5CS.  6(-  ^r 


/^\ 


re  .X- 


onorifi  De  jHorton 


A  SERIES  OF  MCIENT  CHARTERS  OF  THE 

EARLDOM  OF  MORTON  WITH  OTHER  ORIGINAL  PAPERS 

IN  TWO  VOLUMES 


VOL.  L-ORIGINAL  PAPERS 


EDINBURGH:    MDCCCLIIL 

<Jjr/r.  ^(O- 


EDISBDROU  :    T.  CONSTABLE,   PltlNTER  TO  HEK  J1AJE3TV. 


At  the  Annual  General  Meeting  of  the  Bannatyne  Club,  held 
in  the  Hall  of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries  of  Scotland,  on  Monday 
the  1st  of  December  1851 — 

The  President  stated  to  the  Meeting,  that  the  Collection  of  Ancient 
Charters  relating  to  the  Earldom  of  Morton,  accompanied  with  a  Series 
of  Original  Letters  and  Papers  from  the  Archives  of  the  Earls  of  Morton, 
was  now  nearly  completed,  and  might  be  expected  as  one  of  the  Works 
printed  for  the  use  of  the  Members  at  the  expense  of  the  Club  for  the 
following  year. 

This  Collection  having  been  printed  under  the  Superintendence  of  the 
President  of  the  Club,  with  the  assistance  of  the  late  Mk.  Alexander 
Macdonald,  one  of  the  Members,  the  Meeting,  while  expressing  their  obliga- 
tions to  the  President  for  the  great  care  he  has  bestowed  upon  this  Work, 
Resolved, 

That  the  thanks  of  the  Club  are  due  to  the  Right  Hon.  the  Earl  op 
Morton  for  the  use  of  the  Original  Documents  from  which  the  Collection 
has  been  formed. 


At  a  Meeting  of  the  Committee  of  the  Bannatyne  Club,  held  on 
Monday  the  21st  of  February  1853— 

The  Secretary  reported  to  the  Meeting  the  arrangements  made  since 
the  decease  of  Thomas  Thomson,  Esq.,  President  op  the  Club,  in  regard 
to  the  Series  of  Morton  Papers  ;  and  stated,  that  for  the  purpose  of 
completing  the  Work  with  a  suitable  Preface,  Mr.  Innes  had  obtained 
from  the  Earl  op  Morton  the  old  Chartulary  of  Morton,  and  other 
important  documents. 


The  Committee  were  of  opinion  that  the  plan  originally  contemplated  of 
issuing  the  Work  in  two  distinct  volumes,  although  of  unequal  size,  should 
be  adhered  to ;  the  more  modern  portion  to  accompany  the  prefatory 
matter ;  and  authorized  the  Work  to  be  completed  in  the  manner  proposed, 
and  circulated  among  the  Members  with  all  convenient  speed. 

Extracted  from  the  Minutes  of  the  Club, 

DAVID  LAING,  Secretary. 


THE  BANNATYNE  CLUB. 

MAY  MDCCCLIII. 


HON.  HENRY  COCKBURN,  LORD  COCKBURN, 

THE  EARL  OF  ABERDEEN. 

ADMIRAL  SIR  CHARLES  ADAM. 

THE  EARL  OF  ASHBDRNHAM. 

LORD  BELHAVEN  AND  HAMILTON. 

WILLIAM  BLAIR,  ESQ. 

BERIAH  BOTFIELD,  ESQ. 

THE  MARQUESS  OF  BREADALBANE. 

SIR  THOMAS  MAKDOUGALL  BRISBANE,  BART. 
10  GEORGE  BRODIE,  ESQ. 

CHARLES  DASHWOOD  BRUCE,  ESQ. 

0.  TYNDALL  BRUCE,  ESQ. 

THE  DUKE  OF  BUCCLEUCH  AND  QUEENSBEKRY. 

VERY  REV.  DEAN  RICHARD  BUTLER. 

SIR  HUGH  HUME  CAMPBELL,  BART. 

JAMES  CAMPBELL,  ESQ. 

THE  EARL  CAWDOR. 

PATRICK  CHALMERS,  ESQ. 

RIGHT  HON.  SIR  GEORGE  CLERK,  BART. 
20  DAVID  CONSTABLE,  ESQ. 


THE  BANNATYNE  CLUB. 


THOMAS  CONSTABLE,  ESQ. 

ANDREW  COVENTRY,  ESQ. 

DAVID  COWAN,  ESQ. 

JAMES  T,  GIBSON  CRAIG,  ESQ.,  [TREASURER.] 

SIR  WILLIAM  GIBSON  CRAIG,  BART. 

THE  MARQUESS  OF  DALHOUSIE. 

GEORGE  HOME  DRUMMOND,  ESQ. 

HENRY  DRUMMOND,  ESQ.,  M.P. 

RIGHT  HON.  SIR  DAVID  DUNDAS. 
30  GEORGE  DUNDAS,  ESQ. 

WILLIAM  PITT  DUNDAS,  ESQ. 

THE  EARL  OF  ELLESMERE. 

JOSEPH  WALTER  KING  ETTON,  ESQ. 

LIEUT.-COL.  ROBERT  FERGUSON,  M.P. 

COUNT  MERCER  DE  FLAHAULT. 

THE  EARL  OF  GOSFORD. 

WILLIAM  GOTT,  ESQ. 

ROBERT  GRAHAM,  ESQ. 

THE  EARL  OF  HADDINGTON. 
40  THE  DUKE  OF  HAMILTON  AND  BRANDON. 

SIR  THOMAS  BUCHAN  HEPBURN,  BART. 

JAMES  MAITLAND  HOG,  ESQ. 

BIGHT  HON.  JOHN  HOPE,  LORD  JUSTICE-CLERK 

COSMO  INNES,  ESQ. 

DAVID  IRVING,  LL.D. 

HON.  JAMES  IVORY,  LORD  IVORY. 

DAVID  LAING,  ESQ.,   [SECRETARY.] 

JOHN  BAILEY  LANGHORNE,  ESQ. 

THE  EARL  OF  LAUDERDALE. 


THE  BANNATYNE  CLUB. 


50  VERY  REV.  PRINCIPAL  JOHN  LEE,  D.D. 

LORD  LINDSAY. 

JAMES  LOCH,  ESQ. 

THE  MARQUESS  OF  LOTHIAN. 

LORD  LOVAT. 

JAMES  MACKENZIE,  ESQ. 

JOHN  WHITEFOORD  MACKENZIE,  ESQ. 

KEITH  STEWART  MACKENZIE,  ESQ. 

WILLIAM  FORBES  MACKENZIE,  ESQ.,  M.P. 

ALEXANDER  MACONOCHIE,  ESQ. 
GO  JAMES  MAIDMENT,  ESQ. 

SIR  WILLIAM  MAXWELL,  BART. 

THE  HON.  WILLIAM  LESLIE  MELVILLE. 

THE  EARL  OF  MINTO. 

RIGHT  HON.  JAMES  MONCREIFF,  LORD  ADVOCATE. 

THE  EARL  OF  MORTON, 

JAMES  PATRICK  MDIRHEAD,  ESQ. 

HON.  SIR  JOHN  A.  MURRAY,  LORD  MURRAY. 

WILLIAM  MURRAY,  ESQ. 

ROBERT  NASMYTH,  ESQ. 
70  CHARLES  NEAVES,  ESQ. 

THE  EARL  OF  NORTHESK. 

ALEXANDER  PRINGLE,  ESQ. 

JOHN  RICHARDSON,  ESQ. 

THE  DUKE  OF  ROXBURGHE. 

RIGHT  HON.  A.  RUTHERFURD,  LORD  RUTHERFURD,  [VICE-PRESIDENT.] 

THE  REV.  HEW  SCOTT,  A.M. 

JAMES  ROBERT  HOPE  SCOTT,  ESQ. 

THE  EARL  OF  SELKIRK. 


THE  BANNATYNE  CLUB. 


JAMES  YOUXG  SIMPSON,  M.D. 
80   ALEXANDER  SINCLAIR,  ESQ. 

JA5IES  SKENE,  ESQ. 

WILLIAM  SMYTHE,  ESQ. 

JOHN  SPOTTISWOODE,  ESQ. 

EDWARD  STANLEY,  ESQ. 

THE  REV.  WILLIAM  STEVENSON,  D.D. 

THE  HON.  CHARLES  FRANCIS  STUART. 

THE  DUKE  OF  SUTHERLAND. 

ARCHIBALD  CAMPBELL  SWINTON,  ESQ. 

ALEXANDER  THOMSON,  ESQ. 
90  SIR  WALTER  CALVERLY  TREVELYAN,  BART. 

WILLIAM  B.  D.  D.  TURNBULL,  ESQ. 

ADAM  URQUHART,  ESQ. 


LIBRARIES. 

THE  BRITISH  MUSEUM. 

THE  SOCIETY  OF  LINCOLN'S  INN. 

THE  FACULTY  OF  ADVOCATES. 

THE  SOCIETY   OF   ANTIQUARIES  OF   SCOTLAND. 

THE  SOCIETY    OF  WRITERS  TO  H.  M.  SIGNET. 

THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  EDINBURGH. 

THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  GLASGOW. 

TRINITY  COLLEGE,  DUBLIN. 

THE  SMITHSONIAN  INSTITUTION,  WASHINGTON,  UNITED  STATES. 


PREFACE. 


The  Register  of  the  more  Ancient  Writs  of  tlie  Douglases 
of  Dalkeith,  Earls  of  Morton,  which  is  probably  the  oldest 
Ghartiilary  of  lay  possessions  in  Scotland,  consists  of  two  parts  ; 
the  older  written  soon  after  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century, 
and  the  latter  about  its  close.'  Together,  they  contain  about 
three  hundred  charters. 

Such  a  collection  of  the  records  of  an  historical  family  early 
attracted  the  attention  of  the  late  lamented  President  of  the 


1  The  older  contains  forty  leaves  of  vellum 
of  a  small  folio  size,  exceedingly  stained  and 
defaced,  so  as  to  be  in  many  places  wholly 
illegible  even  where  the  velhim  is  entire. 
The  table  of  its  contents  emimerates  one  hun- 
dred and  six  charters,  of  which  twenty-five 
are  wanting. 

The  latter  portion  contains  ninety-one 
written  leaves  of  vellum  somewhat  larger  in 
size,  and  in  a  hand  perhaps  a  little  later,  but 
the  greater  part  T\Titten  before  the  end  of  the 
fourteenth  century.     This  numbering,  how- 


ever, includes  a  second  table  of  contents  of 
more  modern  writing  than  the  original  one, 
and  a  fasciculus  of  twelve  leaves  of  a  hand- 
writing of  the  following  century.  The  older 
table  of  contents  of  this  part  enumerates  two 
hundred  and  six  charters,  the  later  one,  which 
includes  the  fasciculus  of  later  date,  gives 
two  hundred  and  twenty.  This  part,  which 
still  contains  all  that  are  given  in  these 
tables,  with  the  exception  of  five  charters  a( 
the  end  of  the  modern  fasciculus,  is  en  tlic 
whole  tolerablv  legible  throuE'hout. 


X  PREFACE. 

Bannatyne  Club,  and  he  devoted  some  part  of  his  time  for 
several  years  to  superintending  the  arrangement  and  printing 
of  the  present  volume,  which  is  chiefly  derived  from  that  source, 
with  the  addition,  however,  of  some  original  documents  from  the 
Charter-room  at  Dalmahoy.  Mr.  Thomson  intended  to  accom- 
pany the  collection  Avith  a  dissertation  on  the  pedigree  of  this 
branch  of  the  illustrious  house  of  Douglas  ;  but  increasing 
years  and  infirmities  prevented  his  fulfilling  that  intention  ; 
and  nothing  has  been  found  among  his  papers  to  indicate  the 
plan  or  views  of  the  Editor.  By  a  double  fatality,  the  pre- 
mature death  of  the  excellent  Mr.  Alexander  Macdonald,  who 
had  assisted  Mr,  Thomson  in  the  work,  has  shut  us  out 
from  all  knowledge  of  Mr.  Thomson's  communications  with 
him,  and  left  us  to  guess  at  the  method  and  purpose  of  the 
following  collection  from  the  sheets  as  they  stand  printed. 
Owing  to  this  cause,  there  are  omissions  not  easily  accounted 
for,  and  in  a  few  instances,  papers  inserted  without  much 
apparent  utility ;  but  the  general  plan  of  the  work  is  sufficiently 
simple. 

While  the  charters  are  printed  faithfully  from  the  Chartulary 
or  the  charters  themselves,  preserving  even  the  abbreviations  of 
the  original,  the  order  has  been  changed,  and  they  are  now 
nearly,  if  not  quite,  in  chronological  arrangement,  a  matter 
which  has  not  been  at  all  attended  to  in  the  original  record. 
After  the  whole  contents  of  the  Chartulary,  there  are  added  a 
charter  of  Sir  James  of  Douglas  Lord  of  Dalkeith  in  1406, 
founding  six  chaplainries  in  the  Chapel  of  Saint  Nicholas  of 


PREFACE.  xi 

Dalkeith,  and  eleven  Charters  abridged  from  the  Register  of  the 
Great  Seal. 

A  considerable  body  of  original  papers  of  three  reigns,  James 
v.,  Mary,  and  James  VI.,  from  the  Muniment-room  of  the  family 
of  Morton,  have  been  added  as  a  Supplement  to  this  large  body 
of  Ancient  Charters.  Some  of  them  will  be  found  of  much 
historical  interest  and  curiosity.  For  convenience  of  binding, 
these  have  been  placed  in  the  present  volume.  It  must  be 
understood  that  the  second  volume  contains  the  charters  and 
more  ancient  writs. 

Since  the  time  of  old  Hume  of  Godscroft,  it  is  surprising  how 
little  of  the  attention  of  Antiquaries  has  been  directed  to  the 
early  pedigree  of  Douglas.  Contented  with  their  fabulous  ori- 
ginal and  the  real  splendour  of  their  historical  period,  the 
extant  families  of  Douglas  have  not  sought  to  give  that  pre- 
cision to  their  descent  which  modern  accuracy  demands,  and 
which  can  only  be  drawn  from  charters  or  authentic  records. 
When  any  one  qualified  for  the  task  shall  be  induced  to  under- 
take it,  he  will  find  some  of  his  most  valuable  materials  in  the 
present  collection. 

The  romantic  historian  of  the  house  of  Douglas  has  said  of  his 
subject,  'We  do  not  know  them  in  the  fountain,  but  in  the 
stream  ;  not  in  the  root,  but  in  the  stemme  ;  for  we  know  not 
who  was  the  first  mean  man  that  did  by  his  virtue  raise  himself 
above  the  vulgar."  Mr.  Chalmers,  with  no  weakness  for 
romance,  thought  he  had   discovered  'the  first  mean  man'  of 

1  Hume  of  Godscroft's  History  of  the  Houses  of  Douglas  and  Angus ;  Preface. 


xii  PREFACE. 

the  family  in  a  certain  Theobald  the  Fleming,  who  had  a  grant 
of  land  on  the  Douglas  Water,  from  Arnold,  Abbot  of  Kelso,  in 
the  middle  of  the  twelfth  century.'  It  has  been  shewn  else- 
where, that  that  was  not  the  original  land  of  the  Douglas  family, 
although  upon  the  bank  of  the  same  river,  and  that  there  is  no 
proof  nor  any  probability  of  William  of  Douglas  of  the  twelfth 
century,  the  undoubted  ancestor  of  the  family,  being  descended 
of  the  Fleming,  who  settled  on  the  opposite  side  of  his  native 
valley."^  These  Charters  correct  another  mistake  of  the  author 
of  Caledonia,  who  says,  that  no  person  of  the  first  six  descents  of 
the  Douglases  had  obtained  one  grant  from  the  Crown — ascribing 
tlieir  rise  to  greatness  solely  to  the  services  of  the  '  good  Sir 
James.'^  The  ancestry  of  the  first  William  of  Douglas,  indeed, 
is  not  to  be  found  in  a  Scotch  Charter-chest.  Like  the  other 
knightly  and  baronial  families  of  the  Lowlands,  he  probably  drew 
his  origin  from  some  Norman  or  Saxon  colonist,  who  in  that  age 
of  immigration  and  fluctuating  surnames,  sunk  his  previous 
style,  perhaps  some  changing  patronymic,  like  those  of  the 
ancestors  of  the  Stuarts  and  of  the  Hamiltons ;  little  dreaming 
how  illustrious  was  to  become  the  name  Avhich  he  adopted  from 
his  settlement  on  the  bank  of  the  Douglas  Water. 

William  of  Douglas,  who  is  known  at  the  conclusion  of  the 


1  Caledonia,  i.  579.  in  the  j'ear  1290,  William  of  Douglas,  the 

2  Regist.  de  Calchou,  Preface,  pp.  sxvii.,  father  of  '  the  good  Sir  James,'  beside  his  fief 
xxviii. ;  Sir  W.  Scott,  note  to  '  The  Monas-  in  Douglasdale,  and  the  manor  in  Northum- 
tery,'  chap,  xxxvii.  (Waverlcy  Novels,  vol.  x.  berland,  held  lands  in  six  Scotch  counties — 
pp.  472,  473.     Library  edit.,  1853.)  Fife,  Edinburgh,  Berwick,  AVigtown,   Dum- 

3  Caledonia,  p.  584.     It  can  be  shown  that,  fries,  and  Ayr.     (Rotuli  Scotiw,  vol.  i.  p.  24.j 


PREFACE.  xiii 

twelfth  century,  and  who  appears  as  a  person  of  some  consequence 
during  the  whole  reign  of  William  the  Lion,  had  six  sons — 
Erkenbald  or  Archibald,  his  heir  ;  Bricius,  a  churchman,  prior 
of  Lesmahago,'  who  in  the  year  1203  was  preferred  to  the  great 
Bishopi'ic  of  Moray ;  and  four  others,  who  seem  to  have  been 
provided  for  out  of  their  lirother's  northern  benefice. 

Erkenbald  of  Douglas  is  found  witnessing  charters  before  the 
end  of  the  twelfth  century,  and  is  known  in  transactions  as  late 
as  1228.  This  personage  attained  the  dignity  of  knighthood, 
and  acquired  lands  beyond  the  original  territory  in  Douglas- 
dale.2 

Several  of  the  Charters  of  our  Register,  which  appear  to 
have  been  accidentally  omitted  in  printing  it,-  throw  light  upon 
these  earlier  generations  of  the  family,  even  before  it  had  become 
historically  illustrious.  Thus,  early  in  the  thirteenth  century, 
Malcolm  Earl  of  Fife  granted  to  Archibald  of  Douglas,  son  of 
William  of  Douglas,  the  land  of  Levingston  and  the  land  of 
Hirdmanston,  both  formerly  held  by  William  of  Kilmai'on  ;  and 
King  Alexander  II.  confirmed  that  Charter  before  the  year 
1226.^  It  is  remarkable  that,  although  the  family  had  been  for 
a  century  before  in  possession  of  the  lands  from  whence  they 
derived  their  name,  there  is  no  charter  evidence  of  any  earlier 
property  held  by  them  than  these  grants  of  Levingston  and 


1   Lesmahago   was   a   cell  of  Kelso,    and  "  The    authorities   for  lliese  descents    are 

Bricius  and  his  brother  Hugo  seem  to  have  cited  in    the  '  Origines   Parochiales   Scotia' 

been   monks   of  that   great   abbey.     [Liber  under  the  parish  of  Douglas. 

Vitae  Ecd.  Dunelm.,  p.  95.)  3  Appendix  to  Preface,  Nos.  1  and  2. 


xiv  PEEFACE. 

Hirdmanston.*  One  of  the  witnesses  to  the  Earl  of  Fife's  Chartei', 
Freskin,  Dean  of  Moray,  marks  tlie  early  connexion  of  the 
Douglases  with  that  diocese,  to  which  they  had  already  given  a 
bishoj),  and  perhaps  also  with  that  great  family  of  the  north, 
the  De  Moravias,  with  whom  they  had  arms  in  common,  and  of 
whom  old  Wyntoim  says, — 

Of  Miu-rawe  and  the  Dowglas, 
How  that  thare  beg}'nnyng  was, 
Syn  syndry  men  spekis  syndr3'ly 
I  can  put  that  in  na  story. 
Bot  in  thare  armeys  bath  thai  here 
Tlae  sternys  set  in  lyk  manere, 
Til  mony  men  it  is  yhit  sene, 
Apperand  lyk  that  thai  had  bene 
•    Of  kyn  be  desceus  lyneale 
Or  be  branchj's  collaterale. 

The  next  Sir  William  of  Douglas  was  probably  the  son  of  Sir 
Archibald,  but  this  step  of  the  pedigree  is  not  proved  other- 
wise than  by  his  inheriting  the  family  lands.  He  lived  till 
about  1276. 

It  is  hardly  on  better  evidence  that  it  is  asserted  that  Andrew, 
tlie  founder  of  the  House  of  Dalkeith  and  Morton,  was  brother 
of  this  Sir  William,  and  consequently  son  of  Sir  Archibald  of 
Douglas,  Lord  of  Douglas,'  or  that  Sir  James,  who  had  Charters 

1  Setting  aside  the  autLority  of  Boece  and  sister  of  Hugh  Lord  of  Aberuethie,  in  1259. 

his  fabulous  Parliament  at  Forfar  in  1061,  This  historian  may  be  tnisted  where  he  quotes 

which  was  attended  by  "  Gulielmus  a  Dou-  documents.     He    describes    the    contract   of 

glas" — the  first  transaction  of  any  one  of  the  marriage  '  wliich  the  Earles  of  Angus  have 

family  or  name  of  Douglas  recorded  by  Gods-  yet  extant.' — Home  of  Gocfscrojt,  p.  12. 

croft,  is  the  marriage  of  Hugh  Douglas,  the  -  The  fact  seems  to  rest  upon  their  occur- 

son    of  William,    with    Marjory    Abernethie,  rtnce  together  as  witnesses  to  a  Charter  iu 


PREFACE.  XV 

of  Kincavill  and  Calclor-cler,  and  took  his  style  from  Lothian — 
de  Laudonia — and  who  died  about  1320,  was  the  son  of  tliat 
William  who  was  undoubtedly  the  son  and  heir  of  Andrew.' 

Here,  however,  the  doubts  and  difficulties  of  the  pedigree 
cease.  Sir  William  of  Douglas,  '  of  Liddesdale,'  who  flourished 
during  the  reigns  of  Robert  I.  and  his  son,  is  described  in  charters 
as  the  son  of  the  late  Sir  James  Douglas  of  Lothian.-  Supporting 
Bruce  along  with  his  kinsman  and  chief,  '  the  good  Sir  James '  of 
Douglas,  he  received  royal  rewards  for  his  service,  and  trans- 
mitted to  his  nephew  Sir  James,  besides  the  territories  which 
had  got  for  the  family  the  designation  '  of  Lothian,'  extensive 
lauds  in  Tweeddale,  the  old  Graham  lordship  of  Dalkeith,  and 
the  great  territories  of  Liddesdale,  w^ith  the  valleys  of  Esk  and 
Ewys  forfeited  by  the  De  Soulises  and  de  Levels^ — and,  as  if 
for  the  express  benefit  of  genealogists,  left  an  entail  calling  to 
his  succession,  in  their  order,  the  five  sons  of  his  brother  John.* 

The  eldest  of  these,  Sir  James  Douglas,  a  man  of  enormous 
territories  and  great  real  wealth,  is  the  personage  whose 
transactions  occupy  the  greatest  space  in  our  Chartulary. 
With  his  wife  Agnes  of  Dunbar,  daughter  of  '  Black  Agnes,'  the 
heroic  Countess  of  Dunbar,  he  got  not  only  the  lands  of  Mor- 

favour  of  the  monks  of  Dunfermline,   where  jeetured  that  it  is  to  these  five  brothers  that 

they  are  entered  as  Dominis  Willelmo  et  An-  Froissart  alludes  in  his  most  perplexing  notice 

drea  de  Dufglas.  Eeg.  de  Dunfermelyn,  p.  97.  of  the  Douglases  of  his  day — '  I  have  sene  a 

1  Vol.  ii.  p.  8,  No.  10;  p.  11,  No.  14.  five  bretherne,  all  squiers,  bearyng  the  name 

2  Vol.  ii.  p.  11,  No.  15;  p.  22,  No.  30;  of  Duglas,  in  the  Kyng  of  Scotlandes  house 
p. -23,  No.  31;  p.  29,  No.  37.  Dauid ;    they    were    sonnes    to    a   knight    in 

3  Vol.  ii.  p.  43,  No.  57  ;  p.  47,  No.  63.  Scotlande   called  Sir  James  Duglas.'— Cap. 
*  Vol.  ii.  p.  53,  No.  70.     It  may  be  con-      cxlvii. 


xvi  PREFACE. 

dington,  Whittingham,  and  a  territory  perhaps  not  so  tangible 
in  the  Isle  of  Man,  but  also  by  Eoyal  grant  for  her  life,  '2iro 
ap2Mratu  et  ainidu  ipsius,'  the  incredible  sum  of  1000  marks 
a-year,  to  be  levied  out  of  the  customs  of  Aberdeen  and 
Haddington.^  Hitherto  the  family  had  taken  their  designation 
from  their  Castle  of  Dalkeith,  or  from  Liddesdale,  though 
sometimes  styled  popularly  '  of  Lothian  ;'  but  a  grant  from  his 
l)rother-in-law  George  Earl  of  Dunbar,  of  the  lands  of  Morton  in 
Nithsdale,  eventually  changed  their  style  and  title.^ 

The  marriage  of  the  daughter  of  Sir  James  of  Douglas  with 
Sir  John  of  Hamilton,  Lord  of  Cadyhow,  was  arranged  by  an 
indenture  of  1st  JN'ovember  1388,  the  original  of  which,  still  pre- 
served at  Dalmahoy,  is  so  curious  in  its  provisions  that  it  has 
been  thought  proper  to  print  it  in  the  Appendix  to  this  Preface.^ 
The  seal  appended  gives  the  earliest  coat  armour  that  is  known 
of  any  of  the  name  of  Hamilton,* 

Sir  James  of  Douglas  shewed  his  munificence  to  the  Church 
during  his  life  as  well  as  in  his  latter  will.  Dalkeith  was  not 
then  an  independent  parish,  but  part  of  the  parish  of  Lasswade. 
Besides  endowing  a  chapel  in  his  castle  of  Dalkeith,  dedicated 
to  the  Virgin  and  Saint  John  the  Baptist  in  1377,  he  founded 
and  endowed  a  chaplainry  in  honour  of  Saint  Nicholas  in  a 
chapel,  which  previously  existed  at  the  village,  dedicated  to 
the   same  Saint.     This  chapel  of  Saint  Nicholas  of  Dalkeith 

1  Vol.  ii.  No.  lOS.         2  Vo]_  ii.  ]sro.  100.  Paris.     It  was  of  David  Hamilton,  in  1361, 

•''  Appendix  to  the  Preface,  No.  9.  and  Inncs  blazons  it,  Super  sciito  Iria  qvin- 

*  An  earlier  seal  is  described  by  T.  Innes  giiefolia. — Regist.   Episco]).    Glasff.,    Vol.    /., 

as  extant  in  his  time  in  the  Scots  College  at  Tabula,  p.  cxxxii,  No.  297,  note  L 


PREFACE.  xvii 

grew  by  his  bounty,  till  in  1406  it  acquired  the  shape  of  a 
Collegiate  Church  for  a  Provost  and  five  chaplains  with  manses 
and  full  establishment,  the  stipends  provided  out  of  his  lands.' 
It  was  not  till  a  century  after  the  first  endowment  of  Sir  James's 
chaplains,  that  his  descendant  James  first  Earl  of  Morton  com- 
pleted the  establishment  of  the  Collegiate  Church  of  Dalkeith, 
by  adding  three  canons  endowed  with  the  tithes  of  three  parishes, 
of  Newlands,  Kilbucho,  and  Mordington.^ 

Undoubtedly  the  most  interesting  documents  of  this  collection 
are  the  two  wills  of  Sir  James  Douglas  of  Dalkeith,  30th  Sep- 
tember 1390,  and  19th  September  1392,  the  oldest  wills  of  any 
Scotchman  known  to  be  extant.^  Commending  his  soul  to 
God,  and  the  blessed  Virgin,  and  all  saints,  he  gave  his  body  to 
be  buried  in  the  Monastery  of  Newbotle,  beside  his  first  wife 
Agnes.  He  appointed  Archibald  Earl  of  Douglas,  and  Sir  Henry 
of  Douglas,  his  uncle,  to  be  guardians  of  his  heir.  He  gave  the 
half  of  all  his  free  goods  for  his  funeral,  and  for  masses  and  alms 
for  the  weal  of  his  soul ;  also  his  best  horse  and  his  arms  as  a 
funeral  offering  to  the  vicar  of  Lasswade.  He  left  to  James  his 
son  and  heir,  helmet  and  full  arms  for  tilting,*  and  his  best  jack 


1  The  curious  iind  valuable  deed  the 'magna  Bannatyne  Miscellany.     A  much  older  will, 

carta'  of  the  College  is  not  preserved  either  in  that  of  Saint  Gilbert  de  Moravia,  Bishop  of 

the  Chartulary,  or  among  the  original  writs  Caithness,   is   said  to  have   been   extant    in 

at  Dalmahoy.     It  is  printed  from  the  origi-  1636  ;  but  it  is  now  unhappily  lost. — Sir  R. 

nal  preserved  in  the  charter-chest  of  Kilsyth,  Gordon's  History  of  Sutherland. 

Vol.  ii.  No.  278.  *  Along  with  his  tilting  arms  he  bequeaths 

^  Vol.  ii.  No.  230.  '  unum  rethe  quod  fuit  in  bombicinio  meo' — 

3  Vol.  ii.  Nos.  193,  196.     These  were  pre-  perhaps  the  silk  dress  worn  over  arms  in  the 

viously  printed  in  the  second  volume  of  the  tilt-yard. 


xviii  PREFACE. 

and  tusclies,  with  his  second  best  horse — an  owche  with  a  ruby 
in  the  middle,  a  ring  de  columna  Christi,  and  a  cross  made  of  the 
true  cross — sw^;er  qiiam  j^endebat  Jesus — a  relic  of  the  hair  of 
Mary  Magdalene  enclosed  in  silver,  a  circlet  of  gold,  and  a  great 
countertilet  of  gold,  a  silver  basin  with  a  cover,  weighing 
£15,  3s.  8d.,  his  best  gilt  cup,  weighing  £18,  2s.  His  best  ring 
with  a  sapphire,  which  was  his  lady  mother's,  and  which  she 
gave  him  with  her  blessing,  he  left  also  to  his  heir  with  his 
cordial  blessing.  He  left  him  also  a  large  quantity  of  silver- 
plate,  dishes,  chargers,  and  cups  ;  his  best  bed  ;  all  his  books, 
both  those  of  the  Statutes  of  the  kingdom  of  Scotland  and  those 
of  romance.  He  left  to  his  daughter  Jacoba,  a  circlet  of  gold  of 
forty  marks  price  ;  to  his  son  John  Douglas  of  Aberdour,  all 
his  books  of  grammar  and  logic,  and  ten  pounds  yearly  until  he 
should  be  provided  in  ten  pounds'  worth  of  land.  He  specially 
requested  that  the  books  he  had  borrowed  might  be  returned  to 
their  owners.  He  bequeathed  to  the  Earl  of  March,  his  brother- 
in-law,  a  ring  with  a  ruby ;  to  his  son  James  his  second  best 
belt,  a  pair  of  plates  and  the  rest  of  a  suit  of  armour  p'o 
liasiiludio  de  guerra ;  to  his  brothers  VTilliam  and  Nicholas,  each 
a  suit  of  armour;  and  to  the  former  twenty  marks  sterling,  and 
to  the  latter  ten  marks  yearlj^  The  rest  of  his  arms  he  ordered 
to  remain  perpetually  in  his  Castle  of  Dalkeith.  He  bequeathed 
to  John  de  Livingston  a  ring  with  a  Saint  Christopher;  a  chalice 
and  missal  to  the  Chapel  of  Saint  Nicholas  of  Dalkeith ;  a  small 
sum  for  the  support  of  the  fabric  of  Saint  Andrews;  a  jewel  of 
Saint  John  of  the  price  of  forty  marks  to  the  Church  of  New- 


PREFACE.  xix 

botle.  He  gave  for  the  building  of  tlie  Church  of  Newbotle, 
and  the  wages  of  the  masons,  £23,  6s.  8d, ;  and  twelve  silver 
plates,  weighing  £18,  6s.  sterling,  for  the  use  of  the  refectory, 
with  other  sums  to  the  monks  to  pray  for  his  soul.  He  left  £20 
to  the  Monastery  of  Kelso,  and  many  small  sums  to  individuals 
Avhom  he  only  mentions  by  name.  To  be  distributed  among  the 
poor  he  gave  £13,  6s.  8d.  He  gave  legacies  to  the  Friars 
preachers  of  Edinburgh  and  the  Minorites  of  Haddington.  He 
left  to  Elizabeth  his  sister  a  brooch  of  gold ;  to  Sir  Henry  his 
brother  a  small  ring  with  a  sapphire ;  to  Sir  Archibald  Earl  of 
Douglas  a  ring  with  a  ruby  inscribed  Vertu  ne  ijuz  auoir  conter- 
pois;  also  a  sapphire  which  purifies  the  blood  and  has  a  stalk  of 
gold,  also  his  second  best  gilt  cup  with  a  cover,  weighing  £8. 
He  left  to  his  son  William  a  gold  ling  with  an  emerald,  cir- 
cumscribed with  a  posey  beginning  Remembrance.  He  directed 
for  the  weal  of  his  own  soul  and  of  his  uncle's,  that  all  bonds 
of  his  uncle's  that  may  be  found  in  his  keejoing  should  be  burned. 
An  aventale  and  gloves  of  plate  that  had  belonged  to  John 
Ker — won  perhaps  as  the  prize  of  some  tournament — were  to 
be  restored  to  him.  His  robes  of  cloth  of  gold  and  silk  and  his 
furred  robes  were  to  be  given  to  the  Church  of  Saint  Duthoc  of 
Tain,  the  Chapel  of  Dalkeith,  and  certain  churchmen  :  his  other 
garments  to  his  poor  servants.  He  directed  the  residue  of  his 
plate  to  be  sold  for  the  poor.  He  left  his  third  best  horse  and 
a  jewel  of  Saint  John  that  cost  40  marks  to  the  Monastery  of 
Newbotle,  and  £23,  6s.  8d.  to  help  its  fabric.  He  bequeathed 
a  sum  of  only  £26,  13s.  4d.,  to  be  marriage  portions  to  his 


XX  PREFACE. 

nieces,  the  two  daughters  of  Philip  of  Aibuthnot.  He  gave 
£20  for  repairing  and  roofing  the  Chapel  of  Saint  Nicholas,  and 
vestments  to  eacli  of  the  Churches  of  Lasswade,  Newlands,  and 
Saint  Fulan  of  Aberdour.  He  gave  up  to  Robert  de  Livingston 
his  maritage,  which  he  had  by  gift  of  the  King.  He  bequeathed 
to  Egidia,  his  wife,  a  jewel  which  she  had  given  him,  dum  tamen 
de  jocalihus  ulterius  non  querat.  By  his  second  will,  he  gave  the 
residue  of  his  goods,  after  debts  and  legacies,  to  the  building 
and  adorning  of  the  Chapel  of  Saint  Nicholas  of  Dalkeith.  Sir 
James  long  survived  these  testaments,  and  died  in  1420.' 

The  alliances  of  this  princely  person  were  as  high  as  Scotland 
alforded.  His  first  wife  (beside  whom  he  desired  to  be  buried 
in  the  Abbey  of  Newbotil)  was  Agnes,  a  daughter  of  the  house 
of  Dunbar  ;  and  it  is  doubtful  if  he  thought  he  married  more 
nobly  when  he  took  for  his  second,  the  Lady  Giles  Stuart, 
the  sister  of  King  Robert  IL  His  eldest  son  he  married  to 
Elizabeth  Stuart,  the  third  daughter  of  Robert  IIL  It  may 
serve  to  show  how  little  mere  titles  of  honour  were  as  yet 
coveted  in  Scotland  that  this  family,  so  great  in  wealth  and 
connexions,  did  not  receive  the  dignity  of  Earl  till  James,  his 
great  grandson,  having  married  Johan,  the  third  daughter  of 
King  James  L,  was  created  Earl  of  Morton,  in  Parliament 
14th  March  1457.' 

'   Fordun,  xv.  32.     He  died  of  a  very  fatal  ^  The  style  was  declared  to  be  derived  from 

epidemic,  -whicli  the  Faculty  attributed  to  the  the  lands  of  Morton  in  Caldorcler,  the  landa 

badness  of  the  seasons.     It  was  called  by  our  of  Morton  in  Nithsdale  having  gone   to   his 

forefathers  the  Quhew.     In  our  day  it  would  uncle  Sii'  William, 
have  been  named  in/iuenza. 


PREFACE.  xxi 

James  the  third  Earl  of  Morton,  grandson  of  the  first  Earl, 
having  no  sons,  obtained  a  new  charter  of  the  Earldom,'  with 
remainder  to  (1.)  his  daughter's  husband,  James  Douglas,  (after- 
wards the  Regent  Morton  ;)  (2.)  to  Archibald  Earl  of  Angus  ; 
(3.)  to  Sir  William  Douglas  of  Lochleven ;  and  the  heirs-male 
of  their  bodies  respectively. 

By  virtue  of  that  settlement,  tlie  Earldom  came  to  the  Regent. 
After  his  death,  and  when  his  attainder  was  reversed  in  1585, 
Archibald  the  eighth  Earl  of  Angus  became  Earl  of  Morton; 
and  he  also  dying  without  sons,  the  succession  devolved  on 
Sir  William  Douglas  of  Lochleven,  the  lineal  male  descendant 
of  that  Henry  avIio  was  the  fourth  in  the  enumeration  of  the 
nephews  of  Sir  William  of  Douglas  in  his  entail  of  1351.  In 
1368  Henry  acquired  the  lands  of  Lugtoun  adjoining  his 
father's  lordship  of  Dalkeith  ;  had  charters  of  Langnewton  in 
Roxburgh  from  the  Stewards  lords  of  Ochiltree  ;  and  of  the 
castle  and  lands  of  Lochleven,  which  gave  their  style  and  usual 
designation  to  his  descendants.  He  was  a  person  of  great 
consideration  as  well  as  lai'ge  possessions,  being  married  to  a 
niece  of  King  Robert  II.,  daughter  of  David  first  Earl  of 
Crauford  ;-  and  he  was  attached  in  some  manner  to  the  personal 
service  or  attendance  of  the  unhappy  Prince  David  Duke  of 
Rothesay.  The  descent  and  subsequent  history  of  that  family 
are  well  known,  but  they  are  not  illustrated  by  this  collection, 

1  Crown  cliarter  15G4.      Eatified  in  Par-  mistaken  account  of  this  marriage  is  given  in 
liament  1567.  the  Peerages,  where  Marjory  of  Lyndesay  is 

2  See  his  Testament,  (vol.  ii.  p.  176,)  and  said  to  have  married  William  of  Douglas  iu- 
Documcnts  appended  to  the  Preface,  No.  8.    A  stead  of  his  father  Henry. 


xxii  PREFACE. 

which  is  necessarily  by  its  date  confined  to  the  charters  and 
transactions  of  the  Earls  of  the  first  race. 

One  uninitiated  in  the  exciting  pursuit  of  charter  antiquities 
cannot  readily  appreciate  the  interest  with  which  the  zealous 
investigator  searches  through  a  charter-room  like  that  of  Dal- 
mahoy.  As  each  massive  old  cliest  is  approached,  and  one  after 
another  the  bolts  and  locks,  with  all  their  quaint  devices  for 
puzzling  the  stranger,  give  way,  and  as  one  after  another  he 
opens  the  little  oak  drawers,  and  lets  in  the  light  upon  their 
sleep  of  centuries,  he  is  in  constant  hope  of  some  important 
revelation.  That  small  charter  no  bigger  than  a  man's  hand 
may  remove  the  mystery  which  shrouds  the  origin  of  the  race 
— may  tell  us  from  what  chateau  of  J^ormandy  or  from  what 
English  grange  came  the  ancestors  of  the  Scotch  heroes — who 
was  '  the  first  mean  man  that  did  by  his  virtue  raise  himself 
above  the  vulgar.'  Even  when  that  expectation  is  disappointed, 
the  search  is  not  fruitless.  The  venerable  chartulary  gives  the 
precision  of  record  to  the  lives  and  actions  of  one  branch  of  the 
most  illustrious  family  in  Scotland.  Every  chest  yields  something 
to  gratify  curiosity  ;  to  fill  up  a  gap  in  genealogy  ;  to  correct 
the  blunders  of  heralds ;  to  throw  light  upon  the  tenure  and 
descent  of  lands  ;  the  correspondence  of  those  who  could  write, 
and  documents  for  shewing  the  relations  of  the  various  classes 
of  society.  It  is  from  such  materials  that  our  domestic  annals 
are  to  be  written,  and  the  public  history  of  the  country  is  yet  to 
receive  its  truest  as  well  as  its  most  characteristic  colouring. 

However  the  loss  of  the  early  Douglas   charters   is   to   be 


PREFACE.  xxiii 

accounted  for,  the  family  of  Morton  have  been  careful  pre- 
servers of  theirs.  Besides  the  Chartulary  written  'book-ways/ 
there  are  found  in  a  little  black  '  cofifer'  a  number  of  narrow 
vellum  rolls  of  about  the  same  age/  some  containing  lists  of 
charters  and  title-deeds  of  all  sorts,  with  reference  to  their  places 
of  deposit,  but  unfortunately  (like  the  table  prefixed  to  our 
Chartulary)  without  dates.  One  consists  of  a  rental  of  part  of 
the  Morton  possessions  for  the  years  1376-8 — valuable  not  only 
for  tlie  local  antiquary,  but  as  perhaps  the  earliest  rental  of 
lay  lands  in  Scotland.     It  is  printed  at  length.^ 

The  house  of  Lochleven  followed  the  example  of  their  cousins 
of  Dalkeith,  and  the  charter-room  at  Dalmahoy,  which  now  com- 
bines the  united  collections  of  both  families,  shews  many  marks  of 
care  both  in  preserving  and  transcribing  their  ancient  muniments. 

There  is  a  carefully  written  '  Registrum  evidentiarum  domi- 
norum  de  Lochlevin'  compiled  in  1573,  which  commences  with 
the  first  cliarter  of  Henry  of  Lugtou  and  Lochleven  ;  as  well 
as  several  bundles  of  original  writs  on  parchment  inartificially 
stitched  together,  and  some  similar  fascicidi  of  transcripts  of 
originals  by  the  family  notary.^ 

Although  our  forefathers  began  to  use  their  vernacular  tongue 

1  One  of  these  Eolls  begins — '  Eotulus  ad  James   I.,   cliarging  the  Laird  of  Loclileviu 

DOCENDUM  UBi  LiTEEE   DOMINI  INVENIENTUH.  to  enter  liiiHself  as  one  of  the  hostages  for 

Imprimis  in  uno  magna  schotyll  cum  una  W.  the  King's  ransom,  is  printed  in  the  Appen- 

et  una  cruce  super  h  lyd — In  prima  capsa,'  dix  to  the  Preface,  (No.  13.)     The  notary 

&c. ;  and  then  the  rest  are  described  as  '  in  transcriber  has  given  it  the  following  title, 

uno  cofino,'  or  '  in  secunda  capsa,'  and  some-  shewing  his  understanding  of  such  mandates, 

times  in  Scotch  thus  :  '  In  the  thred  scliotill  '  The  transumpt  of  ane  vreting  send  be  the 

of  the  elder  cofyne.'  Kingis  grace  to  umquhil  Eobert  Douglas  fo?- 

-  Appendix  to  the  Preface,  No.  16.  ''yding  of  ane  raid  to  Ingland!' 

"  It  is  from  one  of  these  that  the  letter  of 


xxiv  PREFACE. 

in  law  and  business  documents  about  tlie  end  of  the  fourteenth 
century,  letters  of  correspondence  are  hardly  met  with  in  Scotch 
repositories  till  the  sixteenth.  Even  to  the  end  of  the  latter 
century  they  are  incredibly  meagre  and  unsatisfactory.  The 
writers  are  evidently  suspicious  not  only  of  the  channels  of 
communication,  but  frequently  of  their  correspondents,  whom 
it  might  be  unsafe  to  trust  with  any  frank  expression  of  opinion 
in  ivriting.  Hence  the  constant  practice  in  those  times  of 
accrediting  the  bearer  to  make  those  revelations  which  were 
not  to  be  confided  to  paj)er.  Another  reason,  it  must  be  owned, 
impeded  free  communication  by  letter.  Although  education 
made  a  rapid  stride  just  after  the  Reformation,  and  it  was 
no  longer  necessary  to  enforce  the  old  Statute  which  obliged 
barons  of  substance  to  put  their  eldest  sons  to  the  schools,  yet 
it  cannot  be  said  that  the  classes  of  nobility  and  gentry  were 
generally  imbued  with  literature,  and  the  greater  number  wrote 
:vs  if  they  knew  neither  their  own  nor  any  other  language 
grammatically.  Many  churchmen,  indeed,  before  the  Reforma- 
tion, were  accomplished  in  all  kinds  of  learning.  Public 
libraries  had  been  established,  and  a  few  distinguished  laymen 
had  alrendy  begun  to  form  private  collections  of  books.'     But 

'  Some  of  these  are  still  known  to  the  curi-  would   now    be   beyond   price.      Even    after 

ous  by  their  book-stamps,  which  were  then  printing  had  brought  books  within  the  reach 

impressed    on   the    outside    of    the    binding.  of  moderate  fortvmes,  we  still  find  MS.  copies 

Schives,  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews,  had  his  in  old  libraries ;  indeed,  the  gieater  number  of 

books  so  distinguished  before  the  end  of  the  our  Law  collections  continued  to  be  in  writing 

fifteenth  century.     It  has  been  seen  that  Su-  subsequent  to  the  introduction  of  printing  even 

Jajues  Douglas  of  Dalkeith  coimted  his  books  in    Scotland  ;    and   manuscript  copies  of  the 

among  his  valuables,  even  before  the  end  of  ponderous  romances  of  the  sixteenth  century, 

the  fourteenth  century ;  and  his  manuscripts,  (with  variations  by  the  transcriber,)  are  still 

whether  of  the  laws  of  the  realm  or  of  romance,  found  at  Taymouth  and  in  other  old  collections. 


PEEFACE.  sxv 

subsequent  to  the  Reformation,  and  on  to  the  end  of  that  cen- 
tury, there  was  no  general  taste  for  literature ;  the  leading 
men  of  Scotland  and  women  of  rank  and  education  still  wrote 
in  the  constrained  style  of  people  unacquainted  with  the 
capabilities  of  their  language,  and  for  the  most  part  not  indis- 
posed to  leave  their  meaning  obscure. 

Accordingly,  there  is  little  of  the  interest  of  modern  corre- 
spondence— nothing  of  the  free  interchange  of  sentiment — to  be 
looked  for  in  a  collection  like  that  brought  together  in  the  pre- 
sent volume,  from  the  now  united  repositories  of  Morton  and 
Lochleven.  Somewhat  beyond  the  limits  of  this  collection,  and 
especially  during  the  period  of  Earl  William,  the  Lord  Treasurer, 
the  letters  of  correspondence  preserved  at  Dalmahoy  become 
both  more  frequent  and  considerably  less  restrained. 

A  considerable  mass  of  documents  concerning  the  Regent 
Morton  are  valuable  as  throwing  some  new  light  on  the  life  and 
events  of  a  statesman  whose  character  has  not  been  investigated 
with  any  care  or  research,  except  by  one  whose  prejudices 
quite  overcame  his  better  judgment.  Mr.  Chalmers  can  find  no 
defence  nor  excuse  for  Morton,  but  rails  and  calls  him  names, 
mistakes  and  twists  the  evidence,  and  scatters  abuse  so  in- 
discriminately upon  all  previous  historians,  that  his  '  Memoir 
of  the  Regent  Morton,'^  if  it  has  any  effect,  leads  the  reader  to 
the  opposite  conclusion  from  that  which  he  contends  for. 

The  following  interesting  scrap  of  Parliamentary  history  has 
been  found  at  Dalmahoy  since  the  text  of  the  jjresent  volume 
was  printed.     It  is  evidently  the  memorandum  of  a  speech  in 

1  Chalmers's  '  Life  of  Queen  Mary,'  vol.  iii. 

d 


xxvi  PEEFACE. 

Parliament  in  reply  to  the  Queen's  ojDeniug  speech — something- 
akin  to  those  now  formalised  in  the  British  Parliament  at 
moving  the  address  on  the  '  Queen's  speech.'  We  may  conjecture, 
Avith  tolerable  confidence,  that  it  was  used  by  Morton  while 
Chancellor,  or  when  acting  as  such  before  liis  formal  appoint- 
ment to  the  office ;  and  its  terms  seem  to  point  to  that  Parlia- 
ment which  sat  on  the  2Gth  May  1563,  'On  which  day  the 
Queen  came  to  it  in  her  robes  and  crowned — the  Duke  carrying 
the  crown,  Argyll  the  sceptre,  and  Murray  the  sword,'  when 
'  she  made  in  English  an  oration  publiquely  there." 

'  Sen  it  hes  plesit  the  Quenis  Maiestie  to  mak  her  awin  declara- 
tioun  of  the  grete  zele  and  lufe  hir  Maiestie  hes  borne  towartis 
this  hir  natiue  countre  and  ws  hir  Hienes  liegis  and  subiectis 

'  On  the  vther  part  it  is  our  bundin  dcwtie  to  gif  vnto  God 
most  hartlie  thankis  that  hes  gevin  vnto  ws  sic  ane  lufing 
prynces  to  ring  our  ws 

'Quairfoir  we  aucht  to  endevoir  oure  selfiis  maist  ernestlie 
to  set  fordwart  all  sic  thingis  as  may  be  to  the  avancement  of 
hir  Maiesties  estait  honour  and  dignetie 

'And  that  in  sic  sort  as  may  be  to  the  glorie  of  God  hir 
Hienes  honour  and  obedyence  to  the  mantenance  and  quyeting 
of  this  our  commoun  veill  and  countre 

'And  becaus  thair  is  grete  and  wechtie  materis  to  be  tretit 
in  this  parliament  it  salbe  best  that  we  proceid  to  the  begyn- 
ning  thairof 

1  Randolph   to  Cecil.     The   speech   may,    however,  have  been  made  in  the  Parliament 
of  December  1564. 


PREFACE.  xxvii 

'  And  seing  the  aiild  ancient  custome  of  this  countre  in  the 
lirst  day  of  the  parliament  was  to  chois  the  lord  is  of  the 
articlis  Thairfoir  we  mon  proceid  vnto  the  same 

'  It  is  thocht  giiid  that  thair  be  chosin  aucht  in  nowmer  of 
ilk  ane  of  the  thre  estatis  to  the  effect  that  caussis  may  be  the 
better  ressonit 

'  And  thairfoir  ye  my  lordis  of  the  temporale  estait  mon  chois 
the  aucht  lordis  of  the  sprituale  estait 

'  And  ye  my  lordis  of  the  sprituale  estait  mon  chois  the 
aucht  lordis  of  the  temporale  estait 

'  And  thaireftir  all  ye  my  lordis  togidder  mon  chois  aucht  of 
the  comyssaris  of  burrowis. 

'  Eftir  the  chosing  of  the  saidis  lordis  of  the  articlis  to  cans  thair 
names  be  red  publictlie  that  is  chosin  and  thair  to  declair  to  the 
haill  estaitis  that  the  saidis  lords  of  articlis  will  sit  in  our  Souerane 
Ladyes  palice  within  the  Abbay  on  the  morne  and  will  meit  at 
owris  to  ressone  vpoun  sic  thingis  as  is  to  be  resoluit  on  in  this 
present  parliament  And  thairfoir  desyir  the  estaitis  and  nobilitie 
to  remane  vnto  sic  thingis  be  resoluit  as  may  convenyentlie  be  done 

'  Item  to  declair  that  the  Quenis  Maiestie  wilbe  in  the  Tolbuith 
vpoun  Fryday  nixtocum.' 

As  these  '  heads  of  a  speech'  point  probably  to  the  beginning 
of  Morton's  official  life,  a  document  which  is  given  in  the 
Appendix  to  this  Preface'  may  be  said  to  mark  its  close.  This 
is  the  formal  Act  fixing  his  right  of  precedency.  He  was  now 
stript  of  office  and  power,  but  still  honoured  and  ordained  to 

'  Appendix  to  tlie  Preiace,  No.  15. 


xxviii  PREFACE. 

have  the  first  place  in  Council.  JS'othing  in  the  order  of  the 
Privy  Council  is  so  remarkable,  however,  as  the  names  of  the 
lords  by  whom  it  was  passed,  Athol,  Argyll,  and  all  the 
courtiers  who  here  did  him  honour  felt  no  scruple  in  pursuing 
him  to  the  death  two  years  later.^ 

But  the  greater  number  of  the  documents  composing  the 
present  volume  are  from  the  repositories  of  Lochleven. 

The  letter  from  James  Stewart  (afterwards  Eegent)  to  his 
mother,^  has  reference  to  an  event  in  his  life  not  generally  known. 
He  had  entered  into  a  contract  of  marriage  with  Christian, 
in  her  own  right  Countess  of  Buchan,  while  the  lady  was  still 
an  infant.  The  contract  did  not  take  effect ;  and  she  married 
his  uterine  brother  Robert  Douglas.  Mr.  Chalmers,  whom  it 
suits  to  throw  all  blame  on  Murray,  has  used  very  hard  words  in 
describing  that  transaction,^  with  which  he  was  but  imperfectly 
acquainted.  The  indignation  of  this  letter  seems  genuine,  and  it 
certainly  leaves  the  impression  that  others  Avere  more  to  blame 
than  Murray  in  the  misfortunes  of  the  Countess  of  Buchan. 

The  '  Act  for  sequestrating  the  Queen's  person,'*  though  it 
has  been  published  before,  with  a  fac-simile,*  is  yet  properly 
included  here,  both  as  the  original  is  preserved  in  the  Charter- 
room  at  Dalmahoy,  and  as  connected  with  the  most  interesting 
events  of  the  family  and  castle  of  Lochleven. 

The  letter  of  Knox'^ — one  of  the  few  letters  of  correspondence 
of  the  Scotch  Reformer  that  have  been  preserved — was  probably 

1  The  characteristic  portrait  of  the  Eegent         ^  Life  of  Queen  Mary,  vol.  iii.  pp.  126, 
Morton,  at  Dalmahoy,  has  been  engi-aveil  for  135,  &c.  ^  Vol.  i.  Xo.  26,  p.  24. 
Lodge.     It  is  now  in  had  condition.                           ^  Miscel.  of  Maitland  Cluh,  vol.  i.  p.  250. 

2  Vol.  i.  No.  13,  p.  0.  8  Vol.  i.  No.  49,  p.  52. 


PREFACE.  xxix 

written  after  the  visitation  under  wliicli  he  suffered  in  October 
1570,  and  from  which  he  only  partially  recovered.  He  was  not 
in  the  habit  of  refusing  his  active  aid  in  such  matters  as  this 
letter  refers  to ;  but  now  he  declines  to  interfere  '  in  that  and 
all  other  cases  worldly,  for  I  have  tacken  my  gude  nycht  of  it.' 

The  Countess  of  Northumberland's  letter*  to  her  husband 
relates  to  another  unhappy  prisoner  of  Lochleven.  The  Lady's 
anticipations  were  too  sadly  verified,  when,  to  the  shame  of 
Scotland,  no  less  than  of  the  Laird  of  Lochleven,  the  noble 
fugitive  Avas  '  delivered  to  the  shambles.' 

Several  documents  regarding  the  warding  of  the  Laird  of 
Lochleven,  and  his  liberation  from  durance,  are  explained  by 
documents  at  Dalmahoy,  not  printed.  There  are  two  Remis- 
sions under  the  Great  Seal  to  William  Douglas  of  Lochleven 
and  to  Robert  Douglas  '  fear'  of  Lochleven,  for  their  share  in 
the  Raid  of  Ruthven — 'pro  arte,  parte  captivitatis  et  detentionis 
nostre  persone  &c.  in  loco  de  Ruthwen  mense  Augusti  1582.'" 

Before  concluding,  it  must  be  observed  that  several  of  the 
dates  of  the  deeds  in  the  Chartulary  are  erroneous,  evidently 
through  the  carelessness  of  the  engrossing  scribe,^  and  it  may 

1  Vol.  i.  No.  7G.  Mathie,)  a.d.  1323— the  23d  of  Feb.  1324— 

2  Dated  respectively  29  Nov.  and  27  Dec.      a  mistake  of  the  scribe  for  the  Vigil  of  Saint 
1583.  Mathew  [Sancti  Mathei)— the  20th  of  Sept., 

3  Vol.  ii.  Nos.  14,  15,  and  31.     Thus,  No.      a.d.  1323 — as  is  proved  by  the  confiimation 
T  ^  is  dated  in  the  second  year  of  the  King's      of  King  Eobert  I.,  (Vol.  ii.  No.  15,)  dated  on 

reign,  (a.d.  1307,)  but,  as  it  evidently  follows  the  23d  of  the  same  month.     That  confirma- 

the  grant  of  No.  16,  dated  in  the  tenth  of  tion,  however,  is  itself  misdated,  being  given 

the  reign,   (a.d.  1315,)  its  proper  date  is  ap-  according  to  the  Chartulary  in  the  eighth  year 

parently  the  twelfth,  a.d.   1317,   (the   scribe  of  the   King's  reign,  (a.d.  1313,)  instead  of 

having  apparently  overlooked  the  numeral  x  the  eighteenth,  (a.d.  1323,)  the  dedmo  being 

of  the  rog-nal  year.)     In  No.  31  of  vol.  ii.  the  again  omitted, 
date   is  the  Vigil  of  Saint  Mathias,   [Sancti 


XXX  PREFACE. 

be  allowed,  for  the  benefit  of  future  investigators,  to  mention 
I  tliat  a  great  number  of  deeds  contained  in  the  Chartulary  are 
!  not  printed  in  the  text.  Such  of  these  omitted  deeds  as  seemed 
l^eculiarly  to  illustrate  the  Douglas  family  history,  or  to  be  of 
general  importance  or  interest,  are  added  in  the  Appendix  to 
the  Preface.  The  local  antiquary  will  be  well  pleased  to  find 
along  with  the  rentals  of  1376,  so  useful  for  rural  antiquities, 
ancient  and  minute  Extents  of  Liddesdale,  divided  into  its 
'  quarters,'  and  of  the  baronies  of  Stabilgorton  and  Watstirker. 
(Appendix,  17,  18,  19.) 

On  the  last  leaf  of  the  venerable  little  Chartulary  is  a  note  of 
family  jevrels,  which  enumerates  ten  '  chenyeis  of  perllis,'  with 
a  great  jewel  in  the  middle  of  them,  of  which  a  representation  is 
thus  scratched 


summing  them  up  as  follows  : 

'  The  sowm  of  all  the  perllis  into  x  werkis  of  chenyeis  is 
xxxix''^  (thirty-nine  score)  and  a  peril,'  apparently  exclusive  of 
a  quantity  '  deliuerit  to  Dam  Jamys  to  the  wyrkyng  of  the 
chaplet.' 

C.  INISTES. 


prefacp:.  sxxit 


POSTSCRIPT. 

Among  the  Harleian  Manuscripts,  in  the  British  Museum,  there  are 
twelve  small  volumes  in  octavo  bound  in  two,  containing  Notes  of  the 
Moi'tou  Charters  and  Papers,  for  the  purpose  of  illustrating  the  Genea- 
logical History  of  the  Family.  They  are  not  so  described  in  the 
Catalogue,  (MSS.  HarL,  No.  6432-6443,)  but  they  were  compiled,  it 
is  believed,  by  David  Synison,  M.A.,  "  that  great  Antiquary,"  and 
"  Historiographer  Royal  for  Scotland,"  as  he  is  styled  on  the  title-page 
of  his  "  Genealogical  and  Historical  Account  of  the  illustrious  Name  of 
Stuart."     Edinburgh,  1712,  8vo. 


TABLE   OF  THE   APPENDIX. 


1.  Carta  Malcolmi  de  FyfFe  comitis  facta  Archibaldo  [de  Douglas  filio] 

Willelmi  de   Douglas  terrarum  de  Ilyrdmanstouu    [1214-1226]. 

From  the  Morton  Chartulari/.  .  .  .  .  .P.  xxxiii 

2.  Confinnacio  regis  Alexandri  de  Levyngstoun  et  Ilirdmanstoun  [1214- 

1226].     From  the  Morton  Chartulari/.  ....  xxxiv 

3.  Carta  Alexandri  II.   data  P.  comiti  de  Dunbar  [1235].     Fro7n  the 

Morton  Chartulary.  ......  xxxiv 

4.  Carta  de  Langneutoun  abbreviata  [c.  1377].    From,  the  original  charter 

at  Dalmahoy.  .......  xxxv 

5.  Carta  de  eodeni  abbreviata  [c.  1377].     From  the  original  charter  at 

Dalmahoy.  .......  xxxvi 

6.  Preceptum  sasine  [1377].     From  the  original  at  Dalmahoy.     .  .  xxxvi 

7.  Obligatio  Alani  Senescalli  [1377].     From  the  original  at  Dalmahoy.    .  xxxvii 

8.  Carta  xx  librarum  annuatim  Henrico  de  Douglas  [1385].     From  the 

original  at  Dalmahoy.  ......  xxxvii 

9.  Indentura  inter  dominum  de  Dalketh  et  dominum  Johannem  Hamiltoun 

[1388].     From  the  original  at  Dalmahoy.     ....         xxxviii 

10.  Vne  clepe  et  vne  call  dune  protectioun.     From  the  Morton  Chartulary.  xl 

11.  Receipt  for  £10  sterling  by  Andrew  de  Valoniis  [1393].     From  the 

original  at  Dalmahoy.  .  .  .  .  .  .  xl 

12.  Preceptum  domini  locumtenentis  pro  domina  Marioria  de  Lyndesay 

[1390-1406].     From  an  ancient  notarial  copy  at  Dalmahoy.  .  xli 

13.  Charge  to  the  laird  of  Lochlewyn  to  enter  as  hostage  in  England. 

From  an  ancient  notarial  transumpt  at  Dalmahoy.     .  .  .  xlii 

14.  Magna  Charta  Jacobi  Douglas  prirai  comitis  de  Mortoune  omnium 

terrarum   baroniarum   suarum  dominii   et   regalitatis   de    Dalketh 

[1456].     From  the  original  at  Dalmahoy.    ....  xlii 


xxxii  TABLE  OF  THE  APPENDIX. 

15.  The  Earl  of  Mortoun  ordained  to  have  the  first  room  in  Council  [1578]. 

From  the  Regisl.  Sec.  Cone.  .....  P.  xlv 

IG.  Eentale    quarundam    bai'oniarum    dominorum    de   Dalkeith   [1376]. 

From  the  original  Roll  at  Dahnahoy,  ....  xlvii 

17.  Extentus   terrarum   Vallis   de   Lydel   [c.   1376].     Frovi  t!ie  Morton 

Chartxilary.  .......  Ixviii 

18.  Extentus  proprietatis  baronie  de  Stabilgortoun  [c.  1376].     From  the 

Morton  Chartulary.  ......  Ixxv 

19.  Extentus  proprietatis  baronie  de  Watirstirker  et  tenandrie  [c.  1376]. 

From  the  Morton  Chartulary.  .....  Ixxvj 


APPENDIX. 


Cvarta  Malcolmi  de  Fyffe  comitis  fafta  Archibaldo  [de  Douglas  filio] 
Willelmi  de  Douglas  terrarum  de  Hyrdroanftoun  • 

Oomes  Malcolmus  de  Fyffe  omnibus  amicis  fuis  et  hominibus  [prefens 
I'criptum  vifuris  vel]  audituris  falutem  •  Sciant  prefentes  et  futuri  me  de- 
diffe  et  conceffiffe  et  hac  [prefenti]  carta  confirmafTe  Archebaldo  de  Douglas 
filio  Willelmi  de  Douglas  totam  terram  meam  de  Levingftoun  quam  Wil- 
lelmus  de  Kilmaron  de  me  tenuit  et  totam  terram  meam  de  Hirmanftoun 
quam  idem  Willelmus  de  me  tenuit  per  re6tas  diuifas  fuas  et  cum  omnibus 
jullis  pertinenciis  fuis  •  Tenendas  fibi  et  heredibus  fuis  de  me  etheredibus 
meis  in  feudo  et  hereditate  in  bofco  et  piano  in  [pratis  et]  pafcuis  in  moris 
et  marrefiis  in  ftagnis  et  molendinis  et  in  omnibus  aliis  ayfiamentis  ad 
predictas  terras  jufte  pertinentibus  adeo  libere  quiete  plenarie  et  honori- 
fice  ficut  aliquis  miles  in  toto  regno  Scocie  feudum  fuum  de  comite  uel 
barone  liberius  et  quietius  plenius  et  honorificentius  tenet  et  pofTidet  pro 
feruicio  dimidii  militis  •  Tellibus  Dauid  fratre  meo  •  Alexandro  de  Blare  • 
Alano  de  Haus  ....  Elia  filio  Odonis  •  Adam  Gormond  •  Michel  filio 
[Maliton]  •  Johanne  filio  comitis  de  Marr  •  Merlefwyne  filio  comitis  de 
Buchane  •  Ricardo  Corbet  •  [Rogero]  de  Berclaye  •  Willelmo  de  Coggil- 
fale  •  Frifkyne  decano  Morauienfi  •  [Andrea  de]  Morau[ia]  •  Waltero 
(rreg  •  Alano  capellano  •  Hugone  et  Willelmo  clericis  •  et  multis  aliis  • 


xxxiv  APPENDIX. 

Oonfirmacio  regis  Alexandri  de  Levyngftoun  et  Hirdmanftoun  - 

2  Alexander  Dei  gratia  rex  Scottorum  omnibus  probis  hominibus  tocius 
terre  fue  clericis  et  laicis  falutem  •  Sciant  prcfentes  et  futuri  me  concef- 
fiflTe  et  hac  carta  mea  confirmaflTe  donacionem  illam  quam  comes  Malcol- 
nius  de  Fyffe  fecit  Arkebaldo  de  Dufglas  de  tota  terra  de  Levin[gftoun] 
quam  Willelmus  de  Kilmaron  de  eodem  comite  Malcolmo  tenuit  et  de 
tota  terra  de  Hirdmaneftoun  quam  idem  Willelmus  de  predifto  comite 
Malcolmo  tenuit  •  Tenendas  fibi  et  heredibus  fuis  de  predifto  comite 
Malcolmo  et  lieredibus  fuis  per  rcftas  diuilas  fuas  cum  omnibus  juftis 
pertinenciis  fuis  ita  libere  et  quiete  plenarie  et  honorifice  ficut  carta  pre- 
difti  comitis  Malcolrai  predifto  Arkebaldo  inde  fafta  teftatur  •  faluo  feruicio 
meo  •  Teflibus  Willelmo  de  Bofcho  cancellario  meo  .  Ada  et  Roberto 
capellanis  meis  •  Alexandre  vicecomite  de  Striueline  •  Johanne  de  Haya  • 
Thoma  de  Striueline  clerico  cancellarie  •  Apud  Striueline  [xix]  die 
Aprilis  • 


[Carta  Alexandri  II.  data  P.  comiti  de  Dunbar  •] 

3  Alexander  del  gratia  rex  Scottorum  omnibus  probis  hominibus 
totius  ....  falutem  •  Sciant  prcfentes  et  futuri  nos  in  efcanibium  terre  de 
Trecquer  quam  ....  noftram  contuleramus  Patricio  comiti  de  Dunbar 
nepoti  noftro  ....  carta  noftra  confirmalTe  eidem  Patricio  comiti  /  pro 
homagio  et  feruitio/ ....  Dundaf  et  de  Strathkawan  que  fuerunt  forefta 
noftra  •  Tenendas  et  habendas  Patricio  comiti  et  heredibus  fuis  et  fuis 
affignatis  de  nobis  et  heredibus  noftris  in  feodo  et  hereditate  per  reftas 
diuifas  fuas  et  cum  omnibus  iuftis  pertinenciis  .  .  .  .  et  piano  terris  et 
aquis  in  pratis  et  pafcuis  in  moris  et  marrefeis  in  pafturis  et  molendinis 
cum  facco  et  focca  cum  furca  et  foffa  cum  tol  .  .  .  .  et  cum  omnibus  aliis 
ad  di&as  terras  pertinentibus  libere  quiete  bene  et  honorifice  per  ferui- 


APPENDIX.  XXXV 

tium  tertie  partis  vnius  militis  •  Conceffimus  etiam  di6to  Patricio  ut  ipfe 
et  heredes  fui  et  fui  affignati  habeaat  diftas  terras  de  nobis  et  heredibus 
noftris  in  liberum  foreflum  adeo  libere  et  quiete  ficut  aliquis  aliquani 
terram  tenet  in  libero  forefto  in  toto  regno  noftro  /  quare  firaiiter  prohibe- 
mus  ne  quis  di6tum  Patricium  aut  heredes  fuos  uel  luos  affignatos  moleftare 
aut  terram  noftram  et  libertates  eidem  fuper  hoc  conceflas  injufte  vexare 
prelumat  fuper  noftram  plenariam  foriffa6l  uram  decem  librarum  •  Teftibus 
Waltero  filio  Alani  Jufticiario  Scotie  •  Waltero  Cumyn  comite  de  Menteith 
comite  ....  Katanay  ....  Waltero  filio  Alexandri  •  Waltero  Olifard 
jufticiario  Laodonie  .  Alano  hoftiario  •  Waltero  Byfet  •  Apud  Kenmore 
feptimo  die  Julii  anno  .  .  .  regis  vicefimo  primo  • 


[Oarta  de  Langneutoun  abbreviata  •] 

Omnibus  ....  Alanus  Senelcallus  miles  dominus  de  Vghtiltre  laluteui  • 
.  .  .  Sciatis  me  de  conlenfu  et  aflenfu  Johannis  Sauclcalli  filii  mei  et  here- 
dis  dediffe  ....  dilefto  et  fpeciali  meo  domino  Henrico  de  Douglas 
militi  pro  conftlio  et  auxilio  luo  mihi  et  predifto  filio  meo  multipliciter 
impenfis  totam  terram  meam  de  Langneutoun  cum  pertineuciis  infra  vice- 
comitatum  de  Roxburgh  Tenendam  ....  domino  Henrico  .  .  .  .  de  me 
....  in  feodo  et  hereditate  inperpetuum  ....  Faciendo  inde  ....  domino 
fuperiori  feruicium  debitum  et  conliietum  Et  reddendo  mihi  et  heredibus 
meis  lingulis  annis  vnum  denarium  tantum  nomine  albe  firme  apud  Lano-- 
neutoun  in  fefto  Natiuitatis  San6ti  Johannis  Baptifte  fi  petatur  ....  In 
cuius  rei  teftimonium  huic  ....  carte  figillum  meum  eft  appenlbm  Hiis 
teftibus  domino  Jacobo  de  Douglas  domino  de  Dalketh  •  domino  Wil- 
lelmo  de  Douglas  fratre  eius  •  domino  Johanne  de  Edmundiftoun  •  do- 
mino Roberto  Senefcalli  de  Innermeth  •  militibus  •  Jacobo  de  Douo-las  de 
Strabrok  •  Johanne  de  Glene  •  Adam  Forftar  •  et  Andrea  de  Ormvftoun  • 
cum  multis  aliis  ■ 


xxxvi  APPENDIX. 

|_Oarta  de  eodem  abbreviata  •] 

5  Omnibus  ....  Alanus  Senefcalli  dominus  de  Vghtiltre  falutem  .... 
Sciatis  me  •  •  •  •  dedifTe  ....  domino  Henrico  de  Douglas  militi  .... 
terram  meam  de  Langnewtoun  .  .  .  .  et  illas  centum  folidatas  terre 
vna  cum  toftis  et  croftis  que  iacent  inter  parietes  quondam  Hugonis 
Gamyl  ex  parte  orientali  et  le  Buly  Rod  ex  parte  occidentali  in  villa  et 
territorio  de  Langnewtoun  prediftis  ....  que  prius  fuerunt  Johannis 
Bane  et  que  idem  Johannes  ....  mihi  ....  refignavit  ac  .  .  .  .  quiete 
clamauit  inperpetuum  •  Tenendas  ....  in  feodo  et  hereditate  .... 
Faciendo  inde  ....  fuperiori  domino  feruicium  debitum  et  conluetum 
et  reddendo  inde  mihi  et  heredibus  meis  fingulis  annis  vnum  denarium 
argenti  nomine  albe  firme  apud  Langnewtoun  ad  feftum  Natiuitatis  Beati 
Johannis  Baptifte  fi  petatur  tantum  ....  In  cuius  rei  teftimonium  figil- 
lum  meum  prefentibus  eft  appenfum  •  Teftibus  nobilibus  viris  dominis 
Roberto  Senefcalli  fratre  meo  •  Willelmo  de  Douglas  ■  Johanne  Senel- 
calli  filio  meo  •  militibus  •  Jacobo  de  Douglas  de  Strabrok  Alexandre 
de  Cokburne  ■  Thoma  de  Douglas  •  et  pluribus  aliis  • 

[x  receptum  Saline  •] 

6  A-lanus  Senelcalli  miles  dominus  de  Vghtiltre  ....  Johanni  Senefcalli 
militi  filio  noftro  Roberto  de  Leuyngitloune  [et]  Nicholao  de  Douglas 
falutem  Quia  dedimus  ....  domino  Henrico  de  Douglas  militi  ....  ter- 
ram ....  de  Langnewtoune  ....  vobis  ....  mandamus  quatenus  .... 
indilate  predido  domino  Henrico  vel  ....  attornato  ....  fayfinam  .... 
de  dida  terra  ....  liberetis  iuxta  tenorem  carte  mee  ....  ad  quod  facien- 
dum vobis  ....  poteftatem  ....  concedimus  ....  ratum  ....  habentes 
....  quicquid  vos  vel  vnus  veftrum  in  liberatione  difte  fayfme  ....  dux- 
erit  faciendum  In  cuius  rei  teftimonium  figillum  noftrum  prefentibus  eft 
appenfum  •  Scriptura  die  Sabbati  vicefimo  die  menfis  Junii  anno  Domini 
millefimo  ccc"""  feptuagefimo  feptimo  • 


APPENDIX.  xxxvii 

[Obligatio  Alani  Senefcalli  •] 

7  Omnibus  ....  Alanus  Senefcalli  miles  dominus  de  Vghtiltre  falutem 
Quia  infeodaui  ....  dominum  Henricum  de  Douglas  militem  de  .  .  .  . 
terra  ....  in  villa  et  territorio  de  Langneutoun  ....  pro  fe  et  heredibus 
fuis  Volo  et  concedo  ac  per  prefentes  fide  media  me  obligo  quod  quando- 
cunque  contingat  didam  terram  ....  a  predifto  domino  Henrico  vel  heredi- 
bus fuis  per  proceffum  iuris  recuperari  ego  et  heredes  mei  predicto  domino 
Henrico  vel  heredibus  fuis  infra  annum  immediate  fequentem  ad  duos 
terminos  vfuales  ducentas  libras  llerlingorum  proportionaliter  perfoluemus 
apud  monafterium  de  Neubotle  ....  Et  ad  maiorem  huius  rei  fecurita- 
tem  inueni  Johannem  Senefcalli  hlium  meum  et  heredem  fideiufforem 
meum  et  pi'incipalem  debitorem  qui  fe  obligat  ad  folucionem  prediftam 
....  ficut  ego  fum  fuperius  obligatus  In  cuius  rei  teftimonium  figillum 
meum  vna  cum  figillo  filii  et  heredis  mei  predicli  prefentibus  eft  appen- 
fum  Apud  Edynburgh  vicefimo  fexto  die  menlis  Junii  anno  Domini  mil- 
lefimo  trecentefimo  feptuagefimo  feptimo  • 

[C^arta  xx  librarum  annuatim  Henrico  de  Douglas-] 

8  Xvobertus  dei  gratia  rex  Scottorum  omnibus  probis  hominibus  tocius  terre 
fue  clericis  et  laycis  salutem  •  Sciatis  nos  dediffe  conceffiffe  et  hac  pre- 
fenti  carta  noftra  confirmafle  dileclo  confanguineo  noftro  Henrico  de 
Douglas  militi  viginti  libras  Sterlingorum  de  magna  suftuma  noltra 
burgi  de  Hadyngtoune  annuatim  percipiendas  per  manus  sufturaariorum 
noftrorum  eiufdem  ad  feftum  Pentecoftes  •  Tenendas  et  habendas  ac 
percipiendas  eidem  Henrico  et  kariffime  nepti  noftre  Mariorie  iponfe  fue 
et  eorum  alteri  diutius  viuenti  et  heredibus  inter  ipfos  legitime  procrean- 
dis  quibus  deficientibus  heredibus  iplius  Henrici  legitimis  quibufcumque 
in  feodo  et  hereditate  in  pei'petuum  quoufque    nos  aut  heredes   noftri 


xxxviii  APPENDIX. 

reges  Scotie  predi6tos  Henricum  et  Marioriam  aut  eorum  heredes  pre- 
di6tos  de  viginti  libratis  terre  infeodauei'imus  aut  infeodauerint  in  loco 
competenti  •  In  cuius  rei  teftimonium  prefenti  carte  noftre  noftrum  pre- 
cepimus  apponi  figillum  •  Teftibus  venerabilibus  in  Chrifto  patribus 
Willelmo  et  Johanne  cancellario  noftro  Sanfti  Andree  et  Dunkeldenfis 
ecclefiarum  epifcopis  •  Johanne  primogenito  noftro  de  Carrie  Senel'callo 
Scotie  •  Eoberto  de  Fyf  et  de  Menteth  filio  noftro  dilefto  •  Jacobo  de 
Douglas  confanguineo  noftro  /  comitibus  •  Archebaldo  de  Douglas  et 
Eoberto  de  Erlkyne  confanguineis  noftris  /  militibus  •  Apud  Edynburgh 
oftauo  die  Januarii  anno  regni  noftri  quarto  decimo  • 


Indentura  inter  dominum  de  Dalketh  et  dominum  Johannem  Hamiltoun  ■ 

9  Hec  indentura  fa6ta  apud  Dalketh  prime  die  menfis  Nouembris  anno 
Domini  millelimo  trelcentefimo  oStogelimo  oaauo  inter  nobiles  viros 
dominum  Jacobum  de  Douglas  dominum  de  Dalketh  ex  parte  vna  et 
dominum  Johannem  de  Hamyltoune  dominum  de  Cadgow  ex  parte  altera 
continet  et  teftatur  quod  inter  partes  predi6las  concordatum  eft  in  forma 
que  fequitur  videlicet  quod  diftus  dominus  Johannes  deo  volente  capiet 
et  in  vxorem  ducet  Jacobam  de  Douglas  filiam  fecundam  domini  Jacobi 
quamquidem  Jacobam  prediftus  dominus  Johannes  conjunftim  faciet  in- 
feodari  in  integra  baronia  de  Kinele  cum  pertinentiis  et  cum  feruitiis 
libere  tenentium  in  conftabulario  de  Lynlythqw  infra  vicecomitatum  de 
Edynburgh  •  Tenendam  et  habendam  predicle  Jacobe  et  heredibus  inter 
ipfam  et  predidum  dominum  Johannem  legittime  procreandis  quos  etiam 
heredes  prediftus  dominus  Johannes  faciet  conftituet  et  ordinabit  fuos 
veros  heredes  et  legittimos  fucceirores  omnium  terrarum  fibi  pertinentium 
leu  pertinere  valentium  qualitercumque  infra  regnum  •  Pro  quo  quidem 
maritagio  coniunfta  infeodatione  premiffis  in  omnibus  ut  premittitur  fa- 
ciendis  prefatus  dominus  Jacobus  de  Douglas  dabit  et  perlbluet  predi&o 
domino  Johanni  de  Hamyltoune  verum  annuum  valorem   omnium  ter- 


APPENDIX.  xxxix 

rarum  fuaruni  quas  poffidet  dftius  dominus  Johannes  in  proprietate  die 
huius  conuentionis  fecundum  quod  per  fidelem  recognitionem  antiqui  ex- 
tentus  didarum  terrarum  valeat  recoguolci  in  anno  extendi  in  valore  • 
Et  infuper  prefatus  dominus  Jacobus  de  Douglas  dabit  et  perlbluet  pre- 
difto  domino  Johanni  de  Hamyltoune  ftatim  poft  complementum  di6lorum 
matrimoniorum  et  coniun6te  infeodationis  dimidietatem  antiqui  extentus 
omnium  teneraentorum  que  de  ipfo  tenentur  in  capite  per  wardam  vel 
releuium  ubicumque  infra  regnum  Ad  quamquidem  Iblutionem  vt  premit- 
titur  fideliter  faciendam  predi6lus  dominus  Jacobus  de  Douglas  I'e  et 
heredes  fuos  obligat  peribluere  predido  domino  Johanni  de  Hamyltoune 
ftatim  poft  complementum  didorum  matrimoniorum  et  coniuncle  infeoda- 
tionis centum  mercas  fterlingorum  et  deinde  fingulis  annis  ad  quemlibet 
terminum  Penthecoftes  et  Beati  Martini  quinquaginta  mercas  fterlingorum 
et  fic  de  anno  in  annum  et  de  termino  in  terminum  ipfam  Iblutionem  liic- 
celliue  continuabit  quoulque  diila  fumma  extentus  terrarum  et  teneraen- 
torum prediftorum  vt  preraittitur  predido  domino  Johanni  et  heredibus 
luis  plenarie  fuerit  perlbluta  •  Et  fi  contingat  quod  abfit  didam  Jacobam 
abfque  herede  inter  fe  et  predidum  dominum  Johannem  legittime  pro- 
creando  in  fata  dilcedere  concordatum  eft  inter  partes  predidas  quod 
predidus  dominus  Johannes  de  Hamyltoune  et  heredes  fui  reddent  per- 
foluent  et  refundent  prefato  domino  Jacobo  de  Douglas  et  heredibus  liiis 
tantam  liimmam  pecunie  bone  et  ufualis  monete  quantam  didus  dominus 
Johannes  recepit  in  maritagio  cum  dida  Jacoba  ad  tales  terminos  et 
locum  ac  modo  confimili  ut  antea  fibi  fuerat  perlbluta  •  Et  i\  aliquo  cafu 
diffortuito  contingat  didam  Jacobam  per  mortem  fratrum  I'uorum  vel 
alitor  ad  hereditatem  et  dominium  didi  domini  Jacobi  patris  I'ui  futuris 
temporibus  pervenire  quod  abfit  ambe  partes  predide  volunt  et  concedunt 
quod  filius  lenior  fiue  junior  qui  fuperftes  fuerit  inter  predidum  dominum 
Johannem  et  didam  Jacobam  procreatus  legittime  feu  procreandus  ipfam 
hereditatem  acceptabit  et  gaudebit  affumeudo  fibi  cognomen  de  Douglas 
et  arma  que  gerit  ex  fucceffione  dominus  Jacobus  antedidus  •  Et  ad  omnia 
et  fingula  premifia  fideliter  in  omnibus  perimplenda  ambe  partes  predide 


xl  APPENDIX. 

nianus  corporaliter  aftrixerunt  •  In  cuius  rei  teftimonium  huius  indenture 
partibus  figilla  partium  prediftarum  alternatim  funt  appenfa  loco  die  et 
anno  fupradi6lis  • 


V  ne  clepe  et  vne  call  dune  protedioun — 

10  1  apon  the  behalf  of  Sir  J.  de  D.  that  here  ftandis  fayis  to  the  R.  that 
thar  flandis  that  qwhar  that  he  his  landis  his  men  thaire  pofleffiounis 
and  al  thair  gudis  was  vndir  the  ferme  pece  and  the  prote6tioun  of  owr 
Kyng  Robert  that  now  is  Kyng  of  Scotland  on  Thurifday  neift  before 
Yhole  lad  paflit  thou  come  with  otheris  with  the  to  the  tounis  of  Newton 
and  Dodyngftoun  in  the  Barony  of  Abircorne  in  the  Conftabelery  of 
Lithcu  within  the  Schirrefdome  of  Edinburgh  /  the  qwhilk  tounis  the 
forfaid  Sir  J.  has  in  malyng  of  Jonet  Gourlay  the  dowchtir  of  qwhilome 
Sir  Thomas  of  Erth  Knicht  /  and  thare  wrangwifely  and  aganis  the  law 
thou  and  tha  that  with  the  come  tuk  away  twenty-one  beiftis  oxin  and 
ky  ftotis  and  grys  of  fyndri  eildis  and  fyndri  hewis  that  is  to  fay  blak 
broun  rede  and  braundit  /  the  price  ten  pounds  of  Sterlingis  /  doand  to 
the  fornemmit  J.  and  til  his  men  beforlaid  il  molest  wrang  and  greif/ 
brekand  on  him  and  his  men  the  ferme  pece  and  the  proteftioun  of  howre 
fornemmit  Kyng  Robert  that  nov  is  Kyng  of  Scotland  /  for  the  qwhilk 
doyng  I  foume  the  Ichame  and  the  (kath  of  the  fornemmit  J.  and  his 
men  apon  the  R.  /  iiii°  ti  of  Sterlingis  /  fwilk  as  men  byis  and  fellis  with 
in  Scotland  •  and  gif  thou  be  the  man  that  this  nitis  I  lal  outrak  it  apon 
the  as  lauch  of  proteflioun  wil  or  as  this  gude  court  I'chewis  me  of  lauch  ■ 


LC^uitantia  Andree  de  Valoniis  •] 

Ir^ateat  vniverfis  per  prefentes  me  Andream  de  Valoniis  burgenfem  de 
Lanark    recepiffe  a    nobiliflima    doraina  Marjoria   de   Lyndefay    fponfa 


APPENDIX.  xli 

quondam  domini  Henrici  de  Douglas  militis  et  ab  executoribus  ejufdem 
doniini  Henrici  decern  libras  fterlingorum  unde  teneo  me  folutum  didam- 
que  dominam  Marioriam  ac  didos  executores  necnon  et  heredes  didi 
quondam  Henrici  et  omnes  alios  et  alias  quorum  quarumque  intereft 
quietos  et  quietas  imperpetuum  per  prefentes  •  In  cujus  rei  teftimonium 
figillum  meum  prefentibus  eft  appenl'um  apud  Perth  die  xxii  •  Odobris 
anno  Domini  m°.  ccc".  nonagefimo  tercio  • 


i  receptum      domini     locumtenentis  ....  pro      domina      Marioria      de 
L3'ndefay  •  •  •  . 

12  JJAUID  regis  Scocie  primogenitus  Dux  RothifTaye  Comes  de  Carrie  .  . 
.  .  locumtenens  didi  domini  regis  generaliter  conftitutus  domino  Jacobo 
de  Douglas  ....  salutem  •  Sciatis  quod  recepimus  vnum  preceptum 
domini  regis  penes  vig  ....  magni  figilli  cuius  tenor  I'equitur  et  eft  talis 
Robertus  Dei  gratia  rex  Scottorum  primogenito  noftro  Dauid  duel 
Rothiflaye  Comiti  de  Carrie  et  Marche  Senelcallo  Scocie  locumtenenti 
noftro  infra  regnum  generaliter  conllituto  salutem  •  In  parliamento 
noftro  [tento]  apud  Sconam  vltimo  die  Februarii  vltimo  elapfo  conquefta 
fuit  nobis  Marioria  de  Lyndel'ay  relida  quondam  Henrici  de  Douglas 
militis  de  Jacobo  de  Douglas  ....  domino  de  Dalketh  I'uper  diuerfis 
inftrumentis  ftbi  f'adis  tam  penes  tutelam  Willelmi  de  Douglas  filii  fui 
quam  terciam  lUam  ab  ea  per  ipfum  ut  dicit  iniufte  detentis  ac  eciam 
•  •  •  ■  alia  bona  a  Marioria  de  Douglas  filia  di6ti  quondam  Henrici 
per  eundem  Jacobum  iniufte  detenta  /  Super  quam  querelam  ordinatum 
extitit  et  decretum  quod  locumtenens  partes  predidas  vocari  faciat  coram 
I'e  I'ub  premunitione  viginti  dierum  ad  docendum  que  earum  partium 
ad  didum  tutoris  officium  maius  ius  habeat  et  .  .  .  .  bine  inde  partibus 
iudicet  memoratum  officium  fine  vlteriori  dilacione  parti  ....  plenius 
oftendenti  Et  omnia  bona  per  partem  aduerl'am  iniufte  capta  ad  didam 
[Marioriam]  pertinentia  faciat  debite  reftaurari  parti  huiufmodi  dampna 

/ 


xlii  APPENDIX. 

pafle  Penes  vero  [terciam]  fuam  recuperandam  eidem  Mariorie  locum- 
tenens  teneat  ius  commune  Quare  vobis  ....  precipiendp  mandamus 
quatenus  ea  que  in  dido  decreto  continentur  in  quantum  veftro  incumbit 
officio  quum  et  quoties  ex  parte  difle  Mariorie  fueritis  requifiti  debite 
exequ  ....  cum  effeftu  ita  quod  pro  veftro  defedu  amplius  inde  iuftam 
queremoniam  [non  audiamus]  Datum  lub  teftimonio  noftri  magni  figiili 
apud  Pertb  o6tauo  die  menfis  Maii  •  •  •  • 

[Cjiarge  to  the  laird  of  Lochlewyn  to  enter  as  hoftage  in  England  •] 

Hex- 

13  Deyr  frende  We  chargis  ybow  Ilratly  in  yhour  allegeans  that  yhe 
addrels  yhow/  as  forane/  to  pafs  in  Ingland  in  hoftaygis  for  our  deliuer- 
ance  and  at  yhe  be  at  Edinburgh  at  vs  the  fyrft  day  of  September  nixt 
to  cum  and  thayr  to  tak  yhour  journay  bi;t  langer  delay  /  For  it  is  iua  ap- 
poyntyd  that  on  nay  way  it  may  be  delaite  •  Takand  this  in  paciens  /  for 
God  willande  we  fall  le  weyll  for  yhour  deliuerance  /  And  in  the  meyn- 
tyme  we  fall  tak  yhow  and  yhour  landis  vndyr  oure  Ipeciell  refpyt  and 
proteftione  •  Gewyn  under  oure  preue  leille  at  Edinburgh  the  xviij  dai 
of  Auguft  the  yheir  of  oure  regne  the  xxij  • 

Dilefto  et  fideli  noftro 

Henrico  Douglefs  de  Lochlewyn  • 

JMagna  Carta  Jacobi  Douglas  primi  comitis  de  Mortoune  omnium  terrarum 
baroniarum  fuarum  infrafcriptarum  dominii  et  regalitatis  de  Dalketh  •  1456- 

14  Jacobus  del  gratia  rex  Scottorum  omnibus  probis  hominibus  totius 
terre  lue  clericis  et  laicis  salutem  •  Sciatis  nos  dedifTe  conceffifle  et 
hac  prefenti  carta  noftra  confirmafle  dilefto  conlanguineo  noftro  Jacobo 
de  Douiflas  filio  primogenito  et  heredi  dilefti  confanguinei  noftri  Jacobi 


APPENDIX.  xliii 

domini  de  Dalkeith  dominium  et  baroniam  de  Dalketh  cum  caftro 
eiuldem  necnon  baronias  et  terras  fubfcriptas  Videlicet  baroniam  de 
Caldorcleire  baroniam  de  Garmyltounedunyng-  necnon  terras  de 
Hauthornlek  jacentes  in  baronia  de  Abircorne  ac  terras  de  Dechtment  et 
Holdene  cum  pertinenciis  jacentes  in  baronia  de  Weftercaldore  infra 
vicecomitatum  noftrum  de  Edinburgh  ac  etiam  baroniam  de  Kilbothok 
baroniam  de  Neulandis  /  baroniam  de  Lintoune  necnon  terras  de  Eftfchelis 
cum  earundem  terrarum  et  baroniarum  pertinenciis  et  annexis  et  certas 
terras  baronie  de  Kirkwrde  et  terrarum  de  Lochurde  Quilt  et  Fethan  cum 
pertinenciis  necnon  baroniam  de  Robertoune  cum  pertinenciis  jacentem 
infra  vicecomitatum  noftrum  de  Lanark  et  baroniam  de  Abirdowre  cum 
caftro  eiufdem  cum  pertinenciis  /  terras  de  Wodfeildecyre  et  Seyfeilde  et 
duas  Balbartanis  cum  molendino  et  eiufdem  fequelis  ac  ceteris  pertinenciis 
fuis  in  conneftabularia  de  Kingorne  infra  vicecomitatum  de  Fife  ac 
tenementum  de  Hutoune  cum  pertinenciis  jacens  infra  dominium  de 
Anandirdail  /  terras  de  Mordingtoune  cum  pertinenciis  jacentes  infra 
vicecomitatum  de  Berwick  •  Quod  quidem  dominium  de  Dalketh  et  caftra 
fupradida  cum  pertinenciis  necnon  baronie  et  terre  prefate  cum  perti- 
nenciis fuerunt  di6li  Jacobi  patris  hereditarie  et  quod  dominium  et 
caftra  predifta  baronias  et  terras  prefatas  cum  pertinenciis  idem  Jaco- 
bus non  vi  aut  metu  du6lus  nee  errore  lapflis  fed  lua  mera  et  fpontanea 
voluntate  in  manus  noftras  apud  Edinbwrgh  coram  lublcriptis  teftibus 
perfuftem  etbaculum  et  I'uos  procuratores  ad  hoc  legittime  et  fufficienter 
conftitutos  furfum  reddidit  pureque  fimpliciter  refignauit  ac  totum  jus 
et  clameum  que  in  diftis  dominio  caftris  baroniis  et  terris  cum 
pertinenciis  habuit  feu  habere  potuit  pro  fe  et  heredibus  fuis  omnino 
quietum  clamauit  in  perpetuum  •  Tenendum  et  habendum  diftum 
dominium  de  Dalketh  vnacum  di6tis  caftris  cum  pertinenciis  necnon  pre- 
fatas baronias  de  Dalkeith  Caldorcleire  et  Garmyltounedunyng  ac  terras 
de  Hauthornfek  terras  de  Dechtment  et  Holdene  /  baroniam  de  Kilbo- 
thok /  baroniam  de  Neulandis  /  baroniam  de  Lyntoune  /  terras  de  Eftfche- 
lis et  certas  terras  baronie  de  Kirkwrde  et  terrarum  de  Lochwrde  Quilt  et 


xliv  APPENDIX. 

Fethan  /  necnon  di6tas  baroniam  de  Robertoune  et  de  Abirdowre  vnacum 
di6bo  caftro  de  Abirdowre  ac  etiam  terras  de  Wodfeildecyre  et  Seyfeilde 
et  duas  Balbartanis  cum  molendino  et  eiufdem  fequelis  ac  ceteris  perti- 
nenciis  fuis  vnacum  di6lo  tenemento  de  Hutoun  et  diftis  terris  de 
Mordingtoune  cum  vniuerfis  et  fmgulis  difti  dominii  ac  etiam  omnium  et 
fingularum  diftarum  baroniarum  et  terrarum  pertinenciis  et  annexis 
predidlo  Jacobo  de  Douglas  et  beredibus  Tuis  de  nobis  heredibus  et  fuccef- 
foribus  noftris  in  feodo  et  hereditate  inperpetuum  per  omnes  reftas  metas 
fuas  antiquas  et  diuifas  prout  jacent  in  longitudine  et  latitudine  cum 
omnibus  et  fingulis  libertatibus  commoditatibus  et  afiamentis  ac  iuilis 
pertinenciis  fuis  quibufcumque  tarn  non  nominatis  quam  nominatis 
ad  diftum  dominium  caftra  baronias  et  terras  fupradiftas  cum  perti- 
nenciis fpeftantibus  feu  jufte  fpedare  valentibus  quomodolibet  in  futurum 
et  adeo  libere  quiete  /  plenarie  /  integre  /  honorifice  /  bene  et  in  pace  in 
omnibus  et  per  omnia  ficut  di6tus  Jacobus  pater  aut  fui  predeceflTores 
prediftum  dominium  de  Dalkeith  et  difta  caftra  cum  pertinenciis  /  nocnon 
diftas  baronias  et  terras  cum  pertinenciis  de  nobis  aut  predeeelTbribus 
nofti'is  ante  diftam  refignationem  nobis  inde  fadlam  liberius  tenuit  feu 
poftedit  /  tenuerunt  leu  pofTederunt  /  referuato  tamen  diclo  Jacobo  patri 
pro  toto  tempore  vite  fue  libero  tenemento  didi  dominii  de  Dalketh  et 
dittorum  caftrorum  necnon  omnium  et  lingularum  baroniarum  et  terrarum 
predi6tarum  cum  pertinenciis  /  exceptis  baroniis  de  Robertoune  et  Kilbo- 
thok  cum  pertinenciis  et  de  quibus  duabus  baroniis  tam  feodum  quam 
liberum  tenementum  earundem  baroniarum  libere  hereditarie  pro  per- 
petuo  remanebunt  cum  difto  Jacobo  filio  et  heredibus  fuis  •  Et  referuata 
etiam  rationabili  tertia  parte  difti  dominii  et  omnium  et  fingularum 
baroniarum  et  terrarum  predi6tarum  preterquam  de  diftis  baroniis  de 
Robertoune  et  Kilbothok  cum  pertinenciis  Elizabeth  fponfe  diiili  Jacobi 
patris  pro  toto  tempore  vite  fue  cum  contigerit  •  In  cuius  rei  teftimonium 
prefenti  carte  noftre  magnum  figillum  noftrum  apponi  precepimus  •  Tefti- 
bus  reuerendis  in  Chrifto  patribus  Jacobo  confanguineo  noftro  cariflimci 
et  Georgeo  Sancli  Andree  et  Brechinenlis  eccleliarum  epifcopis/ Willelmo 


APPENDIX. 


xlv 


coniite  Orchadie  et  de  Cathnes  domino  de  Sandoclaro  noftro  cancellario 
et  confanguineo  prediledo  /  dileftis  confanguineis  noftris  Thoma  domino 
Erlkin  /  Alexandre  domino  Montegomeri  /  Johanne  domino  Lindeffay  de 
Byris  /  Johanne  domino  Dernle  /  Patricio  domino  Halis  et  Alexandre 
Waflare  noftrorum  compotorum  rotulatore  •  A  pud  Edinburgh  oaauo 
die  menfis  Septembris  anno  Domini  millefimo  quadringentefimo  quin- 
quagefimo  fexto  et  regni  noftri  vicefimo  • 


L  J.  he  Earl  of  Morton  Iworn  of  the  Privy  Council  •] 
J5    ixpud  Caftrum  de  Striueling  xij  Junij  Anno  to'  •  Ixxviij  • 


Bex. 

Joannes  Comes  Atholie  Cam""^ 
Archibaldus  Comes  de  Angus. 
Colinus  Comes  Ei'gadie. 
Joannes  Comes  de  Montrois. 
Joannes  Comes  de  Mar. 
Hugo  Comes  de  Eglintoun. 
Willelmus  Comes  de  Glencairne 
Andreas  Comes  de  Bothes. 
Georgius  Comes  de  Caithness. 


Sederunt  • 

Jacobus  Dominus  Innermeyth. 
Georgius  Dominus  Seytoun. 
Andreas  Dominus  Vchiltre. 
AUanus  Dominus  Cathcart. 
Allanus  Dominus  Sinclair. 


Willelmus  Dominus  Buthven. 
Patricias  Dominus  Lindesay. 
Laurencius  Dominus  Oliphant. 
Joannes  Dominus  Maxwell. 
Joannes  Dominus  Hereis. 
Jacobus  Dominus  Ogiluy. 


Magifter  de  Gray. 
Magifter  de  Forbes. 
Epilcopus  Sandiandree. 
Epifcopus  Glafguenfis. 
Epilcopus  de  Caithnes. 
Epilcopus  Orchadenfis. 
Epifcopus  Morauienfis. 
Epifcopus  Abirdonenfis. 
Epifcopus  Dunkeldeniis. 
Epifcopus  Brechinenfis. 


xlvi  APPENDIX. 

Cominendatarius  de  Dunfermliiig.  Commifrarii  Burgorum. 

Coinmendatarius  de  Dryburgh.  Archibaldus  Stewart  pro  Edinburgh. 

Commendatarius  de  Cumbuflsyiinet.     Willelmus  Dominus  Cathnenfis  pro 
Coramendatarins  de  Culros.  Perth. 

Commendatarius  de  Incheauffray.         Magifter  Jacobus  Haliburtoun  pro 
Commendatarius  de  Kilwynning.  Dunde. 

Commendatarius  de  Xewbottill.  Joannes  Lokhart  pro  Air. 

Commendatarius  de  San6tcolmis  Thomas  Craufurde  pro  Glalgow. 

Inche.  Robertas  Forefter  pro  Striueling. 

Thomas  Walwood  pro  San6tandrois. 

Thomas  Lichtoun  pro  Montrois. 

The  quhilk  day  in  prefens  of  the  Kingis  Maieftie  Nobilitie  and  Eftaittes 
aboue  writtin  James  Ei'll  of  Mortoun  Lord  of  Dalkeyth  being  admittit  to 
be  of  his  Maiefteis  ordinar  prevy  Counl'ale  quhill  the  Parliament  ap- 
poyntit  to  be  haldin  at  Edinburgh  vpon  the  tent  day  of  Julij  nextocum 
And  in  relpect  of  the  charge  he  buir  of  befoir  as  Regent  to  his  Hienes 
Ordainit  to  haue  the  firft  roume  and  place  in  Counfale  maid  fayth  and 
gaif  his  aith  be  balding  vp  his  hand  That  he  fuld  gif  his  anfauld  leill  and 
trew  Counfall  in  all  thingis  fould  happin  to  be  proponit  in  Counfale 
tending  to  the  honor  and  fuirtie  of  his  Maiefteis  maift  nobill  perlbn  the 
common  effairis  of  his  realme  and  lieges  thairof  and  keep  the  famyn 
fecreit  and  unrevelit  by  any  maner  of  way  And  to  be  refponfall  and 
accufabill  to  his  Hienes  and  his  Eftaittes  of  his  Counfale  And  that  he  fall 
remaine  abyde  and  be  reddy  to  gif  his  counfale  and  not  departe  without 
licence  of  his  Maieftie  and  remanent  of  the  fame  Counfale  • 


APPENDIX.  xlvii 

IG  RENTALE  QUARUNDAM  BARONIARUM  DOMINORUM  DE 

DALKEITH.     MCCCLXXVI. 

MOLEND  .  .  . 

.  XX  li  •  .  .  xl  s  •  per  d-  •  • 

DUE  BOUATE  TERRE  ECCLESIASTICE 

Aff . . . 

LOUCHURDE 

Affedatui-  Ricardo  filio  Alani  Roberto  filio  Ade  Eogero  Wode  Gregorio 
de  Mols  Johanni  Hird  et  Laurencio  filio  Ricardi  ad  terminuni  vniiis  anni 
pro  viii  li  ■  plegio  altero  alterius. 

Sumnia  de  Louchurde  viii  li  • 


BARONIA  DE  KYLBOUHO. 

RAW  ET  BLANDOWYNE 

Affedantur  Johanni  filio  Ade  et  Johanni  Hyldfone  ad  terminum  vnius 
anni  pro  x  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  •  plegio  altero  alterius. 

VILLA  DE  KILBOCHOKE 

AHedatur  Johanni  Murokfone  Thome  de  Cauldlav.-  Radulpho  filio  Willelmi 
et  Matilde  vidue  [ad]  terminuni  vnius  anni  pro  viii  li  •  et  xii  gallinis 
plegio  altero  alterius. 

COTAGIA  EIUSDEM 

Quatuor  cotagia  affedantur  pro  xxvi  s  •  viii  d-  videlicet  Johanni  de  Twed- 
dale  Johanni  Walch  et  Domino  Johanni  .  .  . 


xlviii  APPENDIX. 

Eden  Bondvyle  cepit  vnum  cotagium  pro  antiqua  firma  quam  eadem 
dicit  efle  vi  s  •  viii  d  •  cum  iiii  dietis  plegio  Willelmo  Ker. 

Matilda  vidua  cepit  vnum  cotagium  ficut  prius  pro  vi  s-  viii  d  •  et  iiii 
dietis  plegio  Thoma  Caldlaw. 

Adam  Lityll  cepit  vnum  cotagium  pro  vi  s-  viii  d-  et  iiii  dietis  plegio 
Thoma  de  Caldlaw. 

Johannes  Murokifon  cepit  ii  cotagia  pro  xiii  s  •  iiii  d  •  et  viii  dietis  plegio 
Daw  [id]  filio  Willelmi. 

The  fume  of  the  cotagis  iii  li  • 

GYLDLANDE  CUM  II  COTAGIIS 

Afl'edatur  Willelmo  Ker  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xxvi  s  ■  viii  d  •  et 
viii  dietis  plegio  Johanne  Willelmi. 

BREWLANDE  CUM  II  COTAGIIS 

Afledatur  Willelmo  fabro  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xvi  s  ■  viii  d  •  plegio 
Thoma  de  Cauldlaw. 

WETLANDE 

Affedatur  Johanni  filio  Ade  et  Johanni  Hildl'one  ad  terminum  vnius 
anni  pro  v  s  •  plegio  alter o  alterius. 

MOLENDINUM  EIUSDEM 

Affedatur  Ade  molendinario  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  iii  li  •  vi  s  • 
viii  d  •  et  pafcet  vnum  porcum  ad  lardarium  domini  fi  fibi  mittatur  plegio 
Willelmo  de  Drouchhilde. 

ORIENTALES  DOMINICE  DE  KILBOCHOKE  ET  LE  OKCHEARDE 

AlFedantur  Willelmo  Drouchilde  et  Ade  molendinario  ad  terminum  vnius 
anni  pro  xiii  li  •  xvi  s  •  viii  d  •  plegio  altero  alterius. 


APPENDIX.  xlix 

OCCIDENTALES  DOMINICE  DE  KILBOUCHOKE 

AflTedantur  Roberto  Hildfone  Johanni  Broun  et  Willelmo  Scharp  ad 
terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xiii  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  •  plegio  altero  alterius. 

Suuima  de  Kylboucho  in  anno  liiii  li  •  v  s  •  et  lie  ad 
terminum  xxvii  li  •  ii  s  •  vi  d  • 

WESTIRTOUN  DB  ESSCHELIS 

Affedatur  Johanni  Cady  Patricio  filio  Micbaelis  Johanni  de  Warde 
Chriftiane  de  Wyne  et  Gilberto  filio  Ade  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro 
xii  li  •  plegio  altero  alterius. 

ESTIRTOUN  DE  ESSCHELIS 

Afledatur  Willelmo  de  Burne  et  Thome  filio  Andree  ad  terminum  vnius 
anni  pro  viii  li  •  plegio  altero  alterius. 

Summa  de  ii  EflTchellis  in  anno  xx  li  •  et  fie  ad  terminum  x  li  • 


NEWLANDIS. 


BORDLANDE 

Afledatur  Johanni  filio  Laurenti  ad  terminum  vnius  [anni]  pro  v  li  •  vi  s  • 
viii  d  •  plegio  Jacobo  Swayne. 

BREWLAND 

AflTedatur  Michaeli  filio  Johannir.  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xxvi  s 
viii  d  •  et  vi  gallinis  plegio  Andrea  filio  Johannis. 

9 


1  APPENDIX. 

QWHITSYDE 

In  manu  domini. 


Afledatur  Andree  filio  Johannis  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  vi  li  •  xiii  s  • 
iiii  d  •  plegio  Johanne  filio  Alexandri. 

PLEIIYNGTOUN 

Afledatur  Jacobo  Swayne  et  Willelmo  filio  iiio  ad  terminum  vnius  anni 
pro  xii  li  •  plegio  altero  alterius. 

FEEMANISLANDE 

Afledatur  Ade  ciflx)ri  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xx  s  •  plegio  Andrea 
filio  Johannis. 

COLTHROP 

Afledatur  Johanni  Watir  Johanni  filio  Johannis  et  Willelmo  filio  Willelmi 
ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  v  li  •  et  ii  multonibus  plegio  altero  alterius. 

DEOUCHHILDE 

AflTedatur  Alano  filio  Henrici  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  iiii  li  ■  plegio 
Andrea  filio  Johannis. 

MOLENDINUM  DB  NEWLANDIS 

Afledatur  Andree  filio  Johannis  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xl  s  •  et 
palcet  vnum  porcum  domino  li  fibi  mittatur  plegio  Johanne  filio  Alex- 
andri. 

Summa  in  anno  xxxvi  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  •  et  fie  ad 
terminum  xviii  li  •  xiii  s  •  iiii  d  • 


APPENDIX.  li 

QUTLTE  ET  LE  FETHEN 

AlFedantur  Thome  Stulp  Laurencio  filio  Ade  Ade  filio  Symonis  Thome 
Bull  Willelmo  de  Foreft  et  Johanni  filio  Patricii  ad  terminum  vnius  anni 
pro  X  li  •  et  foluent  annuale  plegio  altero  alterius. 


LYNTOUNE. 

VILLA  EIUSUEM  XVIII  EQUATE  TEKRE 

AfTedatur  Willelmo  filio  Johannis  Ade  Smot  Dauid  filio  Johannis  Thome 
Smyth  Thome  filio  Alexandri  Willelmo  Small  Ade  filio  Thome  Johanni 
Swayne  et  Johanni  Lawsou  ad  terminum  ii  annorum  quolibet  anno  pro 
X  li  •  xiii  s  •  iiii  d  •  plegio  altero  alterius. 

COTAGIA  EIUSDEM  VIDELICET  IIII 


BREWLANDE 


DUE  BOUATE  DE  SWTNBURNLAND  ^""marce!"" 

AlTedantur  Willelmo  Menar  ad  terminum  ii  annorum  primo  anno  pro 
xviii  s  •  et  fecundo  anno  pro  xx  s  •  et  tenetur  edificare  fuflBcientem  domum 
plegio  altero  alterius. 

Antiqun,  stent 
MOLLISLANDE  iUi  marce. 

Affedatur  Waltero  filio  Ade  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xl  s  •  plegio 
Willelmo  de  Menar. 


lii  APPENDIX. 

BAWDWYNISGILL 

Affedatur  Willelmo  filio  Johannis  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  v  li  • 
plegio  Johanne  Lawson  de  Lyntoun. 

QWHITFEILDE 

Affedatur  Willelmo  filio  Ada  et  Dauid  Purdy  pro  iiii  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  ■ 

Summa  baronie  de  Lyntoun  in  anno  xxii  li  •  xviii  s  ■ 
et  fie  ad  tenninum  xi  li  •  ix  s  ■ 

KIKKUKDE 

Affedatur  idano  filio  Gilberti  et  Thome  filio  Patricii  ad  terminum  vnius 
anni  pro  v  li  •  plegio  Waltero  filio  Alani. 

MAYDVEN 

Affedatur  Willelmo  de  Newbiging  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  liib  ilta  con- 
dicione  videlicet  quod  fi  dominus  diftam  terram  iurfum  non  reddiderit 
di6tus  Willelmus  illam  habebit  pro  xx  s-  plegio  Johanne  filio  Willelmi. 

Summa  Kyrkurde  et  Maydven  vi  li  • 

ANNUALI  DE  HOIPEKELYHO-  ANNIALI  DE  NEVVBl 

X  li  ■  xiii  s  •  iiii  d  - 

TEREA  DE  HARDIGTOUN 

Peblys  in  anno  ix"  ix  li  •  iii  s  •  preter  Horlebruke  et  Qwhyt  Ade  et  lie 
ad  terminum  prel'entem  iiii"  xiiii  li  •  vi  s  •  vi  d-  preter  xl  s  •  de  gerluni 
de  Effchellis. 


APPENDIX.  iiii 

Rentale  de  Tybris  de  Mortoon  Dalfcjbill  Garvalde  de  Butyll  et  de 

MOFFET  de  ASSEDACIONE  ANNI  &C.  LXX"'  VII  et  LEUACIONE  ANNI  LXX"'  VIII. 

AssEDACio  terrarum  DE  Tybris  et  Mortoun  ET  Garvalde  Butill  Moffet 
ET  Pkestoune  facta  apud  Drumfres  XV  DIE  Mensis  March  anno  &c. 

LXX"  VI™. 

DUBEIiAUCH 

Affedatur  Ingramo  filio  Dungalli  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xl  s  •  plegio 
Symone  filio  Padine. 

GLENCREACH 
Affedatur  Johanni  filio  Fergufii  ad  terminum  trium  annorum  primo  anno 
pro  xxvi  s  •  viii  d  •  ii"  anno  pro  xxxii  s  •  iii°  anno  pro  xxxvi  s  •  plegio  Thoma 
Hunter. 

DALNAW 

Airedatur  Symcni  filio  Padini  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xl  s  •  plegio 
Ingramo  filio  Dungalli. 

CLAUCHANE 

AflTedatur  Michaeli  filio  Gylis  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  antiqua  firma 
quam  idem  dicit  eil'o  xiii  s-  iiii  d-  plegio  Ingramo  filio  Dungalli. 

BEEWLAND  CUM   LE  STALLAGE 

AHedatur  Mychaeli  M'Cleifch  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  iii  s  •  iiii  d  • 

CLAUCIIIIOPE 

Jacobus  Kaa  tenetur  Ibluere  antiquam  firmam  pro  eo  quod  fummonitus 
fuerat  ad  comparendum  coram  domino  et  non  comparuit  pro  terra  liia 
accipienda  vel  furfum  reddenda. 


liv  APPENDIX. 


LOUCHIKBANE 


Affedatur  Alexandro  Porter  ad  terminum  vriius  anni  pro  iiii  li  •  plegio 
Thoma  Hunter. 

Jacobus  Ea  tenetur  in  antiqua  firma  perfoluenda  pro  eo  quod  fummo- 
nitus  fuerat  ad  comparendum  coram  domino  et  non  comparuit  pro  terra 
fna  accipienda  vel  furfum  reddenda. 

TERRE  DOMINICE 

Afledantur  Patricio  M'Re  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xxxiii  s  •  iiii  d  ■ 
plegio  Thoma  Hunter. 

VILLA  DE  TYBKIS 

Affedatur  Patricio  M'Rey  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  antiqua  firma 
quam  dicunt  effe  xliiii  s  •  videlicet  ii  terre  hulband'  et  i  bouata  cum 
dimidia  et  querendum  eft  quanta  terra  remanet. 

Adam  Aylmer  cepit  vnum  cotagium  cum  le  brewland  ad  terminum 
anni  pro  xi  s  ■  si  dominus  noluerit  eam  in  propria  manu  retinere. 

AUCHIRDILAKDY 

AiFodatur  Cuthberto  M'Narne  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xii  s  •  plegio 
Willolmo  filio  Walteri. 

MOLENDINUM 

In  manu  Thome  Hunter. 

KNOKYNCHANGILL 

In  manu  Nicholai  de  Drumfres. 

AUCHINBEEK 

Alledatur  Patricio  dc  Bryn  et  Johanni  M'Lefe  ad  terminum  vnius  anni 
pro  xxxiii  s  •  iiii  d  •  plegio  altero  alterius. 


APPENDIX. 


AUCHINGASSYLE 


Afledatur  Donaldo  filio  Fergucii  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xxvi  s  • 
viii  d  ■  plegio  Patricio  M'Rey. 

CLONTNGARTH 

Afledatur  Michaeli  M'Cleil'ch  ad  terminum  iiii  annorum  primo  anno  pro 
X  s  •  ii°  anno  pro  xi  s  •  iii°  anno  pro  xii  s  •  et  iiii°  anno  pro  xiii  s  •  iiii  d  • 
plegio  Thoma  Hunter. 

Thomas  Walker  et  Raynaldus  M'Pudirlane  tenentur  soluere  antiquain 
firmam  pro  eo  quod  fummoniti  fuerunt  ad  comparendum  et  non  eom- 
paruerunt  coram  domino  ad  fuum  pent'  faciendum  et  nihilominus  terra 
permanet  in  manu  domini. 


Afledatur   Gilmor   Macnefche  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  iiii  s  •  vi  d  ■ 
plegio  Michaeli  filio  Gillicrifti. 

AUCHNACHT 

Afl^edatur  Patricio  Makre  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  vi  s  •  viii  d  •  et  li 
plus  queri  poterit  de  illo  plus  tunc  I'oluet. 

BBNHANANE  •  CLOVTNCUDE 

Afledantur  M'Cleri  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xvi  y  •  plegio 

Cudberto  M'Narne. 

Summa  de  Tybris  in  anno  xx  li  •  x  d  •  et  fie  ad  terminum 
X  li  •  V  d  •  preter  Clauhope  molendinum  Knokyncangyll. 


!vi  APPENDIX. 

MORTOUNE. 

THOENHILL 

AfTedatur  Willelino  filio  Alani  Thome  de  Dargavane  Johanni  filio 
Ijaurencii  Roberto  de  Couqwhalane  Michaeli  M'Gilrey  Donaldo  Wyly 
Thome  Lambe  Mariote  de  Blare  Johanni  de  Dargavell  et  Thome  Scot 
id  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  ix  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  •  fub  ifta  condicione  quod  fi 
dominus  acceperit  Mortounholme  ad  vfum  I'uum  tunc  faciet  dominus  pent' 
"um  tenentibus  prenotatis  fi  voluerint  plegio  altero  alterius. 

DOBTOUN 

Alfedatur  Laurencio  Newale  Gilberto  filio  Ade  Ade  filio  Alani  Johanni 
Eede  Malcolrao  de  Buchane  Thome  filio  Gilorifti  Patricio  de  Buchane 
Thome  filio  Roberti  et  Tawus  M'Gillefe  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  ix  li  • 
vi  s  •  viii  d  •  fub  condicione  prenotata  plegio  altero  alterius. 

ERISMORTOUN 

AflTedatur  Thome  Hunter  et  Gilcrifto  Herwynd  ad  terminum  vnius  anni 
pro  vi  li  •  xiii  s  •  iiii  d  •  plegio  altero  alterius. 

DKUMCOKKE 

Afledatur  Roberto  de  Ecclefia  Hugoni  de  Forefta  Hugoni  de  Rowkell  et 
Ibbote  Wales  ad  terminum  ii  annorum  primo  anno  pro  vii  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  • 
et  fecundo  anno  pro  viii  li  •  plegio  pro  Roberto  de  Ecclefia  Johanne  filio 
Alani  et  pro  Hugone  de  Rowkell  plegio  Willelmo  filio  Alani  et  plegio  pro 
Ibbota  Wales  Gilberto  filio  Duncani  et  pro  Hugone  de  Foreft  plegio 
Donaldo  Wyly. 

PARCUJf  DE  MORTOUNE 

AflTedatur  Gilberto  filio  Duncani  ad  terminum  unius  anni  pro  vi  li  •  xiii  s  • 
iiii  d  • 


APPENDIX.  Ivii 

LAUCHT 

Afledatur  Gilberto  filio  Duncani  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xl  s  •  xl  d  • 

Summa  de  Mortoun  in  anno  xli  li  •  x  s  •  et  fie  ad 
terminum  xx  li  •  xv  s  •  preter  molendinum. 

MOLENDINUM  DE  MOKTOUNE 
Thomas  de  Mortoun  tenetur  foluere  pro  eo  firmam  pro  qua  illud  prius 
accepit  videlicet  pro  viii  li  •  et  iii  quarteriis  brafii  eo  quod  non  accepit  ad 
terminum  nee  fuffieienter  furfum  reddidit  ad  exitum  termini  fcilicet  fe 
intromittente  eum  molendino  poft  terminum. 

Summa  molendini  viii  li  •  in  anno  et  fie  ad  terminum  iiii  li  • 


DALFUBILL  •  GARVALDE. 

VILLA  DE  DALFUBILL 

Afledatur  Willelmo  filio  Johannis  Willelmo  Rufl^ell  Nigello  filio  Gelyfe 
Symoni  filio  Reginaldi  Thome  de  Rowle  Johanni  filio  Thome  Thome 
Witty  Jehanni  Stut  Ade  Couper  Thome  filio  Reginaldi  Gilcrifto  filio 
Gilberti  Johanni  filio  Johannis  et  Thome  de  DuneoU  ad  terminum  trium 
annorum  primo  anno  pro  xvii  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  •  et  quolibet  anno  duorum 
annorum  I'equeneium  pro  xviii  li  •  xiii  s  •  iiii  plegio  altero  alterius. 

MOLENDINUM 

AflTedatur  Domino  Roberto  re6tori  de  Tynwald  et  Martino  M'Cubyn  ad 
terminum  vnius  anni  pro  viii  li  •  plegio  altero  alterius. 


Afledatur  Thome  filio  Nyuini  Ade  Wode  Johanni  clerico  Johanni  Cruke 

h 


Iviii  APPENDIX. 

Johanni  Dicfone  Johanni  M'Cuk  Ricardo  de  Aula  Ricardo  M'Cuk  Thome 
Boyis  et  Andree  M'Cuk  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  x  li  •  plegio  altero 
alterius. 

JIIKILHOLME  •  AUCHIiSSKEACH  •  ESKNOKIS 

Affedantur  Martino  M'Cubyne  pro  antiqua  firma  quam  tenentes  dicunt 
effe  viii  li  •  et  dominus  x  li  •  plegio  Johanne  Wode. 

MOLYNE 

AflTedatur  Ibbote  Gray  Willelmo  Gray  et  Willelmo  Porter  ad  terminum 
vnius  anni  pro  iii  li  •  xiii  s  •  iiii  d  •  et  vna  xii"^  gallinarum  plegio  altero 
alterius. 

RAHILL 

Affedatur  Thome  Blak  et  Johanni  Scot  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xl  s  • 
plegio  altero  alterius. 


Affedatur  ii  li  •  xiii  s  •  iiii  d  • 

CRUNYHATOUN 

Affedatur  Roberto  filio  Niuini  Thome  filio  Ade  Johanni  Gilajpifon  et 
Johanni  filio  Andree  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  iii  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  • 
plegio  altero  alterius. 

Summa  de  Dalfubill  in  anno  Iv  li  ■  et  (ic  ad  terminum  xxvii  li  •  x  s  • 


APPENDIX.  lix 


BARONIA  DE  BUTILL. 

CLOUCHLAKBANE 

Affedatur  Gilberto  filio  Gilbert!  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  vi  s  •  viii  d  ■ 

AMBRElfES 

Affedatur  Gilberto  filio  Gilberti  Patricio  M'Gilqwhud  Gilberto  M'Wren 
Patricio  M'Gilalwy  Gilberto  M'Gillyn  Gilberto  M'Cumyne  Gilberto 
M'Gilfud  Henrico  M'Alcok  et  Johamii  de  Herwyne  ad  terminum  vnius 
anni  pro  x  li  •  plegio  altero  alterius. 

MAKNAUCH 

Affedatur  Thome  filio  Gilberti  Waltero  Harper  et  Patricio  Walter  ad 
terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xx  s  •  plegio  Thoma  Makgilvane. 

BAETEANE 

Affedatur  Willelmo  filio  Domini  Mathei  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro 
XX  s  •  plegio  Thoma  filio  Gilberti. 

CASTELGOUR 

Affedatur  Thome  filio  Gilberti  ad  terminum  trium  annorum  prime  anno 
pro  vi  li  •  fecundo  anno  pro  vi  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  •  et  tercio  anno  pro  vi  li  • 
xiii  s  •  iiii  d  •  plegio  Gilberto  filio  Gilberti. 

BREKAUCHLUG 

Affedatur  Gilberto  filio  Gilberti  Michaeli  M'Hay  et  Matheo  M'Nab  ad 
terminum  vnius  anni  pro  vi  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  •  plegio  altero  alterius. 

MIKILBREKAUCH 

Affedatur  Gilberto  filio  Gilberti  Gilberto  M'Gufibk  Andree  filio  vidue 


Ix  APPENDIX. 

Johanni  M'Orry  Gilberto  M'Corrill  Thome  M'Gilrewy  Johanni  M'Crikir 
Johanni  M'Claffirdy  Andree  fulloni  et  Donaldo  M'GiU'eigne  ad  terminum 
vnius  anni  pro  xiii  li  ■  plegio  altero  alterius. 

DUO  KNOKIS 

Affedantur  Willelmo  M'Moryne  Dungallo  M'Alayne  Gilqwhongill  Alche- 
nane  et  Moricio  filio  clerici  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  iiii  li  •  iii  s  •  iiii  d  ■ 
plegio  altero  alterius. 

BALGIRDANE 

Affedatur  Johanni  fulloni  et  Johanni  cilFori  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro 
V  li  •  plegio  altero  alterius. 

LOGANE  ET  POKTHULT 

Affedantur  Johanni  filio  Ade  Michaeli  filio  Ade  et  Willelmo  Gudoklbne 
ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  vi  li  •  xiii  s  •  iiii  d  •  plegio  altero  alterius. 

CLAK  •  •  •  YIS 

Affedatur  pro  iii  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  • 

VILLA  DE  BUTYLL 

Affedatur  Johanni  Perilman  Johanni  Studehird  Michaeli  Couper  et  Colyno 
filio  Hugonis  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  vii  li  •  xiii  s  •  iiii  d  •  plegio  altero 
alterius. 

MUNCH YSE 

Affedatur  Gilberto  filio  Gilberti  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  iii  li  •  xiii  s  • 
iiii  d. 

TOEWARDE  •  TYBIRNES  •  CUM  DIMIDIA  MARCATA  TERRE  DE  CULNAW 

AUedantur  Patricio  Makakake  et  Willelmo  Studhirde  ad  terminum  trium 


APPENDIX.  Ixi 

annorum  primo  anno  pro  iii  li  •  I'ecundo  anno  pro  iii  li  •  iii  s  •  iiii  d  •  et 
tercio  anno  pro  iii  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  •  plegio  altero  alterius. 

Summa  in  anno  iii'^x  li  •  xvi  s  •  viii  d  •  et  tic  ad 
terminum  xxxv  li  ■  viii  s  •  iiii  d  • 

MOLENDINUM 
In  manu  Gilberti  filii  Gilberti. 


PRESTOUNE. 

GLENWALDY 

Afledatur  Thome  filio  Jonete  Johauni  filio  Gilberti  Johanni  clerico 
Johanni  filio  Patricii  Gilberto  filio  Gilcrifti  Johanni  Owftyne  Thome  de 
Bek  et  Mauricio  M'Nab  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  viii  li  •  plegio  altero 
alterius. 

VILLA  DE  PREST0U:N 

Afledatur  Johanni  filio  Walteri  Gilberto  filio  Michaelis  Johanni  M'Kethir- 
ryke  Gilberto  filio  Mordaci  Willelmo  M'Caflane  Andree  cifTori  Andree 
Scolfyne  Alano  filio  Bricii  Johanni  Rewfane  et  Andree  filio  prioris  ad 
terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xii  li  •  plegio  altero  alterius  et  foluent  vnam 
marcam  pro  fefta  Tua. 

MOLENDINUM 

Afledatur  Philippo  filio  Gilcrifl;i  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  iii  li  •  vi  s  ■ 
viii  d  • 

Summa  Preftoun  in  anno  xxiii  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  •  et  fie 
ad  terminum  xi  li  •  xiii  s  •  iiii  d  ■ 


APPENDIX. 


TERRE  INFRA  VALLEM  DE  MOFFET. 

LE  COR 

Affedatur  Johanni  Marlchell  Willelmo  filio  Donaldi  et  Roberto  filio 
Willelmi  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  vii  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  •  plegio  altero 
alterius. 

NEWTOUN 

AflTedatur  Roberto  Boyle  et  Waltero  Spi'ot  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro 
vi  li  •  xiii  s-  iiii  d  •  plegio  altero  alterius. 

GRAMPTOUN 

Affedatur  Johanni  filio  Willelmi  Johanni  Joppifon  et  Alano  Joplbne  ad 
terminum  vnius  anni  pro  vii  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  •  plegio  altero  alterius. 

TERRE  DOMINICE  DE  MOFFET  •  % 


TERRA  DE  TORTHORALDE 


VILLA  DE  MOFFET 

Affedantur  Waltero  filio  Symonis  iiii  bouate  terre  ad  terminum  vnius  anni 
pro  XX  s • 

Adam  de  Huke  tenetur  foluere  antiquam  firmam  pro  eo  quod  lurfum 
reddidit  terram  fuam  et  nullum  plegium  potuit  inuenire  et  nichilhominus 
terra  flat  in  manu  domini. 

Thomas  Porter  tenetur  foluere  domino  x  s  •  pro  defeftu  comparent' 
cum  fuerit  ad  pent'  fummonitus  et  nichilominus  terra  flat  in  manu  domini. 

Johannes  filius  Mathei  cepit  ii  bouatas  terre  ad  terminum  vnius  anni 
pro  X  s • 


APPENDIX.  Ixiii 

COTAGIA  EIUSDEM 

Walterus  filius  Symonis  cepit  ii  cotagia  cum  dietis  pro  vi  s  • 

Thomas  Potter  cepit  vnum  cotagium  cum  dietis  pro  iii  s  • 

Johannes  Yhung  cepit  i  cotagium  quod  Thomas  Smith  tenuit  pro  iii  s  • 
cum  dietis. 

Thomas  Potter  vnum  cotagium  pro  ii  s  • 

Item  Dominus  Marcus  cepit  domum  cum  acra  terre  ad  termiuum  vnius  si„,ouirre"""* 

...    J  spoutlebit  pro 

auni  pro  vi  s  •  vm  d  •  isto  auno. 

Summa  huius  in  anno  xxiiii  Ii  •  vii  s  •  iiii  d  •  et  fie 
ad  terminum  xii  Ii  •  iii  s  ■  viii  d  • 

MOLENDINUM  EIUSDEM 


ANNUI  REDDITUS  DE  VUIRDKIFE 


xl 


MORDYNGTOUN 


Afledatur  Patricio  de  Paxtoun  ad  terminum  trium  annorum  primo  pro 
xvi  Ii  ■  ii°  anno  pro  xvii  Ii  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  •  iii°  anno  pro  xviii  Ii  •  xiii  s  •  iiii  d  ■ 
Summa  de  Mordyngtoun  in  anno  xvi  Ii  ■  et  fie 
ad  terminum  viii  Ii  • 


Ixiv  APPENDIX. 


Rentale  de  Abirdoure  de  assedacione  anni  lxx'vii  et  de  leuacione 

ANNI  LXXVni. 

DAUCHY  V  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  • 
Affedatur  Johanni  Sithowfone  [et]  Sithow  Cant  ad  terminum  ii  annorum 
quolibet  anno   pro  v  li  •  xiii  s  •  iiii  d  •  et  dimidia  celdra  auene  exceptis 
multonibus  et  gallinis  plegio  altero  alterius. 

telny  V  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  • 
AfTedatur  Sithow  Cant  Johanni  Sithowfone  Willelmo  de  Hill  Johanni 
Broune  Willelmo  filio  Johannis  Johanni  Mauldfone  Willelmo  Yhunger 
Willelmo  Cant  Willelmo  Smert  et  Matheo  filio  Johannis  ad  terminum 
vnius  anni  pro  v  li  •  xiii  s  ■  iiii  d  •  et  hoc  quod  dederunt  in  anno  precedent! 
exceptis  partibus  fuis  multonum  et  gallinarum  plegio  altero  alterius. 

SMYTHISLANDE  xli  S  •  viii  d  • 

Afledatur  eifdem  hulbandis  preter  Johannem  Sithowfone  et  Sithow  Cant 
et  Matheo  Johnfone  ad  [terminum]  vnius  anni  pro  xl  s  ■  xl  d  •  exceptis 
partibus  fuis  multonum  et  gallinarum  plegio  altero  alterius. 

COTELANDE  xliiii  S  • 

Afledatur  eifdem  hulbandis  videlicet  Matheo  Johnfone  WiUelmo  Smert 
Willelmo  Cant  Willelmo  Yhunger  Johanni  Mauldfone  Willelmo  Johnfone 
Johanni  Broune  et  Willelmo  de  Hill  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pi-o  xlvi  s  • 
viii  d  •  plegio  altero  alterius. 

BRACINA  XX  S  • 

AfTedatur  Matheo  Johnfone  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xx  s  •  et  tenetur 
edificare  domum  excepta  parte  fua  multonum  et  gallinarum  plegio  Johanne 
Schurthonfe. 


APPENDIX.  kv 

AGISMARTE  •  LE  MEDOW 

AfTedantur 

MOEIELL  xl  S  . 

Airedatur  hulbandis  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xl  s  •  exceptis  partibus 
fuis  multonum  et  gallinarum  plegio  altero  alterius. 

BEEKAUCH  XX  S  • 

AfTedatur  hufbandis  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xx  s  •  exceptis  partibus 
fuis  multonum  et  gallinarum  plegio  altero  alterius. 

TERRE  DOMINICE  xii  li  • 

Afledantur  hulbandis  videlicet  Matheo  filio  Johannis  Willelmo  Smert 
Willelmo  Cant  Willelmo  Yhunger  Johanni  Auldlbn  Willelmo  Johnibn 
Johanni  Broun  et  Johanni  Schurthoufe  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  x  li  • 
xiii  s  •  iiii  d  •  et  xvi  bollis  ordei  plegio  altero  alterius. 


Affedatur  Johanni  Schurthoufe  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xx  s  •  excepta 
parte  fua  multonum  et  gallinarum  plegio  Matheo  Mauldfone. 

Summa  iftius  videlicet  Abirdour  in  anno  xxxi  li  ■  x  s  •  et 
fie  ad  terminum  xv  li  •  xv  s  •  iiii  celdre  auene  xvi  boUe 
ordei  iiii  multones  et  ii  duodene  gallinarum. 


Ixvi  APPENDIX. 


KYNGORNE. 

ESTIKBALBEETANE 

Affedatur  Ricardo  Starke  Michaeli  filio  I'uo  et  Johanni  filio  Thome  ad 
terminum  ii  annorum  primo  anno  pro  v  li  •  et  vno  quarterio  auene  et 
fecundo  anno  pro  v  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  •  et  vno  quarterio  auene  plegio  altero 
alterius. 

WESTIRBALBRETANE 

Affedatur  Domino  Bartholomeo  et  Galfrido  Andifone  ad  terminum  vnius 
anni  pro  v  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  •  exceptis  multonibus  et  gallinis  plegio  [altero] 
alterius  cum  vno  quarterio  auene. 

MOLENDINUM 

Affedatur  Willelmo  Qwhitbrow  ad  terminum  quolibet  anno 

pro  iii  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  • 

TYEY  ET  SEFELD  CUM  LE  GKAUNGE 

Ad  terminum  Pentecoftes  dabunt  viii  marcas  de  annuo  redditu  et  ad  ter- 
minum Beati  Martini  dabunt  iii  celdras  frumenti. 

LE  MEDOW  X  S  • 


Summa  de  Kyngorne  ad  terminum  Pentecoftes  xii  li  •  xiii  s  ■ 
iiii  d  •  le  Medow  x  s  •  ad  Pentecoften  et  ad  terminum  Mar- 
tini vi  li  •  xvi  s  •  viii  d  •  et  le  Medow  v  s  • 


In  manu  domini 


APPENDIX.  Ixvii 


KTNNOWLE 

Affedatur  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  xviii  li  •  xiii  s  ■  iiii  d  •  et  fie  ad 
terminum  ix  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  • 

HEETHOENHILL 

Affedatur  Thome  filio  Ricardi  Roberto  Hafty  Thome  Brifbane  et  Johanni 
Hafty  ad  terminum  vnius  anni  pro  x  li  •  plegio  altero  alterius. 

HARDIGTOUN 

Afledantur  Waltero  Gray  ad  terminum  vnius  [anni]  iiii  bouate  terre  pro 
xiiii  s  •  et  fi  alique  alie  bouate  eiusdem  ville  carius  afledantur  in  voluntate 
domini  erit  ad  ampliandum  ad  eandem  fummam  ficut  alie. 

SCEALYNE 

Afl^edatur  Ade  de  Belfurde  Willelmo  Sumer  et  Thome  Markefoun  ad 
terminum  vnius  anni  pro  iii  li  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  •  videlicet  viii  bouate  terre  et 
v  cotagia  cum  dimidio  plegio  altero  alterius. 

Item   afledatur  Thome   Dicfoun  vna  bouata  terre  ad  terminum  vnius 
anni  pro  vi  s  •  plegio  Willelmo  Sumer. 

MOLENDINUM  PIJLLONIS 

Afledatur  Willelmo  de  Lyntoun  videlicet  fexta  pars  ad  terminum  vnius 
anni  pro  viii  s  •  x  d  •  obolo  et  fexta  parte  denarii. 

Summa  huius  iiii  li-  xviii  d  •  et  fexta  pars  denarii. 


APPENDIX. 


EXTENTUS  TERRARUM  VALLIS  DE  LYDELL. 


17      Grenehow 
Wichftalys 
Gildlchaw 
Burnehoufe 
Redemos 
Wedonfcelis 
Stanygill 
Senefchelis 
Foulwod  fuperior 
Foulwod  inferior 
Carglas 
Noua  claufura 
Conihayth 
Todholys 
PoUok 
Gilleftede 
Gilhoufe 
Todiftede 
Alcokftede 
Locus  Willelmi  Sturhes 
Locus  Croyfei' 
Gumereftede 
Wyntirfchel 
Gumyrtrytftede 
Mylneholme 
Watniylnerfled 
Milnelioufe     ■ 


XX 

marce 

iiii 

marce 

vi  s  • 

viii  d  • 

iii  s 

iiii  d- 

xii  s- 

xiiii  s  • 

V  s- 

ii 

marce 

X  s  • 

X  s  • 

xxiiii  s  • 

iiii  s  • 

iii  s 

iiii  d  • 

iiii  s  • 

ii  s  • 

ii  s- 

. 

iiii  s  • 

. 

iiii  s  • 

X  s  • 

vi  s  • 

viii  d  ■ 

V  s- 

vi  s  • 

viii  d  • 

xiii  s 

iiii  d  • 

V  s  • 

XV  s- 

iiii  s  • 

V  s 

•  ix  d- 

APPENDIX. 


Ixix 


Gopifhalch 
Gubifley  maior 
Guftyfley  minor 


nil  marce 

xxii  s  •  viii  d  ■ 

viii  s  • 


Summa  huius  quarterii  xxx  tbr  •  x  s  •  v  d 


QUARTEEIUM  DB  LuDNE. 


Piperftede 

G.-- 

Har  •  •  • . 

WUayk 

Blakburne 

Holfchel 

Wllayk  maior 

Ra  • .  •  • 

Ran  •  •  •  • 

Aldfchelis 

Grenefchelis 

Barbarftede 

Dawdemoundftede 

Locus  Fethyng 

Locus  Loumane 

Locus  Willelmi  filii  Alani 

Locus  Ricardi  de  Roule 

Lawyhalch 

Hyrtifgarth 

Carryfchelis 

Locus  Willelmi  del  Syde 


nil  s  ■ 
iii  s  ■ 
ii  s  ■ 

V  s  ■ 
vi  s  • 

V  s 
xviii  s  • 

xvi  s  ■ 


iii  tbr 

iii  s- 

iiii  s  • 

viii  s  • 


Ixx 


APPENDIX. 


Brocholey 

Stanyhalch 

Langhalgh 

Bulayftede 

Hyrtyftede  et  Peryfynocftede, 

Hyrtys 

Eagarthfchaw 

Toftys 


Vlll  s  • 

viii  »  • 

X  s- 

viii  s  • 

V  s  • 

xii  s  • 

vi  s  - 

V 

raarce 

Sumtna  huius  quarterii  xviii  tbr  •  xi  s  •  viii  d 


QUAETEEIUM  DE  EemYLUOUNE. 


Newland  de  Ermyldoun 

xiii  s  •  iiii  d  • 

Hetreis 

XV  s  • 

Terra  Johannis  Rauffon 

xvi  s  • 

Locus  Ricardi  Broun 

xii  s  • 

Hefylbankftede 

xiii  s  ■  iiii  d  • 

Hyrtiftede 

ii  s- 

Rich  •  •  •  •  fonftede 

xvi  s  ■ 

Crawflat 

xiiii  s  • 

Hoghoufe 

XV  s  • 

•  •  ■  •  Grevyftede 

xvi  s  •  viii  d  . 

Locus  Thome  Gilfon 

viii  s 

Gubacftede 

X  s  • 

Buldirbaynftede 

iiii  s  • 

Heylandys 

XV  s  • 

Dolfynefonftede 

X  s  • 

Grethmanftede 

xiiii  s  • 

APPENDIX. 

Ix 

Locus  Ade  de  Syde         .             .             .             .            . .            xvi  s  • 

Lewynleys 

xvi  s  .  ii  d  . 

vi  s  •  viii  d  • 

xxxviii  s  . 

V  marce 

ii  s  •  vi  d  • 

ynglbnftede 

xiiii  s  •  iiii  d  - 

ley 

vi  s  •  viii  d  ■ 

[Locus]  Elie  Nobill 

vi  s  • 

[Locus  Da]  aid  Stodhirde 

xxxiii  s  •  iiii  d  • 

xiii  s  ■  iiii  d  - 

•  •  gley 

ii  marce 

toun  inferior 

xlvi  s  •  viii  d  • 

toun  luperior 

xiii  s  •  iiii  d  • 

xii  s  • 

Lawys  inferior 

vii  s  • 

Locus  Ennie  de  Lawys 

iii  s  ■ 

Terra  de  Fawtyde 

xxxiii  s  • 

viii  s  • 

Locus  Roberti  de  Lawis 

viii  s  •  iiii  d  • 

xix  s . 

Locus  Willelmi  Nycfon 

xxxi  s  • 

Dalftanys 

xl  s  • 

Cuhirftede 

. 

xxii  s  • 

Lawgappis 

,.„  4-1 

XX  s- 

Ixxii 


APPENDIX. 


T  li. 

Aljxandir 

Armystrand. 


QUAETERIUM  DE  MaNGERTOUNE. 

Ragarth  ^   . 

Speteltoun 

Mangerton 

Mangertounholme 

Grenys 

Qvvhythavvlgh     . 

Weftburneflat 

Pouterlampert    . 

Dominium  inferius 

Haldykis 

Poudercroft 

Swyne  Acre 

Terra  ciflbris 

Dominium  f'uperius 

Hardenkaul 

Tyocfonfted 

Maldfonfted 

Milnniore 

Hungyrflat 

Mylncotis 

Pratum  aule 

Flygh  fuperior 

Kelloley  cum  Mylneholme 

Lanorowftanys    . 

Terra  Philippi  de  Faufyde  cum  Holdoun 

Strypfchelden     . 

Ri  car den 

Halyfyrfted 

Hetreys 

Redehugh 


vii  s  •  vi  d 
iiii  tbr 
X  marce 
xiii  s 
iii  s 
iiii  marce 
xxxvii  s  •  iiii  d  ■ 
xxiiii  s  ■ 
ii  marce 
vi  s  •  viii  d 
ii  s 
iii  s 
xiii  s  •  iiii  d 
ii  marce 

XV  s 

xii  s 

xii  s 

ii  s 

xld 

X  s 

ix  s 

xsxvi  s 

V  marce 

XX  marce 

XXXV  s  • 

xxiiii  s  • 

vii  s  • 

XX  s  •  iiii  d  • 

xviii  s  • 
XV  s  • 


vSumma  huius  quarterii  xlix  tbr  •  xxii  d 


APPENDIX. 


Ixxiii 


FORESTA. 


Sougdon 

Clehop 

Styrkfchelhope 

Ladlawhope 

Wytwrahop 

Sondayhop 

Qwytfeld 

Park  de  Ermeta^ 

Bradle 

Maleatthop 

Goranbery 

Bylhop 

Tarras 

.Cwys  •  •  •  • 

Catle 

Dunle  •  •  •  • 

Cres 

Hawthornfyde 

Hardenleys 

Welftremis 

Folepul 

Blacwd 

Tenafwd 

Eftirhefilfyde 

Weftirhefilfyde 

Kyrcwd 

Dalfernokifgill 

Parkis  de  Calleltoun 

Villa  cum  toll- 

Molendinum 


xii  marce 
iiii  tb  • 
viii  marce 
iiii  marce 
viii  marce 
viii  marce 
XX  marce 
vii  marce  vi  s  •  viii  d  • 
V  tbr  • 
X  marce 
X  marce 
X  marce 

•  •  marce 

•  •  marce 


V  s 
vi  s  •  viii  d 
xiii  s  •  iiii  d 
xl  d 
xiii  s  ■  iiii  d 
ix  marce 
V  marce 
xxiiii  s  ■ 
xld- 
xld- 
iiii  marce 
xii  marce 
xlviii  marce 


Ixxiv  APPENDIX. 

Dalmaynemore  .  .  .  .  .  x  s  • 

Delnj'S  .  .  .  .  .  .  xviii  d  • 

Summa  Forefte  excepto  molendino  cum  villa  et  toll  •  v"  xviii  tbr  •  iii  s  •  x  d  ■ 

iiii  marcate.      Southby  per  forincecum  feruicium  reddendo  x  s  • 

V  ubrate.         Flyglixxs-  vel  cfperuarium  mutatum  ad  feftum SanftiMichaelis  et  tresfeftas. 

X  marcate.       Murjelton  teustur  de  domino  in  capite  per  humagium  reddendo  ii  d  •  et 

iii  fe6las. 
iui marcate.      Dalmayue  per  forincecum  et  vi  tbr-  piperis. 
u  marcate.       Redhugli  per  forincecum  feruicium  reddendo  iiii  s  • 
I  Ubrate.         Thorlclliop  per  forincecum  feruicium  reddendo  xii  d-  vel  vnum  par  cal- 

carium  deauratorum 

Summa  libere  tenencium  xxviii  tbr  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  • 

Sumraa  totalis  proprietatis  preter  villam  toll di"  xii^"  xii  tbr  •  iii  ■  •  • 

•  •  ■  •  le  tlioll  •  •  •  •  iiii''"  xii  tbr i  d  • 

Capella terra  pertinens  ad et  uic  •  eiufdem  d 

Abbotyfchell  xl  s  •  iiii  d  • 
Belfys  XX  s  •  nichil. 

Medietas  de  Schortbo  •  •  •  •  xii 

Tempyllandys  v 

Terra  pertinens  ad  ecclefiam  et 

Summa  terrarum  ecclefiafticarum  xx 

Summa  molendini  ville  et  toll  •  xl  tbr  • 

Summa  totalis  Vallis  de  Lydell  in  anno  iii°  xii  tbr  •  xvi  s  •  v  d  •  de  qua 
fumnia  tenentes  ocupant  xxviii  tbr  •  vi  s  •  viii  d  •  et  terra  ecclefiaftica 
extendit  ad  xxi  tbr-  vi  s  •  viii  d  • 


APPENDIX. 


Ixxv 


18    EXTENTUS  PROPRIETATIS  BARONIE  DE  [STABILGORTOUN.] 


PROPRIETAS 

%x  marcate. 

Stabilgortoim  in  primis  inclufis  dominicis 

xtbr. 

iiii  marcate. 

Langholme 

vitb- 

Brakanwra 

. 

.     vitb 

xiii  s 

iiii  d  • 

viii  marcate. 

Dalblane  cum  le  Ryg 

3umma  xxix  tb  •  [vi  s  • 

TENANDEIA 

.     vitb 
viii  d  •] 

xiii  s 

iiii  d  • 

Carlowfgyl 

Iiii  s 

iiii  d  • 

Bondby 

iiii  tb  • 

Cowchargland 

vitb- 

Cragg 

.     vitb 

xiii  s 

iiii  d  • 

Douglenn 

Sum  ma  xxiiii  lb  •  vi  s 
Summa  vtriufque  •  • 

•  viiii  d  • 

- 

vtb- 

Ardkane 

Tarrifliolme 

Rifchelbuik 

Tenetfchel 

Qwitfchel 


XX  tb  ■ 

xl  s 
xxiiii  3  ■ 


EXTENTUS  PROPRIETATIS  BARONIE  DE  WATIRSTIRKER  ET 
TENANDRIE. 


PROPRIETAS 


19      Wdkoclandis 
Dalbech 


XX  s- 
iiii  li  ■ 


Ixx 


xvi                                         APPENDIX. 

Le  Irahw             .....                liii  s  •  iiii  d  • 

Crimyanetoun                  .              .              .              .        v  tb  •  vi  s  ■  viii  d  • 

Le  Schilde           .....                 liii  s  •  iiii  d  • 

Le  Wdhond        .              ,              .              .              .              .               xl  s  • 

Watirftirkertoun              .              .              .                  iiii  tb  •  xiii  s  •  iiii  d  • 

Albraifterland                  .              .              .              .       iii  tb  •  vi  s  .  iiii  d  • 

Terre  dominice               .             .             .             .             .               xl  s 

Le  Howis             .              .              .              .           xl  s  •  in  manu  doniini  • 

Lyneholme          ......          xxiiii  s  • 

TENANDRIA 

Efkdale  Mur    ]                        ^      .       .  ,     ,    ^,      , 

^     ^  ,               ^  c  s  •  tenente  Domino  Ade  de  Glendenwyne. 

Le  Ealy            J 

Le  Howis  et  tbe  Harperfwate     .              .              .              .              iii  tb 

Le  Knok             .... 

vi  li  ■  xiii  s  ■  iiii  d  ■ 

Botkane               .... 

iii  li  •  vi  s  ■  viii  d  • 

Dalduran             .... 

viii  li . 

Ivegill                  .... 

xl  s  • 

Pegdale               .... 

viii  li  • 

Megdale               .... 

vli- 

Glenfcharne 

Glencroichon 

Le  Wetbothinis 

Glendow  •  ■  •       .              .              .              .             .              .              iiii  li  • 

Meg  •  •  •  •              .              .              .              .              .             .                V  li  • 

T foun 

INDEX  NOMINUM  IN  APPENDICE. 


Abirdonensis  episcopds,  xlv. 
Ada,  capellanus  regis,  xxxiv. 

cissor,  1. 

molendinarius,  xlviii,  xlix. 

Ade,  Gilbertus  filius,  xlix,  Ivi. 

Johannes  filius,  xlvii,  xlviii,  Ix. 

Laurencius  filius,  li. 

Michael  filius,  Ix. 

Walterus  filius,  li. 

Willelraus  filius.  Hi. 

Robertus  filius,  xlvii. 

Thomas  filius,  Iviii. 

Airth  (Erth),  Sir  Thomas  of,  xl. 
Alani,  Ada  filius,  Ivi. 

Johannes  filius,  Ivi. 

Ricardus  filius,  xlvii. 

Walterus  filius,  lii. 

Walterus  filius,  justiciarius  Scotie,  xxxv. 

Willelmus  filius,  Ivi,  l.xix. 

Alanus,  capellanus,  xxxiii. 

hostiarius,  xxxv. 

Senescallus,  dominus  deVghtiltre,  xxxv, 

xxxvi,  xxxvii. 
Alexandri,  .Johannes  filius,  1. 


Alexandri,  Thomas  filius,  li. 

Walterus  filius,  xxxv. 

Alexander  II.,  Rex,  xxxiv. 
Andisone,  Galfridus,  Ixvi. 
Andreas  cissor,  Ixi. 

filius  vidue,  lix. 

filius  prioris,  ixi. 

—  fullo,  Ix. 

Andree,  Johannes  filius,  Iviii. 

Thomas  filius,  xlix. 

Angus,  Archihaldus  comes  de.  xlv. 

Armystrand,  Alyxandir  (in  margine),  Ixxii. 

Aschenane,  Gilqwhongill,  Ix. 

Atholie,  Joannes  comes,  camerarius,  xlv. 

Aula,  Ricardus  de,  Iviii. 

Auldson  {vide  Mauldsone),  Johannes,  Ixv. 

Aylmer,  Adam,  liv. 


Bane,  Johannes,  xxxvi. 
Bartholomeus,  dorainus,  Ixvi. 
Bek,  Thomas  de,  Ixi. 
Belfurde,  Ada  de,  Ixvii. 
Berclaye,  Rogerus  de,  xxxiii. 


Ixxviii 


INDEX  NOMINUM  IN  APPENDICE. 


Bliik,  Thomas,  Iviii. 

Blare,  Alexander  de,  xxxiii. 

ilariota  de,  Ivi. 

Bondvyle,  Eden,  xlviii. 

Boscho,    Willelmus    de,    cancellarius    regis, 

xxxiv. 
Boyis,  Thomas,  Iviii. 
Boyle,  Robertas,  Ixii. 
Brechinensis  episcopus,  xlv. 

Georgeus,  xliv. 

Bricii,  Alanus  filius,  Ixi. 
Brisbane,  Thomas,  Ixvii. 
Broun  (Broune),  Johannes,  xlix,  Ixiv,  Ixv. 

Ricardus,  Ixx. 

Bryn,  Patricius  de,  liv. 
Buchane,  Malcolmus  de,  Ivi. 

Merleswyne  hlius  comitis  de,  xxxiii. 

Patricius  de,  Ivi. 

Bull,  Thomas,  li. 

Burne,  Willelmus  de,  xlix. 

Byset,  Walterus,  xxxv. 


Cady,  Johannes,  xlix. 

Caithnes    (Caithness,     Cathnes,    Katanay), 

comes  de,  xxxv. 

episcopus  de,  xlv. 

Georgius  comes  de,  xlv. 

Willelmus  comes  Orchadie  et  de,  xliv, 

xlv. 
Caldlaw  (Cauldlaw),  Thomas  de,  xlvii,  xlviii. 
Cant,  Sithow,  Ixiv. 

Willelmus,  Ixiv,  Ixv. 

Carrie,    Dauid    comes   de,    et   Marche,    dux 

Rothissaye,  xli,  xlii. 
Johannes  comes  de,  senescillus  Scotie, 

xxxviii. 
Cathcart,  Allanus,  dominus,  xlv. 
Cathnensis,  Willelmus,  dominus,  xlvi. 
Coggissale,  Willelmus  de.  xxxiii. 


Cokburne,  Alexander  de,  xxxvi. 
Corbet,  Ricardus,  xxxiii. 
Couqwhalane,  Robertus  de,  Ivi. 
Couper,  Ada,  Ivii. 

Michael,  Ix. 

Craufurde,  Thomas,  xlvi. 

Croyser,  Ixviii. 

Cruke,  Johannes,  Ivii. 

Culros,  commendatarius  de,  xlvi. 

Cumbuskynnet,  commendatarius  de,  xlvi. 

Cumyn,  Walterus,  comes  de  Menteith,  xxxv. 


Dargayane,  Thomas  de,  Ivi. 
Dargavell,  Johannes  de,  Ivi. 
Derule,  Johannes,  dominus,  xlv. 
Dicsone  (Dicsoun),  Johannes,  Iviii. 

Thomas,  Ixvii. 

Donaldi,  Willelmus  filius,  Ixii. 

Douglas    (Dougless,    Dufglas),    Archebaldus 

de,  filius  Willelmi  de,  xxxiii,  xxxiv. 

Ai-chebaldus  de,  xxxviii. 

— — -  cognomen  et  arma  de,  xxxix. 

dominus  Jacobus  de,  dominus  de  Dal- 

keth,  miles,  xxxv,  xxxviii,  xli. 
dominus   Willelmus    de,     miles,    frater 

domini  Jacobi  de  Dalketh,  xxxv,  xxxvi. 

Elizabeth,  sponsa  primi  comitis  de,  xliv. 

Henricus   de,   de    Langneutoun,   miles, 

xxxv,  xxxvi,  xxxvii,  xxxviii,  xli. 

Henricus,  de  Lochlewyn,  xlii. 

Jacoba  de,  filia  secunda  domini  Jacobi 

de  Dalketh,  xxxviii,  xxxix. 
Jacobus  comes  de,  consanguineus  regis 

Robert!  II.,  xxxviii. 
Jacobus  de,  dominus  de  Dalkeith,  pater 

primi  comitis,  xlii,  xliii,  xliv. 

Jacobus  de,  de  Strabrok,  xxxv,  xxxvi. 

Jacobus,   primus  comes  de   Moitoune, 

xlii,  xliii,  xliv. 


INDEX  NOMINUM  IN  APPENDICE. 


Ixxix 


Douglas,  James,  fourth  Earl  of  Morton,  lord  of 

Dalkeyth,   and    Regent  of  Scotland,   xlv, 

xlvi. 
Marioria  de   Lyndesay,  sponsa  domini 

Henrici  de,   et  neptis   regis    Robert!    II., 

xxKvii,  xxxviii,  xl,  xli,  xlii. 

Nicholaus  de,  xxxvi. 

Thomas  de,  xxxvi. 

AVillelmus  de,  xxxiii. 

Drouchhilde    (Drouchilde),     Willelinus    de, 

xlviii,  xlix. 
Drunifres,  Nicholaus  de,  liv. 
Dryburgli,  comniendatarius  de,  xlvi. 
Dunbar,  Patricius  comes  de,  xxxiv,  xxxv. 
Duncani,  Gilbertus  filius,  Ivi,  Ivii. 
Duncoll,  Thomas  de,  Ivii. 
Dunfermling,  commendatarius  de,  xlvi. 
Dungalli,  Ingramus  filius,  liii. 
Dunkeldensis  episcopus,  xlv. 
Johannes,  cancellarius  regis  Robert!  II., 


EccLESiA,  Robertus  de,  Ivi. 
Edmundistoun,  Johannes  de,  xxxv. 
Eglintoun,  Hugo  comes  de,  xlv. 
Ergadie,  Colinus  comes,  xlv. 
Erskyne  (Erskin),  Robertus   de,    consangui- 
neus  regis  Robert!  II.,  xxxviii. 

Thomas,  dominus,  xlv. 

Erth  (Airth),  Sir  Thomas  of,  xl. 


Fausyde,  Philippus  de,  Ixxii. 
Fergucii,  Donaldus  tilius,  Iv. 
Fergus!!,  Johannes  filius,  liii. 
Fethyng,  Ixix. 
Forbes,  magister  de,  xlv. 
Forest  (Foresta),  Hugo  de,  Ivi. 
Willelmus  de,  li. 


Forester,  Robertus,  xlvi. 

Forstar,  Adam,  xx.xv. 

Friskyne,  decanus  Morauiensis,  xxxiii. 

Fyf  (Fyffe),  David,  frater  Malcom!   comitis; 

de,  xxxiii. 

Malcolmus  comes  de,  xxxiii,  xxxiv. 

Robertus  comes  de,  et  de  Menteth.  filius 

regis  Robert!  11.,  xxxviii. 


Gamtl,  Hugo,  xxxvi. 
Gelyse,  Nigellus  filius,  Ivii. 
Gilaspison,  Johannes,  Iviii. 
Gilbert!,  Alanus  filius,  Hi. 

Gilbertus  filius,  lix,  Ixi. 

Gilcristus  filius,  Ivii. 

Johannes  filius,  Ixi. 

Thomas  filius,  lix. 

Gilcristi  (Gillicristi),  Gilbertus  filius,  Ixi. 

Michael  filius,  Iv. 

Philippus  filius,  Ixi. 

Thomas  filius,  Ivi. 

Gilson,  Thomas,  Ixx. 
Glascuensis  episcopus,  xlv. 
Glencairne,  Willelmus  comes  de,  xlv. 
Glendenwyne,  dominus  Ada  de,  Ixxvi. 
Glene,  Johannes  de,  xxxv. 
Gormond,  Adam,  xxxiii. 
Gourlay,  Jonet,  xl. 
Gray,  Ibbota,  Iviii. 

magister  de,  xlv. 

Walterus,  Ixvii. 

Willelmus,  Iviii. 

Greg,  Walterus,  xxxiii. 
Gudoksone,  Willelmus,  Ix. 
Gylis,  Michael  filius,  liii. 


Haliburtodn  Jacobus,  xlvi. 
Halis,  Patricius,  dominus,  xlv. 


Ixxx 


INDEX  NOMINUM  IN  APPENDICE. 


Hamyltoune,  Johannes  de,  dorainus  de  Cad- 

yow,  xsxviii,  xxxix. 
Harper,  Walterus,  lix. 
Hasty,  Johannes,  Ixvii. 

Robertus,  Ixvii. 

Haus  .  .  .  ,  Alanus  de,  xxxiii. 

Haya,  Johannes  de,  xxxiv. 

Henrici,  Alanus  filius,  1. 

Hereis,  Jacobus,  dominus,  xlv. 

Herwynd,  Gilcristus,  Ivi. 

Herwyne,  Johannes  de,  lix. 

Hildsone     (Hyldsone),     Johannes,      xlvii, 

xlviii. 

Robertus,  xlix. 

Hill,  Willelmus  de,  Ixiv. 
Hird,  Johannes,  xlvii. 
Hostiarius,  Alanus,  xxxv. 
Hugo,  clericus,  xxxiii. 
Hugonis,  Colynus  filius,  Ix. 
Huke,  Adam  de,  Ixii. 
Hunter,  Thoraas,  liii,  liv,  Iv,  hi. 


iNCHEAUFFiiAV,  coHimendatarius  de,  xlvi. 
Innerraeth   (Innermcyth),  dominus  Robertus 

senescalli  de,  miles,  xxxv. 
Jacobus,  dominus,  xlr. 


Jacobcs  VI.,  Rex,  xlv,  xlvi. 
Johannes  cissor,  Ix. 

clericus,  Ivii,  Ixi. 

dominus,  xlviii. 

fuUo,  Ix. 

Johannis,  Andi-eas  filius,  xlix,  1. 

Dauid  filius,  li. 

Johannes  filius,  1,  Ivii. 

Matheus  filius,  Ixiv,  Ixv. 

Michael  filius,  xlix. 

Willelmus  fiUus,  li,  li),  Ivii,  Ixiv. 


Johnsone  (vide  filius  Johannis). 

Matheus,  Ixiv,  Ixv. 

AVillelmus,  Ixiv,  Ixv. 

Jonete,  Thomas  filius,  Ixi. 
Joppisone  (Jopsone),  Alanus,  Ixii. 
Johannes,  Ixii. 


Katanay,  comes  de,  xxxv. 

Ker,  Willelmus,  xlviii. 

Kilmaron,  Willelmus  de,  x.xxiii,  xxxiv. 


Lambe,  Thomas,  Ivi. 

Laurenti   (Laurencii),   Johannes  filius,    xlix, 

Ivi. 
Lawson,  Johannes,  li 

Johannes,  de  L3ntoun,  lii. 

Lawys,  Ennias  de,  Ixxi. 

Ricardus  de,  Ixxi. 

Robertus  de,  Ixxi. 

Leuyngistoune,    Robertus    de,     filius    Alani 

Senescalli,  xxxvi. 
Lichtoun,  Thomas,  xlvi. 
Lindesay  (Lindessay,   Lyndesay),   Johannes, 

dominus,  de  Byris,  xlv. 
Marioria  de,  neptis   regis   Roberti   II., 

et   sponsa   domini    Henrici    de    Douglas, 

xxxvii,  xxxviii,  xl,  xli,  xlii. 

Patricius,  dominus,  .xlv. 

Lityll,  Adam,  xlviii. 

Lochlewyn,  Henricus  Dougle.ss  de,  xlii. 

Lokhart,  Joannes,  xlvi. 

Loumane,  Ixix. 

Lyntoun,  Willelmus  de,  Ixvii. 


Macnesche,  Gilmor,  Iv. 
M'Alayne,  Dungallus,  Ix. 
M'Alcok,  Henricus,  lix. 


INDEX  NOMINUM  IN  APPENDICE. 


Ixxxi 


M'Cassane,  Willelmus,  Isi. 
M'Claffirdy,  Johannes,  Ix. 
M'Cleisch,  Mychael,  liii,  Iv. 

M'Cleri, ,  Iv. 

M'Corrill,  Gilbertus,  Ix. 

M'Crikir,  Johannes,  Ix. 

M'Cubyn  (M'Cubyne),  Martinus,  Ivii,  Iviii. 

M'Cuk,  Andreas,  Iviii. 

Johannes,  Iviii. 

Ricardus,  Iviii. 

M'Cumyne,  Gilbertus,  lix. 
M'Gilalviry,  Patricias,  lix. 
M-Gilfud  (M'Gilqwhud),  Gilbertus,  lix. 

Patricius,  lix. 

M'Gillese,  Tawus,  Ivi. 
M'Gillyn,  Gilbertus,  lix. 
M'Gilreigne,  Donaldus,  Ix. 
M'Gilrewy,  Thomas,  Ix. 
M'Gilrey,  Michael,  Ivi. 
M'Guffok,  Gilbertus,  lix. 
M'Hay,  Michael,  lix. 
M'Kethirryke,  Johannes,  Ixi. 
M'Lese,  Johannes,  liv. 
M'Moryne,  Willelmus,  Ix. 
M'Nab,  Matheus,  lix. 

Mauricius,  Ixi. 

M^Narne,  Cuthberlus,  liv,  Iv. 

M'Orry,  Johannes,  Ix. 

M'Pudirlane,  Raynaldus,  Iv. 

M'Re  (M'Rey,  Makre),  Patricius,  liv,  Iv. 

M'Wren,  Gilbertus,  lix. 

Makakake,  Patricius,  Ix. 

Makgilvane,  Thomas,  lix. 

Maliton,  Michel  Alius,  xxxiii. 

Marche,  comes  de  Carrie  et,  xli,  xlii. 

Marcus,  dominus,  Ixiii. 

Markesoun,  Thomas,  Ixvii. 

Marr  (Mar),  Joannes  comes  de,  xlv. 

Johannes  filius  comitis  de,  xxxiii. 

Marschell,  Johannes,  Ixii. 


Mathei,  Johannes  filius,  Ixii. 

Willelmus  filius  domini,  lix. 

Matilda  vidua,  xlvii. 

Mauldsone  (vide  Auldson),    Johannes,    Ixiv, 

Ixv. 

Matheus,  Ixv. 

Maxwell,  Joannes,  dominus,  xlv. 

Menar,  Willelmus,  li. 

Menteith  (Menteth),  Robertus  comes  de  Fyf 

et  de,  filius  regis  Roberti  II.,  xxxviii. 

Walterus  Cumyn,  comes  de,  xxxv. 

Meryng,  Matheus,  Ixxi. 
Miehaelis,  Gilbertus  filius,  Ixi. 

Patricius  filius,  xlix. 

Montegomeri,  Alexander,  dominus,  xlv. 
Montrois,  Joannes  comes  de,  xlv. 
Morauia,  Andreas  de,  xxxiii. 
Morauiensis,  decanus,  xxxiii. 

episcopus,  xlv. 

Mordaci,  Gilbertus  filius,  ixi. 

Morioius  filius  clerici,  Ix. 

Mortoun,  Thomas  de,  Ivii. 

Moss,  Gregorius  de,  xlvii. 

Muroksone    (Murokison),    Johannes,    xlvii, 

siviii. 


Newale,  Laurencius,  hi. 
Newbiging,  Willelmus  de,  lii. 
Newbottill,  commendatarius  de,  xlvi. 
Niuini  (Nyuini),  Robertus  filius,  Iviii. 

Thomas  filius,  Ivii. 

Nobill,  Elias,  Ixxi. 
Nycson,  Willelmus,  Ixxi. 


Odonis,  Elias  filius,  xxxiii. 

Ogilvy,  Jacobus,  dominus,  xlv. 

Olifard,  Walterus,  justiciarius  Laodonic,  xxxv. 

Oliphant,  Laurencius,  dominus,  xlv. 


INDEX  NOMINUM  IN  APPENDICE. 


Orchadie,  Willelmiis  comes  de,  et  de  Cathnes, 
dominus  de  Sancto-Claro,  cancellarius  regis, 
xliv,  xlv. 

Orchadiensis  episcopus,  xlv. 

Ormystoun,  Andreas  de,  xxxv. 

Owstyne,  Johannes,  Ixi. 


Padijje  (Padini),  Symon  Alius,  liii. 
Patricii,  Johannes  filius,  li,  Ixi. 

Thomas  filius,  lii. 

Paxtoun,  Patricius  de,  Ixiii. 
Perisman,  Johannes,  Ix. 
Porter,  Alexander,  liv. 

Thomas,  Ixii. 

Willelmus,  Iviii. 

Potter,  Thomas,  Ixiii. 
Prioris,  Andreas  filius,  Ixi. 
Purdy,  Dauid,  lii. 


QwiiiTBKOW,  Willelmus.  Ixvi. 


Ka  (Raa),  Jacobus,  liii. 
Raufson,  Johannes,  Ixx. 
Rede,  Johannes,  Ivi. 
Reginaldi,  Symon  filius,  Ivii. 

Thomas  filius,  Ivii. 

Renfane,  Johannes,  Ixi. 
Ricardi,  Laurencius  filius,  xlvii. 

Thomas  filius,  Ixvii. 

Robert,  Kyng  of  Scotland,  xl. 

Roberti  III.,  Regis,  David  primogenitus,  xli. 

II.,  Regis,  Marioria  de  Lyndesay,  neptis, 

xxxvii,  xxxviii,  xl,  xli,  xlii. 

Thomas  filius,  Ivi. 

Robertus,  capellanus  regis,  xxxiv. 
Robertus  II.,  Rex,  xxxvii. 
III.,  Rex.  xli. 


Rothes,  Andreas  comes  de,  xlv. 
Rothissaye,  Dauid  dux,  R.  III.  regis  primo- 
genitus, xli,  xlii. 
Roule  (Rowle),  Ricardus  de,  Ixix. 

Thomas  de,  Ivii. 

Rowkell,  Hugo  de,  Ivi. 
Russell,  Willelmus,  Ivii. 
Ruthven,  Willelmus,  dominus,  xlv. 


Sanctcolmis  Inche,  commendatarius  de,  xlvi. 

Sanctiandree  episcopus,  xlv. 

Sancti  Andrea  episcopus.  Jacobus,  xliv. 

episcopus,  Willelmus,  xxxviii. 

Sanctoclaro,  Willelmus  dominus  de,  xlv. 

Scharp,  Willelmus,  xlix. 

Schurthouse,  Johannes,  Ixiv.  Ixv. 

Scolfyne,  Andreas,  Ixi. 

Scot,  Johannes,  Iviii. 

Thomas,  Ivi. 

Senescalli,  dominus  Robertus,  de  Iimermeth, 
miles,  frater  Alani,  xxxv,  xxxvi. 

Johannes,  filius  et  heres  Alani  Senes- 
calli, xxxv,  xxxvi,  xxxvii. 

Senescallus  (Senescalli),  Alanus,  dominus  de 
Vghtiltre,  miles,  xxxv,  xxxvi,  xxxvii. 

Scotie,    Dauid,    dux    Rothissaye,     xli, 

xlii. 

Scotie,  Johannes  comes  de  Carrie,  pri- 
mogenitus regis  Roberti  II.,  xxxviii. 

Seytoun,  Georgius,  dominus,  xlv. 

Sinclair,  Allanus,  dominus,  xlv. 

Sithowsone,  Johannes,  Ixiv. 

Small,  Willelmus,  li. 

Smert,  Willelmus,  Ixiv. 

Smith  (Smyth),  Thomas,  li,  Ixiii. 

Smot,  Ada,  li. 

Sprot,  Walterus,  l.xii. 

Starke,  Michael  filius  Ricardi,  Ixvi. 

Ricardus,  Ixvi. 


INDEX  NOMINUM  IN  APPENDICE. 


Ixxxiii 


Stewart,  Archibaldus,  xlvi. 
Stodhirde    (Studehird,    Studhirde),    Dauid, 
Ixxi. 

Johannes,  Ix. 

Willelmus,  Ix. 

.Striueline,  Alexander  vicecomes  de,  xxxiv. 

Thomas  de,  clericus  cancellaric,  xxxiv. 

Stiilp,  Thomas,  li. 
Stut,  Johannes,  Ivii. 
Sturhes,  Willelmus,  Ixviii. 
Sumer,  Willelmus,  Ixvii. 
Swayne,  Jacobus,  xlix,  1. 

Johannes,  li. 

Willelmus  filius  Jacobi,  1. 

Syde,  Ada  de,  Ixxi. 

Willelmus  del,  Ixix. 

Symonis,  Ada  filius,  li. 

Walterus  filius,  Ixii,  Ixiii. 


Thome,  Ada  filius,  li. 

Johannes  filius,  Ivii,  Ixvi. 

Tweddale,  Johannes  de,  slwb  Xi  \i  ^/ 
Tynwald,  dominus  Robertus  rector  de,  Ivii. 


Walch,  Johannes,  xlviii. 
Wales,  Ibbota,  Ivi. 
Walker,  Thomas,  Iv. 
Walter,  Patricius,  lis. 
Walter!,  Johannes  filius,  Ixi. 

Willelmus  filius,  liv. 

Walwood,  Thomas,  xlvi. 

Warde,  Johannes  de,  xlix. 

Wassare,  Alexander,  regis  compotorum  rotu- 

lator,  xlv. 
Watir,  Johannes,  1. 
Willelmi,  Dawid  filius,  xlviii. 

Johannes,  xlviii,  lii,  Ixii. 

Radulphus  filius,  xlvii. 

Robertus  filius,  Ixii. 

Willelmus  filius,  1. 

Willelmus  clericus,  xxxiii. 

faber,  xlviii. 

Witty,  Thomas,  Ivii. 
Wode,  Ada,  Ivii. 

Johannes,  Iviii. 

Rogerus,  xlvii. 

Wyly,  Donaldus,  Ivi. 
Wyne,  Christiana  de,  xlix. 


Yaloniis,  Andreas  de,  burgensis  de  Lanark, 

xl. 
Vchiltre.  Andreas,  dominus,  xlv. 


Yhung,  Johannes,  Ixiii. 
Yhunger,  Willelmus,  Ixiv,  Ixv. 


INDEX  LOCORUM  IN  APPENDICE. 


Abbottschell,  Ixxiv. 
Abircorne,  baronia  de,  xl,  xliii. 
Abirdour  (Abirdoure,    Abirdowre),    baronia 
de,  xliii,  xliv,  Ixiv,  Ixv. 

bracina  de,  Ixiv,  Ixv. 

castrum  de,  xliii,  xliv. 

le  medow  de,  Ixv. 

terra  dominice  de,  Ixv. 

Agismarte,  Ixiv. 

Air,  xlvi. 

Alani,  locus  Willelmi  filii,  Ixix. 

Albraisterland,  Ixxvi. 

Alcokstede,  Ixviii. 

Aldschelis,  Ixix. 

Ambrenes,  lix. 

Anandirdail,  dominium  de.  xliii. 

Ardkane,  Ixxv. 

Auchinbrek,  liv. 

Aucbingassyle,  Iv. 

Auchinskeach,  Iviii. 

Auchirdilakdy,  liv. 

Auclinacht,  Iv. 


Balbartanis,  xliii,  xliv. 


Balbretane,  Estir,  Isvi. 

Westir,  Ixvi. 

Balgirdane,  Ix. 

Baly,  le,  Ixxvi. 

Barbarstede,  Ixix. 

Barteane,  lix. 

Bavcdwynisgill,  lii. 

Belsys,  Ixxiv. 

Berwick,  vicecomitatus  de.  xliii. 

Blacwd,  Ixxiii. 

Blakbume,  Ixix. 

Blandowyne,  xlvii. 

Bondby,  Ixxv. 

Botkane,  Ixxvi. 

Bradle,  Ixxiii. 

Brakanwra,  Ixxv. 

Brekauch,  Ixv. 

Brekauchlug,  lix. 

Brekauch,  Mikil,  lix,  Ix. 

Brewlande,  xlviii. 

Brocholey,  Ixx. 

Broun,  locus  Eicardi,  Ixx. 

Bulaystede,  Ixx. 

Buldirbaynstede,  Ixx. 

Buly  Rod,  le,  xxxvi. 


INDEX  LOCORUM  IN  APPENDICE. 


Ixxxv 


Burneliouse,  Ixviii. 

Butill  (Butyll,)  baronia  de,  liii,  lis,  Ixi. 

molendinum  de,  Ixi. 

villa  de,  Ix. 

Bylhop,  Ixxiii. 
Byris,  xlv. 


Caldore.  Wester,  baronia  de,  xliii. 

Caldorcleire,  baronia  de,  xliii. 

Carglas,  Ixviii. 

Carlowsgyl,  Ixxv. 

Carryschelis,  Ixix. 

Castelgour,  lix. 

Casteltoun,  molendinum  de,  Ixxiii,  Ixxiv. 

parkis  de,  Ixxiii. 

terra  ecclesie,  Ixxiv. 

villa  cum  toll,  de,  Ixxiii,  Ixxiv. 

Cissoris,  terra,  Ixxii. 
Clak  .  .  .  yis,  Ix. 
Clauchane,  liii. 

Clauchope  (Claubope),  liii,  Iv. 
Clebop,  Ixxiii. 
Clonyngarth,  Iv. 
Clouchlarbane,  lix. 
Clovyncude,  Iv. 
Colthrop,  1. 
Conihayth,  Ixviii. 
Cor,  le,  Ixii. 
Cotelande,  Ixiv. 
Cowchargland,  Ixxv. 
Cragg,  Ixxv. 
Crawtlat,  Ixx. 
Crimyanetoun,  Ixxvi. 
Croyser,  locus,  Ixviii. 
Crunybatouu,  Iviii. 
Cuhirstede,  Ixxi. 
Culnaw,  Ix,  Ixi. 


Dalbech,  Ixxvi. 
Dalblane,  Ixxv. 
Dalduran,  Ixxvi. 
Dalfernokisgill,  Ixxiii. 
Dalfubill,  liii,  Ivii,  Iviii. 

molendinum  de,  Ivii. 

villa  de,  Ivii. 

Dalketb,  xxxviii. 

Dalketh  (Dalkeith),  dominium  et  baronia  de. 
XXXV,  xxxviii,  xliii,  xliv. 

castrum  de,  xliii,  xliv. 

Dalmayne,  Ixxiv. 

Dalmaynemore,  Ixxiv. 

Dalnaw,  liii. 

Dalstanys,  Ixxi. 

Dauchy,  Ixiv. 

Dawdemoundstede,  Ixix. 

Dechtment,  xliii. 

Delny.s,  Ixxiv. 

Dobtoun,  Ivi. 

Dodyng.stoun  (in  baronia  de  Abircorne),  xl. 

Dolfynesonstede,  Ixx. 

Douglenn,  Ixxv. 

Drouchilde,  I. 

Drumcorke,  Ivi. 

Drumfres,  liii. 

Dubelach,  liii. 

Dundaf,  xxxiv. 

Dunde,  xlvi. 


EDiNBURon      (Edinbwrgh,     Edynburgh), 
xxxvii,  xxxviii,  xlii,  xliii,  xlv,  xlvi. 

vicecoraitatus   de,    xxxviii,    xxxix,    xl, 

xliii. 

Erismortoun,  Ivi. 

Ermetag,  capella  de,  Ixxiv. 

park  de,  Ixxiii. 

Ermyldoune,  Newland  de,  Ixx. 

quarterium  de,  Ixx. 


Ixxxvi 


INDEX  LOCORUM  IN  APPENDICE. 


Ernhanarie,  Iv. 

Eskdale  Mur,  Ixxvi. 

Esknokis,  Iviii. 

Esschelis   (Esschellis,  Estschelis),   xliii,  xlix, 

lii. 
Estirbalbretane,  Ixvi. 
Estirhesilsyde,  Ixxiii. 


Fadstdk,  terra  Philippi  de,  Ixxii. 

Fawsyde,  terra  de,  Ixxi. 

Fethan  (Fethen),  xliii,  xliv,  li. 

Fethyng,  locus,  Ixix. 

Fife,  vicecomitatus  de,  xliii. 

Flemyngtoun,  1. 

Flygh,  Ixxiv. 

superior,  Ixxii. 

Folepul,  Ixxjii. 

Foresta  (de  Lydell),  Ixxiii,  Ixxiv. 

Foulwod  inferior,  Ixviii. 

superior,  Ixviii. 

Fremanislande,  1. 


Garmtltocneddntng,  baronia  de.  xli 

Garvalde,  liii,  Ivii. 

Gildschaw,  Ixviii. 

Gilhouse,  Ixviii. 

Gillestede,  Ixviii. 

Gilson,  locus  Thome,  Ixx. 

Glasgow,  xlvi. 

Glencreach,  liii. 

Glencroichou,  Ixxvi. 

Glendow.  Ixxvi. 

Glenmoth,  1. 

Glenscharne,  Ixsvi. 

Glenwaldy,  Ixi. 

Gopishalch,  Ixix. 

Goranbery,  Ixxiii." 

Gramptoun,  l.xii. 


Greiiehow,  Ixviii. 
Grene.schelis,  Ixix. 
Grenys,  Ixxii. 
Gretlimanstede,  Ixx. 
Grevystede,  Ixx. 
Gubacstede,  Ixx. 
Gubisley  maior,  Ixix. 

minor,  Ixix. 

Gumerestede,  Ixviii. 
Gumyrtrytstede,  Ixviii. 
Gyldlande,  xlviii. 


Hadyngtocne,  burgus  de,  xxxvii. 
Haldykis,  Ixxii. 
Halyfyrsted,  Ixxii. 
Hardenkaul,  Ixxii. 
Hardenleys,  Ixxiii. 
Hai-digtoun,  lii,  Ixvii. 
Harperswate,  Ixxvi. 
Hauthornsek,  xliii. 
Hawthornsyde,  Ixxiii. 
Herthornhill,  Ixvii. 
Hesilsyde,  Estir,  Ixxiii. 

Westir,  Ixxiii. 

Hesylbankstede,  Ixx. 

Hetreis  (de  Ermyldoune),  Ixx. 

Hetreys  (de  Mangertoune),  Ixxii. 

Heylandys,  Ixx. 

Hirdmanestoun    (Hirdmaiistoun,     Hirmans- 

toun,  Hyrdmanstoun).  xxxiii. 
Hoghouse,  Ixx. 
Hoipekelyho,  lii. 
Holdene,  xliii. 
Holdoun,  Ixxii. 
Holschel,  Ixix. 
Horsebruke,  lii. 
Howls,  le,  de  tenandriade  Watirstirker,  Ixxvi. 

de  Watirstirker,  Ixxvi. 

Hungyrflaf,  Ixxii. 


INDEX  LOCORUM  IN  APPENDICE. 


lxxx\ 


Hutoun  (Hutoune),  xliii,  xliv. 

Hyrtisgarth,  Ixix. 

Hyrtistede  (in  quarteiio  de  Ermyldoune),  Ixx. 

Hyrtys,  Ixx. 

Hyrtystede  (in  quartei-io  de  Liidne),  Ixx. 


lUNERMETH,  XXXV. 

Irahw,  le,  Ixxvi. 
Ivegill,  Ixxvi. 


Kelloley,  Ixxii. 

Kenmore,  villa  de,  xxxv. 

Kilbochoche  (Kilbothok,  Kilbouchoke,  Kyl- 

boucho,  Kylbouho),  baronia  de^  xliii,  xliv, 

xlvii,  xlix. 

cotagia  de,  xlviii. 

dominice  de,  xlix. 

villa  de,  xlvii. 

Kinele,  baronia  de,  xxxviii,  xxxix. 
Kingorne  (Kyngorne),  baronia  de,  l.wi. 

connestabularia  de,  xliii. 

le  graunge  de,  Ixvi. 

le  medow  de,  Ixvi. 

molendinum  de,  Ixvi. 

Kirkurde  (Kirkwrde,  Kyrkurde),  lii. 

baronia  de,  xliii. 

Knoebane,  Iv. 

Knok,  le,  Ixxvi. 

Knokis,  duo,  Ix. 

Knokynchangill  (Kuokyncangyil),  liv,  Iv. 

Kynnowle,  Ixvii. 

Kyrcwd,  Ixxiii. 


Ladlawhope,  Ixxiii. 
Lanark,  burgus  de,  xl. 

vicecomitatus  de,  xliii. 

Langhalgb,  Ixx. 


Langholme,  Ixxv. 

Langneutoun  (Langnewtoun,  Langnevvtoune), 

xxxv,  xxxvi,  xxxvii. 
Lanorowstanys,  Ixxii. 
Laucht,  Ivii. 
Lawgappis,  Ixxi. 
Lawyhalch,  Ixix. 
Lawys  inferior,  Ixxi. 

locus  Ennie  de,  Ixxi. 

locus  Ricardi  de,  Ixxi. 

locus  Roberti  de,  Ixxi. 

superior,  Ixxi. 

Levingstoun  (Levyngstoun),  xxxiii,  xxxiv. 

Lewynleys,  Ixxi. 

Lintoune  (Lyntoun,  Lyntounej,   baronia  de, 

xliii,  li,  lii. 

brewlande  de,  li. 

cotagia  de,  li. 

villa  de,  li,  lii. 

Lithcu     (Lynlythqw),     constabularium    de, 

xxxviii,  xxxix,  xl. 
Lochlewyn,  xlii. 
Lochurde     (Lochwrde,     LoucLurde),     xliii, 

.xlvii. 
Logane,  Ix. 
Louchirbane,  liv. 
Loumane,  locus,  Ixix. 
Ludne,  quarterium  de,  Ixix. 
Lydell,  Vallis  de,  Ixviii. 
Lyneholme,  Ixxvi. 


JIaldsonsted,  Ixxii. 
Maleatthop,  Ixxiii. 
Mangerton,  Ixxii. 

dominium  inferius  de,  Ixxii. 

dominium  superius  de,  Ixxii. 

pratum  aule  de,  Ixxii. 

Mangertoune,  quarterium  de,  ixxii. 
Mangertounholme,  Ixxii. 


Ixxxviii 


INDEX  LOCORUM  IN  APPENDICE. 


Marnauch,  lix. 
Maydven,  lii. 
Megdale,  Ixxvi. 
Meryng,  locus  Mathei,  Ixxi. 
Mikilbrekauch,  lix. 
Mikilholme,  Iviii. 
Milnehouse,  Ixviii. 
Milnmore,  Ixxii. 
Moffet,  liii,  Ixii,  Ixiii. 

cotagia  de,  Ixiii. 

molendinum  de,  Ixiii. 

Newtoun  de,  Ixii. 

terre  domiaice  de,  Ixii. 

villa  de,  Ixii. 

Mollislande,  li. 

Molyne,  Iviii. 

Montiois,  ,xliv. 

Mordingtoune  (Mordyngtoun),  xliii,xliv,  Ixiii. 

Moriell,  Ixv. 

Mortoun  (Morloune),  liii,  Ivi,  Ivii. 

molendinum  de,  Ivii. 

parcum  de,  Ivi. 

Mortounholme,  Ivi. 

Munchyse,  Ix. 

Munygep,  Iviii. 

Muryelton,  Ixxiv. 

Mylncotis,  Ixxii. 

Slylneholme,  Ixviii. 

(de  Mangertoun),  Ixxii. 


NobiU,  locus  Elie,  Ixxi. 

Noua  clausura  (in  Valle  de  Lydell),  Ixviii. 

Nycson,  locus  Willelmi,  Ixxi. 


Orchearde,  lii. 


Peblts,  lii. 

Pegdale,  Ixxvi. 

Perth,  xli,  xlvi. 

Piperstede,  Ixix. 

PoUok,  Ixviii. 

Porthuly,  Ix. 

Poudercroft,  Ixxii. 

Pouterlampert,  Ixxii. 

Pratum  aule  (de  Mangertoun),  Ixxii. 

Prestoune  (Prestoun),  liii,  Ixi. 

molendinum  de,  Ixi. 

villa  de,  Ixi. 


Quilt  (Qdtlte),  xliii,  li. 

Qwhitfeilde  (in  haronia  de  Lyntoun),  lii. 

Qwhitsyde,  1. 

Qwhyt  Ade,  lii. 

Qwhythawlgh,  Ixxii. 

Qwitschel,  Ixxv. 

Qwytfeld  (in  Valle  de  Lydell),  Ixxiii. 


Neubotle,  monasterium  de,  xxxvii. 
Neulandis    (Newlandis),    baronia    de, 
xlix,  1, 

Brewland  de,  xlix. 

Bordlande  de,  xlix. 

molendinum  de,  1. 

Newbi,  lii. 

Newton  (in  baronia  de  Abircorne),  xi. 

Newtoun  (de  Motfet),  Isii- 


Ragakth,  Ixxii. 

Ragarthschaw,  Ixx. 

Rahill,  Iviii. 

Ranipysgill,  Ixxi. 

Raufson,  terra  Johannis,  Ixx. 

Raw,  xlvii. 

RedeLugh    (in   qunrterio   de   IMangertoune  I, 

Ixxii. 
Redemos,  Ixviii. 


INDEX  LOCORUM  IN  APPENDICE. 


Ixxxix 


Redhugh  (in  Forestii  de  Lydell),  Ixxiv. 

Ricarden,  Issii. 

Rich  ....  sonstede,  Ixx. 

Rischelbusk,  Ixxv. 

Robertoune,  baronia  de,  xliii,  xliv. 

Roule,  locus  Ricardi  de,  Ixix. 

Roxburgh,  vicecoraitatum  de,  xxxv. 

Ryg,  le,  (de  Stabilgortoun),  Ixxv. 


Sanctandrois,  xlvi. 
Schilde,  le,  Ixxvi. 
Schortbo  .  .  .  ,  Ixxiv. 
Scona,  xli. 
Scralyne,  Ixvii. 

molendinum  fullonis  de,  Ixvii. 

Sefeld  (Seyfeilde),  xliii,  xliv,  Ixvi. 
Sene.scbelis,  Ixviii. 
Smythislande,  Ixiv. 
Sondayhop,  Ixxiii. 
Sougdoii,  Ixxiii. 
Southby,  Ixxiv. 
Speteltoun,  Ixxii. 
Stabilgoi'toun  (baronia  de),  Ixxv. 

villa  et  dominice  de,  Ixxv. 

Stallage,  le,  de  Tybris,  liii. 

Stanygill,  Ixviii. 

Stanyhalch,  Ixx. 

Stodhirde,  locus  Dauid,  Ixxi. 

Strabrok,  xxxv,  xxxvi. 

Strathkawan,  xxxiv. 

Striueline  (Striueling),  xxxiv,  xlvi. 

castrum  de,  xlv. 

vicecomitatus  de,  xxxiv. 

Strypschelden,  Ixxii. 
Sturhes,  locus  Willelmi,  Ixviii. 
Styrkschelhope,  Ixxiii. 
Swynburnland,  li. 
Swyne  Acre,  Ixxii. 


Syde,  locus  Ade  de,  Ixxi. 
Syde,  locus  Willelmi  del,  Ixix. 


Tarkas,  Ixxiii. 

Tarrisholme,  Ixxv. 

Telny,  Ixiv. 

Tempyllandys    (in    Foresta    de    Lydell), 

Ixxiv. 
Tenaswd,  Ixxiii. 
Tenetschel,  Ixxv. 
Terra  cissoris,  Ixxii. 
Thornhill,  Ivi. 
Thorleshop,  Ixxiv. 
TodLolys,  Ixviii. 
Todistede,  Ixviii. 
Toftys,  Ixx. 
Torthoralde,  Ixii. 
Torwarde,  Ix,  Ixi. 
Trecquer,  xxxiv. 
Tybirnes,  Ix,  Ixi. 
Tybris,  liii,  liv,  Iv. 

Brewland  de,  liii. 

molendinuin  de,  liv. 

Stallage  de,  le,  liii. 

terre  dominice  de,  liv. 

villa  de,  liv. 

Tynwald,  Ivii. 
Tyocsonsted,  Ixxii. 
Tyry,  Ixvi. 


Vghtiltrk,  xxxv,  xxxvi,  xxxvii. 
Vuirdrife,  Ixiii. 


Watikstirkek,  baronia  et  tenandria  de,  Ixxvi. 

terre  dominice  de,  Ixxvi. 

Watirstirkertoun,  Ixxvi. 


xc  INDEX  LOCORUM  IN  APPENDICE. 

Watmylnersted,  Ixviii.  Wetbothinis,  Ixxvi. 

Wddfeld,  Ixvi.  Wetlande,  xlviii. 

Wdhond,  Ixxvi.  raolendinum  de,  xlviii. 

Wdkoclandis,  Ixxvi.  Wichstalys,  Ixviii. 

Wedonscelis,  Ixviii.  Wllayk,  Ixix. 

Welstremis,  Ixxiii.  maior,  Ixix. 

Westbiimeflat,  Ixxii.  Wodfeildecyre,  xliii,  xliv. 

Westercaldore,  xliii.  Wyntirschel,  Ixviii. 

Westirbalbretane,  Ixvi.  AVytwrahop,  Ixxiii. 
Westirhesilsyde,  Ixxiii. 


ORIGINAL  LETTERS  AND  PAPERS 


IN  THE  ARCHIVES 


OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON. 


M.D.XXIX-M.DC.VII. 


•^-*-CL^v-ja-^ 


THE    TABLE. 


1.  Letter  from  King  James  V.  to  James  Earl  of  Mortoun,     . 

2.  King  James  V.  to  the  Earl  and  Countess  of  Mortoun, 

3.  Precept  by  the  King  to  Robert  Lord  Maxwell  and  to  John  of  Maxwell  his 

brother  in  favour  of  the  Countess  of  Mortoun, 

4.  Exemption  by  the  King  to  James  Erie  of  Mortoun  from  all  Oistis, 

5.  Letter  from  the  King  to  the  Countess  of  Mortoun, 

6.  The  King  to  the  Thesaurer  anent  Robert  Douglas  of  Lochleven,   . 

7.  Acquittance  by  George  Erie  of  Erroll  to  Robert  Douglas  of  Lochlevin, 

8.  Ane  Appointment  betuix  the  Duik  my  Lord  Governor  and  my  Lord  of 

Mortoun  for  deliverie  of  the  hous  of  Dalkeith, 

9.  Receipt  and  Discharge  by  the  Commendator  and  Convent  of  Sanctandrois 

to  the  Lady  of  Lochlewyne  and  her  son, 

10.  My  Lord  Erskynis  acquittans  in  the  Quenis  grace  behalf  of  iij"  crowiiis. 

11.  Precept  by  Mary  Queen  Regent  to  Patrick  Home  of  the  Brumclious, 

12.  The  Erll  Marshall  and  the  erll  of  Errolles  band  for  the  relief  of  thani  that 

ar  bund  for  the  Master  of  Marshalis  entras, 

13.  The  Prior  of  Saint  And|rews  to  his  mother  The  Lady  Lochlevin, 

14.  Mary  Queen  of  Scots  to  the  Abbot  of  Dunfermling, 

15.  ArchihaM  ♦^ifth  Earl  of  Argyll  to  James  third  Earl  of  Arran,  Duke  of 

Chatelherault,      ....... 

16.  Licence  by  the  King  and  Queen  that  William   Douglas  of  Lochlevin 

retain  the  place  and  hous  of  Lochlevin,   .... 

17.  King  Henry  Darnley  to  The  Laird  of  Lochlevin,  . 

18.  James  Stewart  [Earl  of  Murray]  to  mj-  Lady  Countes  of  Murray, 

19.  Warrant  to  charge  James  erll  of  Mortoun   Patrick  Lord   Ruthven  and 

Patrik  Lord  Lindesay  of  the  Byres  and  uthoris, 


.  1 

S  .,  f " 

ib. 

iV  ,    -f  " 

2 
3 

ib. 
4 

lb. 

^-  ,  f  •  7 

6 

- 

7     . 

ib. 

8 

i_y 

f^l 

9 

l¥ 

fM 

10 

-7^'     ■' 

■    -^ 

11 


12 

1 '.' 

f- 

l^ 

14 

S^ 

■f 

.51 

ib. 

15 


7x    fv 


THE  TABLE. 


IV      ^.ifl   20. 
"    '    .'  ,  s-  21- 

(  22. 

,.<    ;  !>«  25. 


/             ; 

/;•'  28. 

-^      ; 

29. 

^ 

30. 

.SI. 

.32. 

33. 

.34. 

35. 

'ro 

30. 

'TJ 

37. 

tii 

38. 

7/ 

7  ' 

39. 

40. 

41. 

42. 
43. 

44. 
4.5. 
46. 
47. 

48. 

49. 


Mary  Queen  of  Scots  to  the  Laird  of  Lochlevin,    .  .  .  .    P.  1 6 

The  extract  of  the  copy  subscriuit  be  Robert  Scott  of  my  Lord  of  Murray! 

Testament,  ....... 

Bond  betwixt  certain  Noblemen  etc.  and  Sir  James  Balfour  keeper  of  the 

Castle  of  Edinburgh,       ...... 

Letter  from  England  concerning  the  murder  of  King  Henry  Darnley, 

Declaration  by  the  Queen  on  the  state  of  the  Realme, 

Order  by  the  Privy  Council  to  John  Mowbray  of  Bernbougall, 

Act  for  sequestrating  the  Quenis  Maiesties  person  and  detening  the  same 

in  the  hous  and  place  of  Lochleven,         .... 
Notarial  Protest  at  the  Castle  of  Lochleven  by  William  Douglas  of  Loch- 
leven in  the  presence  of  the  Queen,  .... 
Commission  to  ressave  the  Comptis  of  gold  and  silver  etc., 
James  Earl  of  Murray  Regent  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 
Sir  William  Kirkaldy  of  Grange  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 
The  dubill  of  the  Letter  send  to  the  King  of  France  fra  the  Nobilitie  for 

our  So\  erane,      ....... 

Letter  to  the  Duik  of  Alva  fra  the  Nobilitie  for  our  Soverane, 

Lord  Hereis  to  the  Archbishop  of  Sanct  Andrews, 

Mary  Queen  of  Scots  to  the  Archbishop  of  Sanct  Andrews, 

Copy  of  my  Lord  Argill  Cypher  fra  the  Queue  xvj  Decembris  [1568], 

The  Earl  of  Huntly  to  Mary  Queen  of  Scots, 

The  Earl  of  Argyll  to  the  Provest  and  Baillies  of  Edinburgh, 

The  Earl  of  Argyll  to  the  Archbishop  of  Sanct  Andrews, 

Charge  to  serche  and  apprehend  Thomas  Irland,    . 

Charge  to  deliver  the  Abbay  and  place  of  Melrose  to  William  Douglas  of 

Lochleven,  ....... 

Testificat  be  some  Monks  of  Melros  of  their  being  compelled  to  subscryve 

the  Earl  of  Bothwells  few,  ..... 

The  Earl  of  Mar  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 
Dame    Annas   Keyth   widow   of  the   Regent   Murray   to   the   Laird    of 

Lochleven,  ....... 

Decreit  Arbitral  betuix  Gabriell  Merser  of  Sawling  and  George  Dury, 
Letter  from  the  Lords  of  Scotland  to  Elizabeth  Queen  of  England, 
Band  for  pursuing  the  murderers  of  umquhill  James  Earl  of  Murray, 
Patrick  Lord  Lindsay  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

Dame   Annas   Keyth   widow   of  the   Regent   Murray    to   the    Laird    of 
Lochleven,  ....... 

John  Knox  to  Sir  William  Douglas  of  Lochleven, 


THE  TABLE. 


50.  Charge  to  deliver  the  Castle  of  St.  Andrews  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

51.  The  Earl  of  Mar  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

52.  The  Earls  of  Mar  Mortoiin  and  Glencairn  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

53.  The  Earls  of  Mar  Mortoun  and  Glencairn  to  the  Laird  of  Rankelour, 

54.  The  Earl  of  Mortoun  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven,    . 

55.  The  Earl  of  Mar  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

56.  The  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews  and  Commendator  of  Arbroath  to  John 

Hamilton  of  Grange,       ...... 

57.  Annas  Keyth  widow  of  the  Regent  Murray  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

58.  Archibald  fifth  Earl  of  Argyll  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

59.  Warrand  to  charge  George  Ruthirfurd  of  Fernitoun  to  rander  the  hous 

and  place  of  Langnutoun,  ..... 

60.  Warrand  to  assege  the  place  and  fortalice  of  Langnutoun, 

61.  Mathew  Earl  of  Lennox  Regent  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

62.  The  Eai'l  of  Mortoun  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven,    . 

63.  Mathew  Earl  of  Lennox  Regent  of  Scotland  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

64.  The  Earl  of  Mar  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

65.  The  Erll  of  Mortouns  Exemptiouu    the  tyme  he   wes    ambassadour  in 

England,  ....... 

66.  Two  Lists  of  Persons  of  the  Surname  of  Hamilton, 

67.  Commissioun  to  compeir  before  quhatsumevir  Juge  to  persew  and  defend 

in  all  my  Lord  Chancellaris  actiounes,     .... 

68.  Warrand  to  charge  the  Surnames  of  Burnfeild  and  Haitlie, 

69.  Licence  to  George  Usufructuar  of  Dunferniling  to  remane  in  ward  within 

the  place  of  Dury  and  sex  myles  about  the  same, 

70.  Precept  by  John  Earl  of  Mar  Regent  to  Alexander  Douglas, 

71.  Ciiarge  to  George  Rutherfurde  of  Farnytoun  to  ap])ear  before  the  Privy 

Council,  etc.,       .  .  .  .  .  .  . 

72.  The  Earl  of  Mar  Regent  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

73.  Licence  to  George  Leirmonth  of  Balcomy  to  abyde  at  hame  fra  all  oistis 

wappinschawingis,  etc.,   ...... 

74.  The  Earl  of  i\Iar  Regent  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

75.  My  Lord  of  Mortounis  Commissioun  of  Levetenentre  to  ryde  upoun  Clydis- 

daill, 

76.  The  Countess  of  Northumberland  to  the  Earl  her  husband, 

77.  John  Earl  of  Mar  Regent  in  favour  of  James  Commendator  of  Melros, 

78.  John  Earl  of  Mar  Regent  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

79.  The  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews  to  William  Douglas  of  Lochleven, 

80.  Annabella  Countess  of  Mar  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 


53  1^ 
ib.  Li 

54  {y 

55  ' 
ih. 

56 

57 

58  ^/2  4^ 

59  ""    '  ' 

ib. 
60 
61 
62 
ib. 
63 

ib. 
65 

69 
ib. 

70 
71 

72 
ib. 

73 

74 


75 
77 

78 
ib. 
79 


THE  TABLE. 


81. 

82. 

^-  V 

83. 

tV. 

4<-V- 

84. 

^- 

85. 

~^^ 

8(5. 

y 

^'-  / 

yf 

87. 

- —  '-' 

V 

88. 
89. 
90. 
91. 

V 

92. 

■^' 

93 

v 

94 

'v 

95 

96. 


97. 

98. 

v 

99. 

y- 

100. 

^7^ 

5^? 

101. 
102. 

^ 

103. 
104. 

105. 

106. 
107. 
108. 

109 
110, 
111 
112 


Leonard  of  Cuper  to  the  Lady  Lochleven,  .  .  .  .P. 

Commission  to  William  Douglas  of  Lochleven  to  mak  Convocation  of  the 
lieges,  etc.,         ....... 

John  Carmichael  younger  of  that  Ilk  to  the  Chamberlain  of  Melros, 

The  Lord  Ruthven  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven,     . 

Andrew  Rutherfurd  of  Hundolee  and  others  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

William  Stewart  to  the  Laird  of  I>ochleven, 

James  Earl  of  Mortoun  Regent  to  warne  and  poind  Thomas  Brown, 

James  Earl  of  Mortoun  Regent  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

James  Earl  of  Mortoun  Regent  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

James  Earl  of  Mortoun  Regent  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

Litera  Roberti  Douglas  filii  Gulielmi  Douglas  de  Lochleven, 

James  Earl  of  Mortoun  Regent  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

James  Earl  of  Mortoun  Regent  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

James  Earl  of  Mortoun  Regent  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

Discharge  by  the  Privy  Council  of  Scotland  to  James  Earl  of  Mortoun 
of  his  Regiment,  ...... 

The  Nobiliteis  Obligatioune  for  Ratifeing  my  Lord  of  Mortoun  discharge 
maid  be  the  King  in  Parliament,  etc.,    .... 

The  Earl  of  Mortoun  to  the  Lord  Chancellar,      ... 

The  Earl  of  Mortoun  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

The  Earl  of  Mortoun  to  the  Earl  of  Angus, 

Agreement  between  James  Earl  of  Mortoun  and  the  Earl  of  Rothes  anc 
Lords  Ruthven  and  Hereis,        ..... 

The  Earl  of  ilortoun  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

Litera  Exemptionis  Jacob!  Comitis  de  Mortoun  domini  de  Dalkeith, 

Act  anent  the  Election  of  the  Kingis  Secret  Council, 

The  Nobiliteis  Obligatioune  to  the  Erll  of  jSIortoune  anent  the  Rander- 
ing  of  Edinburgh  Castell,  ..... 

The  Kingis  Discharge  gevin  to  the  Erll  of  Mortoun  vpon  the  Ressait  of 
Edinburgh  Castell,        ...... 

The  King  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven,        .... 

The  Earl  of  Mortoun  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

Jeane  Lyon,  relict  of  Robert  Douglas  younger  of  Lochlevin,  afterwards 
Countess  of  Angus  and  Lady  Spynie  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

George  Douglas  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven,  . 

,  King  Henry  IIL  (of  France)  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 
.  The  Earl  of  Mar  to  Charles  Rutherfurd, 
,  The  Earl  of  Mar  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 


79 


THE  TABLE. 


113, 
114. 
115. 
116. 
117. 

118. 

119. 
120. 
121. 
122. 
123. 


124. 
12.5. 
126. 

127. 
128. 
129. 
130, 

131. 
132. 
133. 
134. 

1.35. 

13(3. 
137. 
138. 
139. 
140. 
141. 

142. 


Patrick  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

The  Earl  of  Mortoun  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

King  James  VI.  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven,         .  .  .  . 

The  King  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven,       ..... 

Gift  by  the  King  to  William  Douglas  of  Lochleven  of  the  waird  of  all 
landis  quhilk  pertenit  to  umquhile  Robert  Erie  of  Buchan, 

The  first  charge  gevin  to  the  Erie  of  Mortoune  to  entir  in  waird  in  his 
awin  chalmer  in  Halyrudhous,  ..... 

The  Erie  of  Mortounis  charge  to  enter  in  Edinburgh  Castell, 

The  Earl  of  Mar  to  William  Douglas  of  Lochleven, 

Act  of  Caution  for  William  Douglas  of  Lochleven, 

The  King  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven,       ..... 

Licence  by  the  King  and  Privy  Council  to  William  Douglas  of  Loch- 
leven to  transport  his  waird  fra  the  water  of  Cromertye  to  the  water  of 
Dye,      ........ 

The  King  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven,        .... 

The  King  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven,       .... 

Licence  by  the  King  and  Privy  Council  to  William  Douglas  of  Loch 
leven  to  repair  hame,     ...... 

The  King  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven,       .... 

The  King  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven,       .... 

The  King  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven,       .... 

Licence  by  the  King  and  Privy  Council  to  William  Douglas  of  Loch- 
leven and  his  spouse,  etc.,  to  eat  flesche  during  Lentron, 

John  Lindsay  of  Covington  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

The  Earl  of  Angus  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven,     . 

George  Douglas  to  his  brother  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

Proclamatioun  that  nane  move  or  provoke  trouble  unquietnes  or  seditioun 
amang  his  Majesteis  subjectis,    ..... 

Order  to  the  Keepers  of  the  Castle  of  Inverness  to  receive  John  Leslie 
of  Buchquhane  and  others  in  waird,       .... 

Christian  Douglas  to  her  Mother  the  Lady  Lochleven,    . 

Gift  of  the  escheit  of  William  Douglas  of  Lochleven  to  the  Lady  Lochleven 

Obligation  by  William  Douglas  of  Lochleven  to  Thomas  Ogilv}', 

The  Laird  of  Lochleven  to  his  Lady,       .... 

The  King  to  the  Lady  of  Lochleven,       .... 

Licence  by  the  King  and  Privy  Council  to  James  Commendator  of 
Melros  and  others  to  abide  at  hame  fra  all  oistis,  etc., 

Licence  by  the  King  to  Lady  Lochleven  to  eat  flesche  in  Lentroun, 


121 
122 

ib. 
123 

124 

ih. 
125 
126 
127 

ib. 


128 
129 
130 

131 
132 
133 
134 

135 

ib. 

136 

137 

138 

140 
ib. 
141 
142 
143 
144 

145 
146 


THE  TABLE. 


U^^ 


143.  The  Laird  of  Lochleven  to  John  Lawrie  burgess  of  Edinburgh, 

144.  John  Boswell  of  Balmuto  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

145.  The  Master  of  Glammis  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

146.  The  King  to  the  Earl  of  Buchan, 

147.  Licence  to  James  Commendator  of  Melros  to  pas  to  France  and  Flanders, 

148.  Acquittance  to  William  Douglas  of  Lochleven  of  the  fevf  maills  of  Melros, 

149.  Extract  of  clause  and  article  in  the  Ratificatioun  of  the  Pacificatioun 

restitutioun  and   abolitioun  grantit  to   our   Soverane  Lordis 
divers  Parliamentis  befoir,  .... 

150.  The  King  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven, 

151.  Warrant  to  retain  Archie  Eliot  of  the  Hill  in  clois  firniance, 

152.  Warrant  to  put  Archie  Eliot  of  the  Hill  to  freedome  and  to  keip  Cleniet 

Eliot  his  brothers  son  in  his  place, 
lil  153.  Obligation  by  Dame  Jean  Lyoun  Countess  of  Angus, 

154.  Discharge  to  William  Earl  of  Mortoun  as  air  of  tailzie  to  umquhile 

Archibald  Erll  of  Angus,  .... 

155.  The  King  to  the  Earl  of  Mortoun, 

156.  Proclamatioun  to  charge  his  Majesteis  liegis  within  the  scherifdome  of 

Fyffe  to  assist  in  apprehending  the  Earl  of  Huntly, 

157.  Mr.  Andrew  de  Mazieres  [Minister  at  Thoire  in  Xaintonge]  to  the  Earl  of 
Morton,  ...... 

158.  The  warrand  for  deliuerie  of  Johne  Logane, 

159.  The  King  to  the  Earl  of  Mortoun, 
'  160.  George  Douglas  of  Parkhead  to  the  Earl  of  Mortoun, 

161.  The  King  to  the  Earl  of  Mortoun, 

162.  Order  for  Proclamation  of  the  Marriage  of  the  Earl  of  Errol  and  Lady 
Elizabeth  Douglas  and  Certificate  thereof, 

163.  Francis  Earl  of  Errol  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 
•  164.  Mr.  John  Knox  Minister  at  Melros  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

165.  Francis  Earl  of  Errol  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

166.  Francis  Earl  of  Errol  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

167.  The  Master  of  Glammis  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

168.  Francis  Earl  of  Errol  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

169.  Licence  by  the  King  to  M'Intoshe  to  pas  hame  to  his  fad 

170.  The  King  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

171.  The  Earl  of  Angus  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

172.  Ludovick  Duke  of  Lennox  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

173.  Ludovick  Duke  of  Lennox  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

174.  The  Laird  of  Drumlanrig  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 


Li 


■z  U 


147 
ib. 
148 
149 
150 
151 


ib. 
],54 
155 

ib. 
150 

157 

ih. 

158 

IGO 
1G2 
163 
164 
ib. 

165 
166 
167 
168 

ib. 
169 
170 
171 

ih. 
172 
173 

ib. 
174 


THE  TABLE. 


XCIX 


175.  Agnes  Couutes  of  Morton  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

176.  The  Earl  of  Angus  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

177.  Sir  Duncan  Campbell  of  Glenorchy  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

178.  Sir  Duncan  Campbell  of  Glenorchy  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

179.  Declaratioun  by  the  King  and  Privy  Council  anent  the  title  of  Earl  of 

Morton  given  to  John  Lord  Maxwell, 

180.  The  King  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

181.  Mr.  William  Scott  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

182.  The  Earl  of  Angus  to  the  Earl  of  jMorton, 

183.  The  King  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

184.  Commissioun  to  serche  seek  and  tak  David  Barclay  of  Strowie, 

185.  Advice  of  the  Commissioners  of  the  Kirk  to  the  King, 
180.  Sir  John  Carmychall  to  William  Earl  of  Angus, 

187.  Agnes  Countess  of  Morton  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

188.  Agnes  Countess  of  Morton  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

189.  William  Lord  Hereis  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

190.  Warrant  to  retain  John  A  lay  and  Rowie  Betels, 

191.  Warrant  to  charge  Adam  Strudgeon  and  others, 

192.  Daniel  Archdeacon  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

193.  Ludovick  Duke  of  Lenox  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

194.  Alexander  Sixth  Lord  Home  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 

195.  The  Presbytery  of  Linlithgow  to  the  Earl  of  Morton, 
19G.  King  James  VI.  to  the  Earl  of  Morton,  . 


.176 

177 
ib. 

178 

179 
180 
181 
182 

a. 

183 
184 
185 
187 

ib. 
188 

ib. 
189 

ib. 
190 
191 

ib. 
192 


-r .  "o 


ORIGmAL  PAPERS 


IN  THE  AKCIimiS  OF 


THE   EARLS   OF   MORTON. 


Lietter  from  King  James  V.  to  James  Earl  of  Mortoun  • 
REX- 

1  Treft  Coufing  and  Counfalour  We  greit  gou  weill  /  and  hes  reflauit  gour 
writenis  /  and  to  gour  defyr  of  our  licence  to  Contra6t  Mariage  betwix 
Robert  Maxwell  fone  and  apperand  ayr  til  our  Coufing  Robert  lord 
Maxwell  and  gour  dochtyr  our  nece  /  We  ar  hartly  content  of  the  famyn 
Conforme  to  our  mynd  fchawin  to  gou  be  our  other  writenis  of  befor 
Subfcriwit  with  our  hand  At  Falkland  the  xvij  day  of  Junij  • 

James  R  • 
Confanguineo  et  confiliario  noftro  dilefto  Jacobo 
de  Morton  comiti  ac  domino  de  Dalkeith  to  • 

J.  he  King  to  the  Earl  and  Countefs  of  Mortoun  • 
REX- 

2  rvicht  weilbelouit  /  Coufing  and  traift  counfalour  We  grete  gow  hertlie 
weile  and  fforfamekle  as  it  is  fchewin  till  Ws  that  our  filter  and  ge  thinkis 
to  contra6b  mariage  and  allia  our  nece  gour  gongar  dochter  with  Robert 
Maxwell  fone  to  our  coufing  Robert  lord  Maxwell  off  the  quhilk  We  ar 
herthe  wele  content  and  erar  with  him  nor  any  uther  ffor  we  purpofe  to 

a 


2  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

tak  him  fra  his  fadir  and  bring  him  vp  in  our  awne  houfe  /  T;  god  haue  gow 
in  keping  Subfcriuit  with  oure  hand  at  Edinburgh  the  xxj  day  of  Julij  • 

James  R • 
To  our  derreft  coufing  t  traift  counfalour  James  erle 
of  Mortoun  and  our  derreft  fifter  his  Ipoufe  tc  • 

Precept  by  the  King  to  Robert  Lord  Maxwell  and  to  John  of  Maxwell 
his  brother  in  favour  of  the  Countefs  of  Mortoun  • 

REX- 

3  AV^ elebelouit  Coufing  We  grete  gou  wele  Forfamekle  as  It  is  humelie 
menyt  to  ws  be  our  louit  fifter  Katherine  Countas  of  Mortoun  that  quhare 
fcho  hes  of  ws  in  few  the  landis  and  barony  of  Buthil  and  has  maid  gude 
and  thankfull  payment  to  oure  ComptroUar  of  all  malis  and  dewiteis 
awand  to  ws  thairof  fen  fcho  gat  the  i'aidis  landis  in  few  /  and  ge  withhald 
fra  hir  ane  grete  part  of  the  malis  of  the  famyn  extending  to  thre  hun- 
dreth  merkis  of  termes  bygane  Nochtwithftanding  oure  Comptrollare  is 
payit  be  hir  of  the  faid  malis  And  als  fcho  is  planetuis  that  ge  haue  ane 
bruther  of  gouris  callit  Johnne  of  Maxwell  quhilk  withhaldis  fra  hir  the 
manys  of  Preftoun  callit  the  Wrayes  quhilk  is  hir  conjunftfeftment  /  all 
malis  and  proffittis  of  the  famyn  of  thir  thre  geris  bygane  be  gour  toUer- 
ance  /  confidering  ge  ar  fchiref  to  ws  and  bailie  to  our  faid  fifter  We 
merwell  that  ge  thole  fie  manifeft  wrangis  to  be  done  within  the  boundis 
of  goure  office  Tharefore  We  charge  gou  as  ye  will  efchew  oure  hie  dif- 
plefure  that  ge  mak  and  caufe  gour  bruther  to  mak  thankfull  payment  to 
our  faid  fifter  of  all  termes  bygane  and  tocum  for  fcho  hes  optenit  our 
lettres  on  gou  in  the  ferd  forme  /  And  We  will  thole  thame  to  proceid 
according  to  Juftice  without  ge  mak  and  caus  to  be  maid  thankfull  pay- 
ment to  hir  of  all  termes  bygane  and  to  cum  of  the  faidis  landis  Subfcriuit 
with  our  hand  At  Edinburgh  the  xij  day  of  Maij  and  of  oure  Regnne  the 
xvj  gere  • 

James  R. 


jAc.  v.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  3 

Jlixemption  by  the  King  to  James  Erie  of  Mortoun  from  all  oiftis  t  c  • 
REX. 

4  We  underftand  that  our  weilbelovit  Coufing  and  Counfaloure  James 
erle  of  Mortoun  Lord  of  Dalkeith  is  fubject  to  diverfe  feiknes  and  infir- 
miteis  in  his  perfoun  havand  ane  fare  leg  and  not  habill  to  endure  grete 
travel  in  weirfare  without  extreme  danger  in  his  perfoun  And  thairfore 
We  have  exemit  our  faid  coufing  as  for  his  awne  perfoun  and  fex  fervandis 
with  him  fra  all  our  oiftis  radis  wappinfchawingis  and  weris  be  fey  or 
land  within  our  realme  or  outwith  for  all  the  dayis  of  his  life  to  •  T:c  • 
Gevin  under  our  privie  Seill  and  fubfcrivit  with  our  hand  At  Edinburgh 
the  xix  day  of  Odlober  And  of  our  Regnne  the  xvj  gere  • 

James  R  • 

Jl*  rom  the  King  to  the  Countefs  of  Mortoun  • 
REX- 

5  W  eiibelouit  fifter  We  grete  gow  hertly  weill  flPorfamekill  as  We  have 
writin  to  our  traift  coufing  gour  hufband  prayand  hym  to  fulfill  and  to 
keip  the  commonyng  and  promil>  betuix  hym  and  our  coufing  Malcom 
Lord  Flemyng  anent  the  alienatioun  of  certane  gour  hufbandis  landis  to 
be  maid  to  our  faid  coufing  efter  the  forme  of  the  faid  commonyng  becaus 
the  faid  Malcom  lord  Flemyng  hes  auaiiit  certane  of  his  awin  landis  to 
furniD  money  to  gour  hulband  for  his  landis  Heirfor  We  pray  gou  to 
mak  na  ftop  nor  Impediment  thereto  /  for  We  heirfay  that  ge  will  nocht 
thoill  gour  douchter  to  gif  our  hir  fee  of  the  faid  landis  to  that  effefl  hot 
ftoppes  hir  therof  /  We  pray  gou  efFeftuufly  becaus  the  faid  Malcomis 
barnis  that  fuld  haue  the  faidis  landis  ar  fa  teynder  of  blude  bayth  to  ws 
and  gou/  and  ficlik  becaus  gour  hufband  is  felland  and  puttand  faft  away 
till  utheris  that  ge  forthir  the  farayn  for  our  faik  as  ge  will  report  Ipeciall 
thankis  of  ws  therfor  And  failseing  that  gour  hufband  will  not  fulfill  nor 
keip  his  promiO  to  our  faid  coufing  We  afiure  gou  We  fall  provyd  and 


4  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

fynd  the  way  that  he  falbe  compellit  to  keip  his  condicioun  be  the  law  And 
forth er  ge  fall  gif  credence  to  this  berar  in  this  mater  Subfcriuit  with  our 
hand  at  Edinburgh  the  xij  day  of  06tober  and  of  our  Regne  the  xix  geir  • 

James  R • 
To  our  wilbelouit  fitter  the  Countes  of  Mortoun  • 

The  King  to  the  Thefaurer  anent  Robert  Douglas  of  Lochleven  • 
REX. 

6  Thefaurer  We  grete  gow  wele  /  ge  fall  underftand  We  have  confentit  to 

put  Robert  Dowglas  of  Lochlevin  in  fee  of  the  Erldom  of  Mortoun  and 

Lordfchip  of  Dalkeith  with  thair  pertinentis  for  gude  cauffis  as  he  will 

fchaw  gow  We  pray  gow  fail  nocht  to  gar  reforme  his  fignature  be  men 

of  underftanding  as  he  thinkis  beft   And  help  him  in  fik  thingis  as  he 

defiris  /  Forder  gif  credence  to  him  /  Subfcrivit  with  our  hand  At  Brechyn 

the  xviij  day  of  Oftober  And  of  our  Regne  the  xxviij  geir  • 

James  R. 
Till  our  Thefaurer  1c-  ■ 

A-cquittance  by  George  erle  of  ErroU  to  Robert  Douglas  of  Lochlevin  • 

7  I  George  erle  of  Erroll  grantis  me  haif  refTauit  fray  ane  honorabill  man 
Robert  Douglas  of  Lochlevin  the  foume  of  ane  hundreth  merkis  wfuale 
money  of  Scotland  for  the  nonentres  of  his  landis  of  Foflaquhy  haldin 
of  me  the  faid  George  erle  '^C  of  the  quhilk  foume  I  hald  me  weile  con- 
tent and  payt  Difcharging  and  quietclamand  the  faid  Robert  his  airis 
executoris  and  affignais  for  now  and  euer  and  all  otheris  quhome  efferis 
of  the  forfaid  foume  of  j°  merkis  be  this  myne  acquittance  Subfcriuit  with 
my  hand  At  Kilros  the  day  of  Auguft  the  geir  of  God  I'^  Y"  and 
fourte  thua  geris  befor  thir  witnes  Androw  Hay  John  Murray  Duncan 
Robertfone  and  Androw  Montago  with  otheris  divers  • 


(^^-^Cvf 


^^^JSl 


MARY.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  5 

Ane  Appointment  betuix  the  Duik  and  my  Lord  of  Mortoun  for 
deliverie  of  the  hous  of  Dalkeith  • 

GUBERNATOR  • 

8  JVly  Lord  Gouvernour  of  his  fpecial  grace  and  favour  hes  grantit  and 
be  thir  prefentis  grantis  to  James  of  Douglas  fone  to  George  Douglas 
Maifter  of  Angus  •  That  the  faid  James  cummand  inftantly  furth  of  the 
dungeoun  of  Dalkeith  and  fubmittand  him  alwayis  to  my  faid  Lord 
Governours  will  /  My  faid  Lord  Governour  is  contentit  that  the  faid 
James  his  fervandis  and  geir  being  now  prefently  within  the  dungeoun 

falbe  faif  and  fre  to  pas  at  his  and  ther  plefouris  and  thai 

all  ther  geir  forfaid  to  quhatfumevir  place  thai  pleis 

the  faid  James  his  fervandis  and  geir  to  be  convoyt  fuirly  gif  as  the  faid 
James  fal  defyre  apone  his  humble  requifitioun  and  fute  Providing  that 
the  faid  houfe  be  deliverit  betuix  this  and  the  morne  ten  houris  befor 
none  And  for  the  mair  fecuritie  therof  my  faid  Lord  Governour  hes 
fubfcrivit  this  prefent  And  failgeand  that  the  hous  be  nocht  deliverit 
agane  the  tyme  apointit  /  This  apointment  to  be  of  nane  avale  and  the 
faid  James  to  be  punift  at  my  Lord  Governouris  plefure  At  Dalkeith  the 
fevint  day  of  November  1543  And  thir  premiffis  abone  writtin  being 
fulfillit  be  the  faid  James  and  his  fervandis  My  Lord  of  his  grace  Remittis 
to  him  and  thame  the  crime  of  the  haldinff  of  the  houfe  • 


6  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

Receipt  and  Difcharge  by  the  Commendator   and   Convent  of  Sanft- 
androis  to  The  Lady  of  Lochlewyne  and  her  fon  • 

9  VV^ e  James  be  the  permiffioun  of  God  Commendatair  of  the  priorie  of 
Sanftandrois  and  Convent  of  the  famyne  grantis  ws  to  have  reflTavit  furth 
of  the  place  of  Lochlewyne  fra  ane  honorable  gentill  woman  Margaret 
Erflcyne  Lady  of  Lochlewyne  And  hir  fone  William  Douglas  air  to 
wmquhile  Robert  Douglas  of  Lochlewyne  that  laft  deceffit  thre  kyftis 
contening  certane  reliquis  and  claithis  of  filk  and  gold  with  divers  geir 
pertening  to  our  place  quhilk  we  caufit  be  put  thair  to  be  fuirlie  kepit 
fra  our  enimeis  handis  of  Ingland  befoir  the  raid  of  Langhop  /  Ane  of  the 
faidis  kiftis  being  of  auld  aik  haifSng  ane  clovyne  1yd  abone  with  thre 
holis  in  the  famyne  Ane  uthir  being  of  new  eiflland  bwrd  haiffand  .  .  .  • 
lokkis  with  twa  bandis  of  Irne  about  It  The  third  of  thaim  being  rycht 
lua  of  new  eiftland  bwird  haiffand  hot  ane  lok  with  crampattis  of  Irne 
about  the  anglaris  gawillis  and  newkis  of  the  famyne  /  And  difchargis  the 
laid  Lady  and  Williame  hir  fone  and  all  utheris  quhome  It  effeiris  of  the 
faidis  thre  kiftis  as  is  abone  expremit  Swa  that  the  foirfaidis  kiftis  and 
geir  be  als  fuirlie  put  in  our  handis  agane  upoun  our  expenfis  As  we 
caufit  the  famyne  be  put  within  the  faid  place  of  Lochlewyne  /  In  Witnes 
of  the  premiffis  To  this  prefent  write  Subfcrivit  with  our  hand  our  com- 
mone   Seil  Is  affixit  At  San6landrois  the  day  of  March    the  geir 

of  God  1"  V  fourte  geris  • 

James  Commendator  of  Sanclandrois  • 

Den  Jhon  Wynram  Subpriore  of  San6tandrois  • 

Den  James  Wemis  • 

Den  Dauid  Guthre  • 

Den  Dauid  Cuke  • 

Dominus  Patricius  Dunkanfoun  T;c"  ■ 


MARY.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  7 

JMy  lord  Erfkynis  acquittans  In  the  Quenis  grace  behalf  of  iij"  crownis  • 

10  i  Jhone  lord  Erlkene  grantes  me  to  haue  reflauit  fra  the  handis  of 
matter  Johne  Bougomyn  fecretar  to  the  Quenis  grace  dowriar  of  Scot- 
land the  fowm  of  thre  hundreth  crownis  of  the  fone  in  name  and  behalf 
of  Margret  Erlkene  Lady  of  Lochlevin  auchtand  be  the  faid  Quenis  grace 
unto  hir  Of  the  quhilk  foum  of  thre  hundreth  crownis  forfaid  I  grant  me 
wele  content  and  payit  And  quitclamys  and  difchargeis  the  faid  fecretar 
therof  in  the  Quenis  behalf  and  all  otheris  quhome  efferis  for  now  and 
euer  In  witnes  herof  I  haue  fubfcriuit  this  acquittance  in  the  faid  Lady 
Lochlevynis  behalf  At  Blais  the  xxix  day  of  Januar  the  gere  of  God  I"^ 
Y"  and  fyfty  geris  • 


'/f  iP7tni>rp^ 


X^recept  by  Mary  Queen  Regent  to  Patrick  Home  of  the  Brumehous  • 
REGINA  . 

1 1  OomptroUar  3®  fall  Incontinent  eftir  the  fycht  heirof  deliver  and  mak 
thankfuU  payment  to  oure  fervitour  Patrik  Home  of  the  Brumehous  the 
fowme  of  fourty  pundis  money  of  this  realme  of  the  reddieft  mailis  and 
dewiteis  of  oure  derreft  dochteris  propirtie  of  the  termes  of  Martimes  in 
the  geir  of  God  I'^  V"  and  fifty  fex  and  Witlbunday  In  the  geir  of  God 
\(x\  yc  £f(.y  fevin  geris  Quhilk  falbe  allowit  to  gou  in  gour  comptis  ge 
kepand  this  oure  precept  for  gour  Warrand  Subfcriuit  be  vs  At  Halyrud- 
hous  the  third  day  of  Junij  the  geir  of  God  I*^  V°  and  fifty  fevin  geiris  • 


8  OEIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

X  he  Erll  Marfliall  and  the  erll  of  Errolles  band  for  the  relief  of  thaim 
that  ar  bund  for  the  Mafter  of  Marflialis  entras  • 

12  We  Williame  erle  Merfchell  Lord  Keith  tc"  George  erle  of  Errole  Lord 
Hay  fforfamekle  as  James  erle  of  Mortoun  Lord  Dalkeith  Walter  Ker 
of  Ceffurd  and  Johne  Ker  of  Farnyhirft  knichtis  ar  oblift  and  bundin 
with  ws  conjundlie  and  feuerallie  To  the  erle  of  Northumberland  Schir 
Henrie  Percy  knicht  and  to  Eobert  Lord  Ogill  Inglifmen  and  to  everie 
of  thame  failing  of  uther  That  Williame  maifter  Merfchell  prefoneir  in 
Ingland  and  be  the  faid  erle  of  Northumberland  lattin  hame  in  Scotland 
fall  without  fraude  gile  or  delay  enter  agane  to  the  faid  erle  or  to  the 
faid  Schir  Henry  Percy  or  to  thair  affignais  within  the  towne  of  Norhame 
he  being  haill  man  and  foir  In  fuche  fort  as  lauchfuU  entrie  falbe  thair 
takin  of  him  the  firft  day  of  September  nixttocum  efter  the  dait  of  the 
faid  band  And  in  default  that  the  faid  Maifter  enter  nocht  as  faid  is  to 
content  and  pay  within  xx  dayis  nixteftir  the  failing  of  the  faid  entrie 
the  Ibwme  of  foure  thowfand  pundis  Sterling  without  fraude  cuUour  or 
dilTait  Thairfore  to  be  bundin  and  oblift  and  be  the  tennour  heirof  bindis 
and  obliffis  ws  oure  airis  and  executouris  To  freith  releif  and  keip 
fljaithles  the  faidis  Erie  of  Mortoun  Lairdis  of  Ceffurde  and  Fairnihirft 
thair  airis  and  executouris  off  the  faid  band  fowme  contenit  thairintill 
and  contentis  of  the  famyn  At  the  handis  of  the  faid  erle  of  Northum- 
berland Schir  Henry  Percy  knicht  and  the  Lord  OgeU  and  thair  affignais 
and  all  utheris  Be  this  our  obligatioun  Subfcrivit  with  oure  handis  our 
leillis  ar  aiExt  AT  Edinburgh  the  auchtene  daye  of  Junij  The  geir  of 
God  I*^  V°  fiftic  nyne  geiris  • 

George  erll  of  ErroU  • 

Wyl3am  erll  of  Merfcheall  wyth  my  hand  • 


MAR  v.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  9 

X  he  Prioi-  of  Saint  Andrews  to  his  mother  The  Lady  Lochlevin  • 

13  IVLother  after  maift  hartly  commendatioun  / 1  refavit  your  wrytting  /  and 
hes  at  lenth  confyderyt  the  fame  •  And  treuly  hes  fa  mekle  merw'elyt 
thairat  /  that  yff  your  hand  wrytt  hayd  not  perfuadit  me  /  the  Reportis  of 
the  toungis  vpon  earthe  culd  nevir  hayd  maid  my  hart  beleif  that  heirin 
I  perceave  •  I  knaw  afluredly  my  brother  hayd  nevir  meynit  fie  thing  to 
my  difplafeur  yff  thai  quhome  I  [traift]  abuif  the  reft  of  the  haill  warld 
hayd  not  bene  ane  fpure  to  him  to  vndermynd  me  in  abufing  the  gouth- 
hyd  of  that  •  •  •  Innocent  I  patt  in  thair  hand  is  as  my  maift  trufty 
begound  all  vtheris  I  haif  In  deid  falowed  my  hartis  inclination  in  my 
mariage  and  Is  prowydit  be  my  fouerayne  •  •  •  to  god  to  fum  lyiff  / 
albeit  I  myght  Juftlyar  fay  ane  ftyill  of  ane  leiffing  /  and  thairfor  did  not 
hyd  from  gou  how  I  wes  not  hable  to  heir  out  the  ftait  of  my  former 
lyiff  by  that  vther  leifBng  the  quhilk  how  coiftly  and  cummerfum  It  hes  bene 
to  me  I  neid  not  to  expreme  to  gou  that  knawis  It  as  my  felf  quhairfor 
all  my  mynd  wes  to  haif  placed  that  damolel  according  hir  ftate  and  to 
the  contentement  of  her  freindis  fa  haifing  my  awin  quhome  I  trufted  the 
playn  i'upplantaris  of  me  I  will  certifie  gou  as  I  haif  my  brother  already 
all  the  brether  I  haif  on  lyiff  fall  not  bruik  that  leifing  during-  my  dayis 
onles  thay  bruik  It  on  my  belly  for  fie  proceydingis  merittis  not  fie 
favour  at  my  hand  I  call  your  confcience  to  record  yff  I  hayf  bene  ane 
vnprouffitable  forfter  to  that  houfe  or  not  and  this  Is  ane  fniall  revard 
for  recompenfe  •  thus  vnder  truft  and  credit  to  fupplant  me  and  with  ane 
abufioun  of  ane  Innocent  to  fpoill  me  bayth  of  my  leifRng  and  my  honour 
for  I  pray  gow  mother  with  quhat  face  may  I  anfuer  hir  freindis  compleyn- 
ing  vpone  me  the  abufion  of  hir  and  the  perifiiing  of  that  ancient 
leiflBng  from  the  fuirname  /  as  concerning  hir  the  credit  I  haif  gevin  gou 
of  hir  perfoune  hes  maid  gou  Rowme  to  abufe  hir  /  but  for  the  leifBng 
I  fall  god  willing  in  fie  fort  preferve  that  nayther  fall  fhe  nor  he  haif 
that  pouer  be  the  grace  of  god  •  and  albeit  ge  wrytt  I  fuld  be  glad  to 

b 


10  OKIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

further  fie  leiffing  to  my  brother  as  god  prowyidis  him  I  am  not  per- 
fuaded  that  heir  Is  the  prouifion  of  god  but  (faiffing  that  honour  and 
reuerence  that  be  law  of  god  and  natuir  I  awcht  to  gou  quhilk  alio  I  mynd 
be  goddis  grace  perpetually  to  keip  and  vie  towardis  gou)  I  wald  in 
playn  termes  lett  you  knaw  in  quhat  fort  I  refave  this  pradife  at  gour 
hand  and  how  lytill  ge  half  regarded  ayther  my  wele  and  honour  or  git 
gour  awin  deutye  towardis  me  heirin  that  nevir  wald  haif  fparit  to  haif 
putt  my  hart  with  in  my  bouk  vpon  gour  credit  Vther  thingis  I  will  not 
wrytt  at  this  prefent  but  prayis  god  to  oppin  fum  ayfyer  way  to  prowyid 
gour  bayrnis  (quhilk  ar  in  deid  tender  aneuchtt  to  me  and  may  be  on  force) 
nor  be  my  (kayth  and  diflionour  /  and  fa  committis  gou  to  the  proteftioun 
of  God  from  Aberdene  the  ix  of  o6bober  1562  • 
As  I  keip  fecreit  this  matter  fa  wald 
I  wiih  it  wer  nevir  fpokin  • 

3our  fonne  at  all  pouer  tc 

To  my  mother  the  Lady  of  Loychlewin  • 

jVlary  Queen  of  Scots  to  the  Abbot  of  Dunfermling  • 

14  V  enerable  fader  in  god  We  grete  gou  wele  iforfamekle  as  for  certane 
occafionis  moving  ws  at  this  prefent  tyme  We  haue  thocht  gude  that  the 
temporall  landis  of  oure  abbay  of  Dunfermling  be  fett  in  fewferme  to 
oure  thefaurair  maifter  Robert  Richartfoun  with  quhome  we  haue  takin 
fie  ordour  that  the  faid  few  fall  nowther  be  preiudiciall  to  gou  /  nor  to 
thame  that  beis  pofleffouris  for  the  tyme  of  oure  faid  abbay  Nor  git  to 
the  tenentis  thairof  As  we  haue  at  lenth  declarit  to  your  coufing  maifl;er 
Robert  Pitcarne  And  thairfoir  we  pray  gou  effeauillie  that  ge  fubfcriue 
and  pas  the  faid  maift;er  Robertis  charteris  maid  upoun  the  faidis  few 


MARY.] 


OF  THE  EAELS  OF  MORTON. 


11 


landis  quhilk  we  haue  caufit  be  fend  to  gou  to  that  cflFeft  And  mak  the 
lamyn  to  be  fend  agane  in  all  guidlie  haift  Sua  that  this  our  purpos  be 
na  wyfe  hinderit  as  ge  will  do  ws  verie  acceptable  plefure  And  thus  we 
commit  gou  to  God  At  Edinburgh  the  laft  day  of  Maij  1564  ■ 


To  ane  venerable  fader  in  God 
the  abbat  of  Dunfermling  tc* 


Archibald  fifth  Earl  of  Argyll  to  James  third  Earl  of  Arran  /  Duke  of 
Chatelherault  • 


15  JMy  Lord  Eftir  my  mall  humill  Commendatiounis  your  grace  fall 
ondirftand  that  the  Quines  Majeftie  hes  defyrit  me  to  be  Into  Edinbrhwitc 
the  XX  day  of  this  inftand  becawif  of  the  Erll  of  Lenox  in  Cwming  tharfor 
I  thocht  it  gowd  to  adwartil^  your  grace  of  the  fame  for  qwhat  ewir  beis 
proponit  In  tha  behalwis  I  fall  do  na  thing  qwhill  I  fpek  wyth  your  grace 
farder  It  fall  pleis  your  grace  to  gyf  credit  to  my  Cofing  berar  heirof 
wrytin  fra  the  xix  day  of  feptember  1564  • 

5our  grace  Cofing  to  command  ■ 


To  My  Lord  Dwkis  grace  of  Satillarolt 
gyf  this  • 


12  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

Liicence  by  The  King  and  Queen  that  William  Douglas  of  Lochlevin 
retain  the  place  and  hous  of  Lochlevin  • 

Apud  Edinburgh  decimo  tertio  die  menjis  Nouembris  anno  domini 
Millefimo  quingentejimo  Sexagejimo  quinto  . 

16  Xhe  quhilk  day  flPorfamekle  as  the  King  and  Quenis  Majefties  charge 
wes  dire6l  to  ane  herauld  or  vther  ofRciar  of  armes  Commanding  thame 
to  pas  and  charge  Margaret  Erfkin  lady  Lochlevin  Williame  Douglas  of 
lochlevin  Robert  douglas  his  fone  and  apperand  air  and  the  laid  Williame 
his  fader  as  lauchfull  tutour  adminiftratour  gydar  and  gouernour  to  him 
and  all  vtheris  his  tutouris  and  curatouris  gif  he  ony  hes  for  thair 
interefle  and  all  vtheris  keparis  havaris  and  withhalderis  of  the  caftell 
and  forterefle  of  Lochlevin  To  rander  and  deliuer  the  famyn  to  the 
officiar  executour  of  the  fame  charge  And  remove  thame  felflBs  thair  fer- 
uandis  and  guidis  furth  of  the  famyn  within  fex  houris  nixt  efter  the 
charge  vnder  the  pane  of  treffoun  Like  as  at  mair  lenth  is  contenit  in 
the  famyn  charge  Of  the  dait  the  fevint  day  of  nouember  inftant  Com- 
perit  Adam  m^culloch  merchemont  herauld  and  producit  the  faid  charge 
devvlie  execute  be  him  vpoun  the  ellevint  day  of  the  faid  moneth  And 
being  inquirit  vpoune  the  laid  Williamis  anfuer  Reportit  That  he  wes 
extremlie  feik  in  perrell  of  his  lyff  to  the  faid  Adamis  apparence  ^\t 
ofiferit  he  with  all  humilitie  to  obey  the  command  of  the  laid  charge  with 
all  haift  poffible  to  him  And  to  that  efFeft.  defirit  the  faid  Adam  to  remain 
with  him  quhilk  he  and  the  countes  of  Buchane  quha  than  wes  travelland 
with  chyld  mycht  remove  and  cum  furth  of  the  faid  place  The  King  and 
Quenis  Majefties  vnderftanding  alfwele  be  the  faid  herauldis  report  and 
declaratioun  As  be  thair  traift  coufing  and  counfalour  Johnne  erll  of 
Mar  lord  erfkin  the  obedient  mynd  of  the  faid  Williame  Douglas  towart 
the  deliuering  of  his  faid  hous  and  place  Thair  fore  and  in  refpeft  of  his 
prefent  infirmitie  And  of  the  erneft  fute  of  thair  faid  traift  counfalour 


OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON. 


13 


MARY.] 

and  of  Maifter  James  balfour  perfoun  of  flifk  Offerand  in  the  faid  Wil- 
liams naim  cautioune  to  the  effeft  vnderwrittine  Thair  Majefties  acceptis 
and  RefTavis  the  faid  Williamis  aniuer  as  full  and  fufficient  obedience  of 
the  faid  charge  And  ar  contentit  that  he  as  of  before  retene  and  keip  in 
his  awin  handes  and  poffefRoune  his  faid  houfe  and  place  of  Lochlevin 
quhill  thair  hieneffis  be  further  avyfit  without  fkayth  cryme  or  danger 
to  be  incurrit  be  him  his  faidis  moder  and  fone  or  vtheris  quhatfumeuir 
for  thair  abiding  and  Remanyng  within  the  faid  houfe  and  place  fen  the 
faid  charge  wes  execute  aganis  thame  Of  the  quhilk  charge  thair  Ma- 
jefties be  tbir  prefentis  difchargeis  thame  fimpliciter  •  And  inftantlie  the 
faid  erll  of  Mar  and  Michaell  Balfour  of  Burly  In  name  of  the  faid 
Williame  Douglas  vndertuke  and  promift  That  fchir  William  Scott  of 
balwery  knycht  Uauid  Dury  of  that  Ilk  Dauid  Barclay  of  cullerny  the 
faid  Michaell  Balfour  of  Burly  and  Johnne  Anftruther  of  that  Ilk  fall 
cum  to  the  burgh  of  Edinburgh  betuix  and  the  xxij  day  of  nouember 
inftant  And  thair  becum  aftit  and  oblift  conjunftlie  and  feueralie  as 
cautionaris  and  fouirteis  for  the  faid  Williame  Douglas  That  the  faid 
houfe  and  place  of  Lochlevin  falbe  reddy  and  patent  at  thair  Majefties 
commandiment  with  all  munitioune  and  artalliery  being  within  the  famyn 
quhilk  pertenit  to  James  erll  of  Murray  at  quhatfumeuir  tyme  thair 
hieneffis  fall  pleis  require  the  famyn  vpoun  xxiiij  houris  warnyng  And 
that  nane  of  thair  Majefties  rebellis  thair  feruandis  or  meffingeris  falbe 
reflett  fupplijt  or  intertenyit  in  the  faid  place  in  the  meyntyme  vnder 
the  panis  of  five  thoufand  merkis  • 


14  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

Henry  Darnley  to  The  Laird  of  Lochlevin  . 

17  Lard  of  Lowghe  Levyn  Whear  as  We  have  taken  order  thorowgh  our 
Realme  ffor  Reftraynte  of  Shotynge  with  gunnes  you  beinge  flieryfe  of 
thes  partes  we  wyll  and  commande  you  hereby  To  apprehende  all  per- 
fons  within  your  charge  that  fo  vfes  to  fliote  contrary  our  order  /  And 
we  havinge  alredy  vnderftandynge  of  ane  John  fliawe  /  fune  to  Maifter 
William  fliawe  /  To  be  a  common  flioter  We  allfo  charge  you  hereby  to 
take  the  fayde  Johne  and  fend  him  to  vs  with  his  gune  where  ever  we 
chaunce  to  be  within  three  dayes  after  this  prefent  And  farder  We 
beinge  Informed  of  dyvers  fyers  vfed  to  be  made  upon  the  waters  for 
fyfliynge  wyche  fcarrethe  the  fowles  /  Our  pleafure  Is  alfo  that  ye 
Reftrayne  all  fuche  fyers  to  be  made  tyll  ye  farder  vnderfland  frome  vs  / 
In  all  which  doinge  thes  fyngned  with  our  hande  Shallbe  your  fuffycyent 
warraunt  Agenfte  all  perfones  Geven  at  Burley  this  wendfday  the  xxij 
of  nouember  [1565  •] 

Henry  R • 
To  our  welbeloved  the  Lard  of 
Lowghe  Levyn  • 


James  Stewart  [Earl  of  Murray]  To  my  Lady  Countes  of  Murray. 

18  A.fter  my  maid  hartly  commendatioun  My  oncle  the  Erie  of  Mar  hes 
wryttin  to  me  anent  the  kyrk  of  Eglifgrige  It  wes  nevir  my  mynd  that 
he  fuld  want  the  x  chalderis  of  wiftuallis  he  ufed  to  refave  thairof  Tak 
thair  adwyis  betuix  gou  with  my  mothir  and  lett  her  L  •  be  latiffeit 
anentis  thai  x  chalderis  viftual  and  the  reft  thairof  to  cum  to  the  prouffeyt 
of  thayme  It  wes  deftinat  unto  I  wraytt  to  gou  of  befoyr  my  adwyiO  . 
3e  fall  now  joyne  with  my  mother  and  ufe  hir  counfale  and  my  oncles 
therle  of  Marris  in  gour  fwttis   and  as  I  may  fynd  beararis  and  fuyr 


MARY.]  OF  THE  EAELS  OF  MORTON.  15 

acceffe  ge  fall  knaw  forthir  of  my  mynd  and  that  fliortly  I  pray  gou  be 
blyth  and  prayfe  God  for  all  that  he  fendis  for  It  Is  he  only  that  gevis 
and  takis  and  It  Is  he  only  that  may  and  will  reltoyr  agayne  •  And 
becumis  ws  in  all  lawlynes  of  hart  to  awaytt  patiently  for  his  leafeur  yff 
my  mother  fall  obteyne  ane  licence  for  ane  fervand  of  niyn  for  the  aftion 
of  Buchquhane  ge  fall  knaw  forthir  of  my  mynd  befeikkand  God  to  com- 
fort gou  to  our  meitting  with  my  commendatioun  to  all  freyndis  that 
ar  fi-eyndis  in  deid  the  number  quhairof  Is  growen  merwelous  flcant 
prayfed  be  God  quha  met  prelerve  gou  frome  Neucaftell  the  xvij  of 
februar  1.565  • 

3ouris  as  ge  knaw 


/j^^yvvw>0  r^  sryvt^-z^- 


c/ 


W  arrant  to  charge  James  erll  of  Mortoun  Patrick  Lord  Ruthven 
and  Patrik  Lord  Lindefay  of  the  Byres  and  utheris  • 

19   Xlenry  and  Marie  be  the  grace  of  God  King  and  Queue  of  Scottis  To 
our  louittis  Peter  Thomfoun  Ilay  herauld  meffingeris  oure 

fhereffis  in  that  part  conjuncblie  and  feverallie  fpecialie  conftitut  greting 
Oure  Will  is  and  We  charge  gow  llraitlie  and  commandis  that  incontinent 
thir  our  lettres  fene  ge  pas  and  in  our  name  charge  James  erll  of  Mor- 
toun Lord  of  Dalkeith  Patrik  Lord  Ruthven  Patrik  Lord  Lindefay  of 
the  Byres  Williame  Maifter  of  Ruthven  George  Douglas  fone  naturall  to 
umquhill  Archibald  erll  of  Angus  that  laft  deceffit  Andro  Ker  of  Faw- 
dounfyde  Williame  Dowglas  of  Quhittinghame  Maifter  Archebald  Dowglas 
perfoun  of  Dowglas  bruther  to  the  faid  Williame  T;c-'  Williame  Dowglas 
of  Lochlevin  'tc-  Alexander  Ruthven  bruther  to  the  Lord  Ruthven  and 
utheris  perfonallie  or  at  thair  duelling  places  and  failgeing  therof  be 
oppin  proclamatioun  at  the  mercatt  croces  of  the  heid  burrowes  of  our 


16  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

fcheriffdomes  quhair  thai  dwell  To  compeir  perfonalie  before  ws  and 
Lordls  of  oure  fecreit  Counfale  at  Edinburgh  or  quhair  It  falhappyn  ws 
to  be  for  the  tyme  upone  the  text  day  nixt  efter  thai  and  ilkane  of  thame 
beis  chargeit  be  gow  therto  refpedive  To  anluer  to  fik  thingis  as  falbe 
laid  to  ther  charge  under  the  pane  of  rebellioun  tc  Gevin  under  our 
Signett  at  Edinburgh  the  xix  day  of  Marche  and  of  our  Regnnes  the 
firfl  and  xxiiij  geiris  • 

Per  ad,uin  manibus  S.  D.  N.  Regis  et  Reginefubfcriptum  . 


JMary  Queen  of  Scots  to  the  Laird  of  Lochlevin  • 

20  J_  raift  freind  We  greit  gou  weill  We  intend  God  willing  in  proper  per- 
foun  to  repair  fchortlie  towart  Jedburgh  and  ther  to  do  juftice  to  our 
puir  oppreft  fubieftis  That  oure  bordour  being  anys  quietit  We  may  the 
mair  efalie  put  ordour  in  the  in  cuntre  in  the  quhilk  Jornay  it  is  neidfuU 
that  we  be  weill  and  fubftantiouflie  accunipanyit  with  oure  gude  and 
trew  lubjeftis  Praying  gow  therfore  that  ge  accumpanyit  with  goure 
houflialdis  and  fubftancioufe  freindis  bodin  in  weirlik  maner  addrefs 
gow  to  meit  ws  at  Peblis  the  xiij  day  of  auguft  nixtocum  And  fwa  to 
accumpany  ws  for  the  fpace  of  xv  dayis  efter  gour  cumIng  to  Jedburgh 
As  ge  will  do  ws  verray  acceptabill  plefure  and  feruice  Subfcriuit  with 
oure  hand  At  Alio  way  the  laft  day  of  Julij  1566  • 


To  our  traift  freind  the  lard  of 
Lochlevin  • 


MAR  v.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MOETON.  17 

~  The  extraft  of  the  copy  fubfcriuit  be  Robert  Scott  of  my  Loi-d  of 
Murrayis  Teftament  • 

21  vie  James  erle  of  Murray  Lord  Abernethy  tc  Being  prefentlle  with 
licence  of  the  Quenis  grace  In  redines  to  depart  furth  of  this  Realme 
and  underftanding  that  all  creatures  ar  mortale  and  fubieft  to  death  The 
tyme  quhairof  is  onlie  Referuit  unto  the  eternall  god  •  Thairfoir  I  haif 
maid  conftitute  and  ordanit  and  be  the  tennour  heirof  makis  conftitutis 
and  ordanis  my  derreft  fpous  Dame  Agnes  Keith  Johne  erle  of  Mar  Johne 
Wifcharte  of  pettarro  knycht  Williame  Douglas  of  Lochlevin  and  Wil- 
liame  Kirkcaldy  of  grange  knycht  my  executouris  teftamentaris  and  my 
faid  fpous  the  onlie  and  vniuerfall  intromiflatrice  with  my  guidis  and  ane 
noble  and  mychtie  princes  Marie  Queue  of  Scottis  ouerifwoman  of  my 
faid  teftament  and  makis  my  faid  fpous  fa  lang  as  fche  Eemanis  wedo 
vndefloret  tutrix  teftamentar  to  Elifabeth  ftewart  my  lauchfull  docl^ter 
And  gif  fche  beis  mareit  or  defloret  Margaret  Erfl'^in  my  mother  And 
failgeing  of  hir  Williame  Douglas  of  Lochlevin  tutouris  teftamentaris  to 
my  faid  dochter  And  the  Quenis  Maieftie  my  fouerane  ouerifwoman  to 
fe  all  thingis  be  handillit  and  Reulit  for  the  weill  of  my  faid  dochter  In 
witnes  heirof  I  haue  fubfcriuit  thir  prefentis  with  my  hand  xit  San6t- 
androis  the  fecunde  day  of  aprile  The  geir  of  god  I*^"*  Y°  Ixvij  geiris 
Sic  fubfcribitur  •  James  Stewart  • 

Tenet  prejens  copia  In  omnibus  cum  originali  copiata  et  collacionata 
per  me  Notarium  publicumjul)jcriptum  de  mandato  dominorum  conjilij 
et  eorundem  decret  tc"  Tertio  die  inenjis  aprilis  anno  Domini  tc-  h'xvj" 
tejiantibus  meisjigno  etfubfcriptione  manualibusjic fubfcribitur  • 

R  •  Scott  • 


18  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

Jjond  betwixt  certain  Noblemen  "tc  and  Sir  James  Balfour  keeper  of 
the  Caftle  of  Edinburgh  •     (A  copy.) 

22  W  e  Erles  Lordis  baronis  and  otheris  vnderfubl'crivand  of  the  Nobilite 
having  refpeft  that  the  Quenis  hienes  maft  noble  perfoun  wes  apprehendit 
be  the  erll  Bothvell  vpon  the  day  of  Aprill  /  And  therefter  be  fors 

and  violence  off  armit  men  convoyit  to  the  caftell  of  Dunbarre  /  there 
deteynit  and  kepit  in  fuir  and  ferm  ward  be  the  faid  erll  /  be  the  fpace  of 
dayes  '  In  likmaner  hir  Grace  being  Invyronit  allwele  be  a  num- 
ber of  men  of  were  as  be  the  haill  frendis  of  the  laid  erll  Bothvell  boddin 
in  armour  wes  convoyit  from  place  to  place  in  fik  parts  as  he  haid  maft 
dominion  and  power  to  command  /  during  the  quhilk  fpace  that  the  faid 
erll  haid  hir  maft  noble  perfoun  in  the  thraldome  abone  fpecifyit  hir 
Majeftie  being  onlie  accumpanyit  with  a  few  number  of  hir  domeftick 
fervandis  /  he  ceaffit  not  be  all  waves  and  unleifTum  meanis  to  feduce  hir 
Grace  to  ane  unlefuU  and  unhoneft  marriage  /  quhilk  from  the  begynning 
is  null  and  of  na  effed  for  fik  caufes  as  ar  notourlie  alfwele  knawin  to 
other  realmes  as  to  ws  •  The  Nobilite  and  inhabitantis  of  this  our  native 
cuntre  in  lykwyes  being  informit  that  the  faid  erll  as  git  remanis  in  his 
maft  wickit  intentioun  and  ferra  purpos  to  kepe  our  foverannis  perfoun 
in  the  thraldom  and  fubieftioun  forl'aid  /  invyronit  with  men  of  weir  and 
his  frendis  /  fvvay  that  nane  of  the  Nobilite  of  hir  Grace  realm  may 
refort  to  hir  prefens  to  knaw  hir  mynd  without  thair  maft  extreme  and 
utter  danger  quherthrow  he  intendis  to  utterlie  rwyn  and  decay  the 
guid  fame  and  brute  of  our  derraft  foveran  liberte  of  this  commoun  wele 
and  previledge  grantit  to  the  nobilitie  therof  •  WE  therfor  conftraynit 
upon  neceffitie  hes  oppynnit  this  maft  lamentable  caife  to  S'  James 
Balfour  of  Pettindrech  knycht  dark  of  our  fouerannis  regifter  and  keper 
of  the  caftell  of  Edinburgh  /  quha  being  cairfull  for  the  mifordouris 
above  writtin  /  and  tendering  the  Quenis  Majefties  maft  dangerous  eftate 
and  perill  that  may  come  to  the  commoun  wele  hes  upon  the  lik  zeale 


MARY.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  19 

with  ws  faythfullie  promifit  and  be  the  teunour  herof  promifes  to  ayd 
and  affift  vnto  ws  or  any  part  of  ws  that  fall  interpryes  and  put  ordour 
to  the  preraiffis  with  the  caftell  of  Edinburgh  for  furthering  of  our  enter- 
pryes  devifit  or  to  be  devifit  in  fik  ordour  as  falbe  thocht  expedient  be 
ws  /  and  adione  with  ws  in  all  and  quhatfumeuer  caus  that  we  fall  have 
ado  in  any  tyme  heirefter  •  Providing  alwayes  that  he  may  be  fo  requirit 
as  his  honor  be  faiff  at  our  firft  cuming  to  the  toun  of  Edinburgh  •  In 
Refpe6l  of  the  quhilkis  We  the  perfonis  vnderfubfcrivand  upoun  our 
honour  and  fidelitie  and  be  the  tennour  herof  bindis  and  obliges  ws  that 
we  fall  tak  efald  and  plane  part  with  the  faid  S'  James  in  all  and  quhat- 
fumeuer his  adiouns  that  he  hes  haid  to  do  befor  the  dait  of  thefe  pre- 
fentes  and  fall  defend  and  mantene  him  therintill  aganis  all  dedlie  •  And 
fiklik  fall  in  all  tyme  cuming  concurre  and  aflift  to  him  in  furthfetting  of 
any  thing  that  falbe  for  the  furtherans  and  advancement  of  this  com- 
moun  wele  /  and  promote  him  in  any  eftate  therintill  that  he  falbe  meit 
for  and  fpeciallie  fall  mantean  him  in  the  keping  of  the  caftell  of  Edin- 
burgh •  And  ficlik  fall  aflift  fortefie  mantean  and  defend  him  in  all  his 
awin  particuler  caufes  and  a6tions  quhatfumeuer  in  all  tyme  herefter 
aganis  all  dedelie  for  fuir  obferving  and  keping  of  the  premiffis  on  his 
part  the  faid  S"^  James  fall  upon  the  requifitioun  of  the  Lordis  /  and  terme 
being  appointit  for  the  faid  interpryes  delyuer  in  pledge  and  hoftage 
vnto  the  nobilitie  vnderfubfcrivand  the  perfons  maft  deir  and  tender  to 
him  in  all  the  wardill  to  remane  in  quhat  place  falbe  thocht  neidfull  and 
meit  be  the  faidis  Lordis  ay  and  quhill  the  performans  of  the  premiffis 
or  quhill  they  be  frede  and  relevit  be  the  faidis  Lordis  •  In  witnes  of  the 
quhilkis  we  the  faidis  erles  Lordis  and  barronis  and  alfua  the  laid  S' 
James  hes  fubfcrivit  thir  prefentes  with  our  handis  At  the 

day  of  1567  • 

Dalkeyth  Creichtoun  and  Melros  wilbe 
very  handfum  dwellingis  for  them  • 


20  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

A  Letter  from  England  concerning  the  murder  of  King  Henry  Darnley. 

23  Having  the  commodity  of  this  bearer  Mr.  Clark,  I  tho't  good  to  write  a 
few  words  unto  you.  I  have  rec*  fome  writs  from  you,  and  fome  I  have 
feen  lately  fent  others  from  you,  as  namely  to  the  Earl  of  Bedford  of  the 
l6th  of  May.  I  have  participat  the  contents  thereof  to  fuch  as  I  thought 
meet,  this  mekle  I  can  affure  you ;  the  intelligence  given  hithere  by  the 
French  was  untrue,  for  there  was  not  one  Papift  nor  Proteftant  which 
did  not  confent  that  juftice  fliould  be  done,  be  the  Queen  my  fov""  aid 
and  I'upport,  againft  fuch  as  had  committed  that  abominable  ill  murder 
in  your  country  ;  but  to  fay  truth,  the  lack  and  coldnefs  did  not  rife  from 
fuch  as  were  called  to  council,  but  from  fuch  as  fliould  give  life  and  execu- 
tion thereunto.  And  further,  I  affure  you,  I  never  knew  no  matter  of  eftate 
proponed  which  had  fo  many  favourers  of  all  forts  of  nations  as  this  had  : 
yea,  I  can  fay  unto  you,  no  man  promoted  the  matter  with  greater  affec- 
tion than  the  Spanifli  ambaffador.  And  fure  I  am  that  no  man  dare 
openly  be  of  any  other  mind,  but  to  affirm  that  whofoever  is  guilty  of 
this  murder,  handfafted  with  advoutre,  is  unworthy  to  live.  I  fliall  not 
need  to  tell  you,  which  be  our  letts,  and  stays  from  all  good  things  here. 
You  are  acquainted  with  them  as  well  as  I.  Neds  I  muft  confefs,  that 
howfoever  we  omit  occafions  of  benefit,  honour,  and  furety ;  it  behoveth 
your  whole  nobility,  and  namely  fuch  as  before  and  after  the  murder 
were  deemed  to  allow  of  Bodwell,  to  profecute  with  fword  and  juftice  the 
punifliment  of  thofe  abominable  a6ls,  though  we  lend  you  but  a  cold  aid, 
and  albeit  you,  and  divers  others,  both  honourable  and  honeft,  be  well 
known  to  me,  and  fundry  others  here,  to  be  juftifiable  in  all  their  aftions 
and  doings  ;  yet  think  not  the  contrary  but  your  whole  nation  is  blemilhed 
and  infamit  by  thefe  doings  which  lately  paffed  among  you.  What  we 
(hall  do  I  know  not,  neither  do  I  write  unto  you  affuredly,  for  we  be 
fubjefb  unto  many  mutations,  and  yet  I  think  we  fliall  either  aid  you,  or 
continue  in  the  defence  and  fafeguard  of  your  Prince,  fo  as  it  appear  to 


MARY.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  21 

us  that  you  mean  his  fafeguard  indeed,  and  not  to  run  the  fortune  of 
France,  which  will  be  your  own  deftruclion  if  you  be  unadviled.  I  know 
not  one,  no  not  one  of  any  quality  or  eftate  in  this  country,  which  does 
allow  of  the  Queen  your  fovereign,  but  would  gladly  the  world  were  rid 
of  her,  fo  as  the  fame  were  done  without  farther  flander,  that  is  to  fay  by 
ordinary  juflice.     This  I  fend  the  23d  of  May. 


Declaration  by  the  Queen  on  the  flate  of  the  Realme  •     (A  copy.) 

Apud  Edinburgh  quarto  die  menjis  Junij  anno  Domini  millefimo 
quingentejimo  Sexagejimofoptimo  • 

24  -L  he  Quenis  Maieftie  confidering  and  thinking  vpoun  hir  awin  eftait  and 
the  governament  of  this  hir  hienes  realme  owir  the  quhilk  alniychtie  God 
hes  placit  hir  fupreme  heid  and  lauchfuU  inheritour  And  with  that  calling 
to  mynd  quhat  gret  alterationis  and  flrange  accidentis  hes  fra  tyme  to 
tyme  occurrit  during  hir  Maiefties  regnne  hot  maifl  fpeciallie  fen  hir 
hienes  arryvall  and  returning  in  this  realme  and  taking  of  the  manyment 
and  governament  of  the  eflParis  thairof  in  hir  awin  perfoun  quhilk  all 
(prayfit  be  God)  ar  happelie  quietit  and  fet  doun  be  hir  Maieftie  (God 
fa  Weill  profpering  the  wei'k  in  hir  handis)  alfweill  to  hir  awin  honour  as 
to  the  fatiffadioun  and  contentment  of  all  hir  gude  fubieftis  That  in  all 
this  tyme  of  hir  Maiefties  awin  prefens  fen  hir  laid  arryvall  thay  haif 
neuir  felt  the  force  of  foreyn  Innemeis  hot  levit  in  gud  peace  nor  git 
bene  owirthrawin  be  the  auftouris  of  ony  domeftik  feditionis  that  hes 
nocht  bene  fpedely  dantonit  and  puniflit  for  thair  demerites  And  fua 
thay  may  iuftlie  compair  thair  eftait  in  this  hir  Maiefties  regnne  to  the 
maift  happy  tyme  that  hes  occurrit  in  mannis  memorie  hot  as  Inv}'  is 
enemy  to  vertew  and  that  feditious  and  unquiet  fpreitis  euir  fekis  occa- 
fioun  to  Interteny  trouble  and  vnquietnes  Sa  can  hir  Maieftie  neuir  mein 
fa  fincerlie  and  vprichtlie  nor  neuir  direft.  hir  doingis  fa  perfytly  hot 


22  OEIGINAL  PAPEES  [sec.  xvi. 

infted  of  thankfull  hartis  and  gud  obedience  hir  hienes  clemencie  is  com- 
monlie  abufit  and  recompanfit  with  tbrawartnes  and  Ingratitud  And 
quhen  fcho  thinkis  leift  of  ony  nouatioun  Euir  fum  Inuentioun  or  vtheris 
brocht  in  and  the  pepill  perfuadit  to  beleif  it  i  as  that  hir  hienes  cair  of 
this  conimoun  weill  wer  tint  That  hir  Maieftie  menit  to  fubuert  the  lawis 
to  reieft  the  counfell  and  affiftance  of  hir  nobilitie  and  to  handle  all 
thingis  without  ony  difcretioun  contrar  the  ancient  cuftoum  Bot  laft[lie] 
that  is  maift  grievous  and  offenfive  of  all  that  the  health  preferuatioun 
lure  cuftodie  and  governament  of  hir  maift  deir  and  only  fone  the  prince 
now  in  his  infancie  wer  negleftit  be  hir  hienes  and  na  fie  attendance  haid 
thairto  as  appertenit  And  befidis  this  the  malice  of  fum  hes  bene  fo  greit 
That  quhair  as  hir  hienes  with  avys  of  hir  counfall  laitlie  fet  out  procla- 
mationis  Commanding  hir  fubieftis  in  certane  cuntreis  of  the  realme  To 
be  in  redines  and  convene  for  perfute  of  the  rebellious  and  difobedient 
fubieftis  of  Liddifdall  by  quhome  the  trew  lieges  ar  havelie  oppreffit  It 
hes  bene  murmurit  and  put  in  the  heidis  of  the  pepill  that  thay  forces 
wer  to  be  convenit  for  vther  purpofis  that  neuir  enterit  in  hir  hienes 
mynd  flPor  in  making  of  the  faidis  proclamationis  hir  Maieftie  haid  na 
coullorat  meaning  nor  na  vther  purpos  in  held  nor  is  planelie  mentionat 
in  the  fame  As  the  lucces  will  weill  declair  Quhilkis  vntrew  reportis  and 
opprobious  calumnys  fa  neirlie  tuicheis  hir  Majeftie  That  conftranitlie  it 
behuvis  hir  to  gif  plane  declaratioun  of  hir  mynd  and  part  to  all  hir  gude 
fubieftis  To  the  efl'ecl  that  thai  being  certifeit  of  the  veritie  may  be  re- 
foluit  of  all  dout  and  fecludand  errour  may  ftay  thamefelves  on  the  treuth 
for  firft  as  God  knawis  hir  mj'nd  fcho  neuir  menit  the  lubuerfioun  of  the 
[lawis]  in  na  Jote  bot  rather  hes  mantenit  thame  Quhat  is  abill  to  be 
obie6bit  that  euir  hir  Maieftie  tuke  on  hand  vnconfultit  be  the  noble  men 
hir  counfale  And  in  quhat  point  hes  hir  hienes  handlit  ony  manor  of 
thing  in  the  publift.  effiiris  by  the  cuftome  of  hir  maift  noble  progeni- 
touris  men  that  ar  godlie  and  hes  difcretioun  may  juge  and  tyme  will 
manifeft  it  to  the  haile  ^varld  And  for  hir  derreft  fone  Of  quhome  fall  hir 
Maieftie  be  cairfuU  gif  fcho  negleft  him  that  is  fo  deir  to  hir  On  quhais 


MARY.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  23 

gude  fucces  hir  fpeciall  joy  confiftis  And  without  quhora  hir  Maieftie 
culd  neuir  think  hir  felf  in  gude  eftait  bot  comfortles  all  the  da^is  of  hir 
life  And  git  feing  men  now  this  biffy  in  his  infancie  to  ground  the  occa- 
fioun  of  thair  particulariteis  on  his  perfoun  It  may  be  thocht  quhat  thai 
wald  pretend  gif  he  war  of  mature  aige  Bot  as  God  hes  hard  hir  prayeris 
and  the  prayeris  of  hir  pepill  in  granting  fie  happie  yffue  and  lucceffioun 
of  hir  body  efter  hir  life  to  pofTes  and  Inioy  this  kingdome  Sa  fall  hir 
Maiefties  moderlie  affedlioun  towartis  him  appeir  euidentlie  that  na  thing 
requifite  for  his  nutriture  cuflody  Intertenement  and  preferuatioun  falbe 
forget  And  with  that  he  committit  to  fie  governance  as  vthiris  princeis 
of  this  realme  In  thair  Infancie  hes  bene  accuftomed  in  tymis  bigane 
That  in  proces  of  tyme  the  a6touris  of  fie  fals  reportis  aither  in  previe  or 
patent  fall  worthelie  accus  thame  felves  of  vntreuth  and  find  thame  felfis 
frufl;rat  of  thair  Inventionis  And  hir  Maieft;eis  cair  towart  hir  realme  and 
naturall  lyf  and  Inteir  affeftioun  towart  hir  faid  derrefl;  fone  fall  manifefl; 
the  felf  As  it  is  in  effe6l  to  the  haill  warld  And  that  letteris  be  direft  for 
publicatioun  heirof  In  dew  forme  as  efFeris  • 


Order  by  the  Privy  Council  to  John  Mowbray  of  Bernbougall  ■ 

Apud  Edinburgh  xj  Junij  Anno  Donwii  Y^  V°  Ixvij  ■ 
25  ihe  quhilk  day  the  Lordis  of  Secrete  Counfell  having  herd  how  that 
diverfe  of  the  nobilitie  and  utheris  hes  prefentlie  joynit  thame  felflSs 
togidder  in  armour  and  as  is  brutit  purpofing  to  ly  about  the  place  of 
Borthuik  quhairin  the  Quenis  Majefl,ie  is  at  this  prelent  And  to  invaid 
and  aflege  hir  hienes  maift;  noble  perfoun  within  the  faid  cafl;ell  And 
becaus  it  is  uncertane  upoun  quhat  purpofe  and  occafioun  thai  have  con- 
venit  at  this  tyme  And  gif  ony  thing  be  menit  be  thame  towart  the  Quenis 
Majefl;ies  perfoun  or  utherwayes  Thairfore  hes  ordanit  this  berare  Johne 
Moubray  of  Bernbougall  To  pas  defire  and  inquire  of  thame  To  declair 
to  quhat  purpos  and  upon  quhat  motioun  and  occafioun  thai  have  con- 


24  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

venit  thamefelffis  togidder  at  this  tyme  and  quhat  Is  meanit  be  thame 
towart  the  Quenis  Majefties  perfoun  And  gif  thai  will  declair  that  thing 
quherin  ordoure  aucht  and  fall  be  takin  for  eftablifliing  of  gude  reuU  and 
quietnes  in  the  cuntrie  that  upoun  thair  advertifment  and  declaratioun 
the  Lordis  of  Secret  Counfell  now  prefent  in  Edinburgh  ar  reddy  with 
the  Quenis  Majefties  advife  and  in  hir  hienes  name  To  conveine  and  tak 
fik  reafonable  ordour  therintill  as  may  ftand  for  eftabliftieing  and  prefer- 
vatioun  of  the  commoun  weill  tranquillite  and  quietnes  and  avoiding  of  all 
Inconvenientis  And  forther  to  declair  unto  tharae  his  credite  as  Is  fchawin 
be  toung  • 

P  •  Hewatt  de  mandato  Dominorum  Secreti  C'onjilij  • 


Act  for  fequeftrating  the   Quenis  Maiefties  perfon   and  detening  the 
fame  in  the  hous  and  place  of  Lochleven  • 

Apvd  Edinhirgh  decimojexto  die  menjis  Junii  Anno  Domini  millejimo 
quingentejimo  Jexagefimofoptimo  . 

26  X*  orfamekle  as  efter  the  fchamfull  and  horrible  murther  of  umquhile  the 
King  the  Quenis  Majefties  late  hutband  /  hir  Majeftie  being  revift  with 
the  Erll  Boithuile  principall  and  chief  authour  of  the  faid  murther  and 
therefter  Joynit  with  him  in  maift  ungodlie  and  diflionnorable  maner 
under  the  name  of  ane  pretendit  mariage  Continewing  in  that  ftate  to 
the  evident  dangeir  of  the  innocent  perfoun  of  our  native  Princes  lyff  / 
and  owerthraw  and  diftru6tion  of  the  nobilitie  and  haill  ftate  of  this 
common  weill  /  quhill  on  juft  neceffitie  it  behuvit  the  nobilitie  and  utheris 
faithfull  fubjeftis  to  tak  armes  for  punifment  and  revenge  of  the  faid 
murther  /  Aganis  quhome  come  the  faid  erll  Boithuile  /  leidand  the 
Quenis  Majeftie  in  his  cumpany  /  and  fchadoand  his  murther  and  utheris 
wicket  enormiteis  fra  piraifment  with  the  cloik  of  hir  au6loritie  /  And 
refufand  fingular  combatt  /  fled  and  efchapit  himfelf  /  Hir  Majeftie  in  the 


MArjY.]  or  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  25 

mentyme  willinglie  cuming  in  the  cumpany  of  hir  faid  nobilitie  and 
faithfull  fubjeftis  fra  Carbarry  hill  to  Edinburgh  /  quhair  efter  they  had 
oppinnit  and  declarit  unto  hir  hienes  hir  awin  eftait  and  condicioun  /  and 
the  raiferable  eftait  of  this  realme  /  with  the  dangeir  that  hir  deareft  fone 
the  Prince  ttude  in  /  Requirand  that  flie  wald  fuffer  and  command  the 
faid  murther  and  authouris  therof  to  be  punift  /  Fand  in  hir  Majeftie  fie 
untowardnes  and  repugnance  thairto  /  That  rather  fche  apperit  to  fortefie 
and  mantene  the  faid  erll  Boithuile  and  his  complices  in  the  faidis  wickit 
crymes  /  nor  to  fufFer  iuftice  pas  forwart  /  Quhairthrow  gif  hir  Hienes 
fuld  be  left  in  that  ftate  to  follow  hir  awin  Inordinat  paflioun  /  it  wald 
not  faill  to  fucceid  to  the  final  confufioun  and  exterminioun  of  the  haill 
realme  /  Sua  that  efter  mature  confultatioun  be  commoun  advyfe  /  IT  is 
thocht  convenient  /  concludit  and  decernit  i  that  hir  Majefties  perlbun  be 
fequeftrat  fra  all  Ibcietie  of  the  faid  erll  Boithuile  /  and  fra  all  having  of 
intelligence  with  him  or  ony  utheris  quhairby  he  may  have  ony  comfort 
to  efchaip  dew  punifment  for  his  demeritis  /  And  finding  na  place  mair 
meitt  nor  commodious  for  hir  Majeftie  to  remane  into  Nor  the  hous  and 
place  of  Lochlevin  /  Ordanis  conimandis  and  chargeis  Patrik  Lord  Lind- 
fay  of  the  Byris  Williame  Lord  Ruthven  and  William  Douglas  of  Loch- 
levin To  pas  and  convoy  hir  Majeftie  to  the  faid  place  of  Lochlevin  /  and 
the  faid  Lard  to  reffave  hir  thairin  /  and  thair  thay  and  every  ane  of 
thame  to  keip  hir  Majeftie  fuirlie  within  the  faid  place  /  and  on  na  wyfe 
to  fuffer  hir  pas  furth  of  the  fame  /  or  to  have  intelligence  fra  ony  maner 
of  perfonis  Or  yit  to  fend  advertifmentis  or  direct  hir  intelligence  with 
ony  levand  perfonis  '  except  in  ther  awin  prefence  and  audience  Or  be 
the  commandiment  and  dire6tioun  of  the  Lordis  underfubfcrivand  or  ane 
part  of  thame  reprefenting  the  counfall  at  Edinburgh  or  utherwife  quhair 
thai  fall  refort  for  the  tyme  As  thai  will  anfuer  to  God  and  upon  thair 
dewitie  to  the  commoun  weill  of  this  cuntrie  Kepand  thir  prefentis  for 
thair  warrand  /  Attour  the  faidis  Lordis  and  utheris  underfubfcrivand  / 
obliffis  thame  and  ther  airis  faithfullie  and  promittis  to  the  faid  Patrik 
Lord  Lyndefay  Williame  Lord  Ruthven  William  Douglas  of  Lochlevin  / 

d 


26  OKIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xm. 

and  thair  airis  To  releve  and  keip  thame  (kaithles  of  the  reffaving  kep- 
ing  and  detenying  of  the  Quenis  Majefties  perfoun  in  maner  foirfaid 
And  to  fortefie  mantene  and  defend  thame  fra  all  levand  creatures  that 
in  the  law  or  by  the  law  wald  prefume  to  perfew  or  Invade  thame  for  the 
famyn  • 

AtHOLL  •  MoRTOUN  • 

Glencarne  •  Mar  • 

J  •  Grahame  •  Alex"^  ■  L  •  HwME  • 

Sanquhar  •  Sympyl  • 
wchiltre  • 


^  otarial  Proteft  at  the  Caftle  of  Lochleven  by  William  Douglas  of  Loch- 
leven  in  the  prefence  of  the  Queen  • 

27  oanaiffimo  chrifti  Inuocato  Nomine  Amen  per  hoc  prefens  publicum 
Inftrumentura  Cunftis  Innotefcat  quod  Anno  Incarnacionis  dominice 
miUefimo  quingentefinio  fexagefimo  feptimo  menfis  vero  Julij  die  vige- 
finio  oftauo  Indiftione  decima  Anno  Regnj  ferenifTime  Regine  fcotorum 
Marie  Anno  vigefimo  quarto  In  mei  notam  publice  et  tedium  fubfcrip- 
torum  prefencia  Perfonaliter  conftitutus  Nobilis  vir  Willielmus  Douglace 
de  lochlevin  acceffit  ad  perlbnalem  prcfenciam  prefate  fupreme  domine 
noftre  Marie  Eegine  fcotorum  prout  fequitur  in  wlgari  And  ther  exponit 
and  declarit  to  hir  Majeftie  how  It  wes  cumin  to  his  knawlege  that  hir 
hienes  being  within  his  houfe  had  be  hir  lettres  fubfcriuit  be  hir  hand 
dimittit  and  ourgevin  hir  croun  and  auftorite  In  fauouris  of  hir  fone  the 
prince  /  without  the  faid  Williamis  knawlege  /  And  alfua  he  wes  Informit 
that  the  nobilite  and  certane  vtberis  eftatis  of  the  realme  war  paft  to 
Striuiling  according  to  hir  hienes  faid  commandiment  to  croun  the  prince 
and  Inveft  hym  in  this  kyngdome  /  And  therfore  defirit  hir  Maieftie  fen 
he  wes  ignorant  of  hir  preceding  and  of  the  fubfcriptione  of  the  faidis 
lettres  to  the  quhilk  hir  grace  anfurit  that  he  was  abfent  that  culd  not 


MAR  v.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  27 

Ijnaw  hir  Maiefties  preceding  nor  fubfcription  and  maid  na  compulfion 
nor  coa6tione  therto  noder  be  word  nor  deid  And  than  the  iaid  William 
faid  that  it  wald  pleife  hir  hienes  to  pas  to  ftriueling  and  ther  declair 
frelie  hir  awin  plefour  and  will  quhair  vnto  he  offerit  hym  to  convoy  hir 
hienes  Quha  anfurit  that  for  the  prefent  fche  culd  nocht  be  prepairit  to  pas 
thair  hot  defirit  the  faid  William  that  fche  micht  remane  in  his  place 
and  vfe  hir  felf  at  hir  eas  and  quietnes  as  fche  has  done  heir  to  fore 
AflSrmand  the  lettres  quhilkis  fche  fubfcriuit  to  the  effeft,  abone  writtin 
to  be  of  propir  motive  quhilkis  fche  now  as  of  before  the  fubfcription 
therof  ratifiit  and  apprevit  In  refpeft  therof  the  faid  Williame  proteftit 
that  hir  maieftie  fuld  not  be  comptit  heireftir  as  captiue  or  in  prefon  with 
hym  Quhilk  proteftation  hir  Maieftie  allowit  and  admittit  De  et  fuper 
quibus  omnibus  et  fingulis  premifRs  fepefatus  Willielmus  Douglace  A  me 
notario  publico  fubnotato  fibi  fieri  et  tradi  peciit  hoc  prefens  publicum 
Inftrumentum  fiue  plura  publica  Inftrumenta  Afta  erant  hec  apud  Loch- 
levin  horam  circiter  vndecimam  ante  merediem  ....  fub  Anno  die  menfe 
Indidione  et  regnj  antediclis  quibus  fupra  Prefentibus  Ibidem  honorabi- 

libus  viris  videlicet  Thoma  Difchinton  de  Ardrofs  Dau 

penfionario  de  breching  Georgio  Douglace  et  thoma  cherie  notario  publico 
teftibus  ad  premiffa  vocatis  pariter  et  Rogatis  tc"  • 

Et  ego  Joannes  feyrn  prefbiter  fanftiandree  diocefeos  publicus  facra 
aufitoritate  apoftolica  notarius  ac  dominos  per  confilij  admifius 
Quia  premiffis  omnibus  et  fingulis  dum  fie  vt  premittitur  dicerentur 
agerentur  et  fierent  vnacum  prenominatis  teftibus  prefens  per- 
fonaliter  interfui  Eaque  omnia  et  fingula  fie  fieri  vidi  dici  et 
audiui  ac  in  notam  fumpfi  Ideoque  hoc  publicum  Inftrumentum 
manu  mea  propria  fideliter  fcriptum  exinde  confeci  et  in  banc 
publicam  Inftrumenta  formam  redegi  Signoque  nomine  cognomine 
et  fubfcriptione  meis  folitis  et  confuetis  fignauj  fubfcripfi  et  robo- 
raui  In  fidem  et  teftimonium  veritatis  omnium  et  fingulorum  pre- 
mifforum  Rogatus  et  Requifitus  • 
Joannes  Feyrne  notarius  publicus  • 


28  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xm. 

OomraifRon  to  reflave  the  comptis  of  gold  and  filver  ic  • 

James  be  the  grace  of  God  King  of  Scottis  To  all  and  findrie  oure  liegis 
and  fubdittis  to  quhais  knawlege  thir  our  lettres  fall  cum  greting  Wit  ge 
ws  with  expres  confent  and  affent  of  oure  derreft  coufing  James  Erll  of 
Murray  Lord  Abernethie  regent  to  ws  oure  realme  and  liegis  to  have 
gevin  grantit  and  committit  and  be  thir  our  lettres  gevis  grantis  and 
committis  oure  full  power  '^c"  to  William  Maitland  of  Lithingtoun 
goungar  oure  Secretare  Maifter  Robert  Richertfoun  Comniendatare  of 
San6t  Marie  He  oure  Thefaurare  Sir  Johne  Bellenden  of  Auchnowle 
Knycht  Clerk  of  oure  Jufticiarie  and  David  Fores  Generall  of  our 
Cunjiehous  Or  ony  thrie  of  thame  conjundlie  To  reflave  and  fycht  the 
Comptis  of  all  gold  and  filver  reflTavit  be  oure  traifl;  coufing  and  coun- 
falour  James  erll  of  Mortoun  Lord  of  Dalkeyth  fra  the  Queue  our  derreft 
Moderis  fervandis  or  utherwayis  fen  the  tent  day  of  Junij  laft  bipaft 
to  the  dait  heirof  To  charge  difcharge  and  perfyte  and  fute  the  faidis 
comptis  and  the  famyn  attentiklie  to  fubfcrive  Ic"  Gevin  under  our  fignet 
and  I'ubfcrivit  be  oure  faid  derreft  coufing  and  regent  At  Edinburgh  the 
xiij  day  of  October  And  of  oure  regnne  the  firft  geir  1567  • 


// <*J4^4-U^  -vO- v>^^v4^/^ 


«J  ames  Earl  of  Murray  Regent  to  The  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

29  Ijroder  efter  our  hertlie  commendatioun  /  We  haif  writtin  to  Farny  for 
ane  buk  and  to  Cleiflie  to  gar  fend  j-ow  a  twn  of  wyne  /  As  to  George 
Pyngill  althocht  we  think  ther  be  na  Inconvenient  /  howbeit  he  pas  furth 
or  tary  In  at  his  plefure  '  ^h  quhill  our  Returning  fra  Dumbertane  and 
hering  of  word  out  of  England  It  is  meitt  that  he  byde  ftill    And  la  ge 


MARY.]  OF  THE  EAELS  OF  MORTON.  29 

fall  declaii-  unto  him  Thus  We  commit  30W  to  God  At  Stirling  In  Turn 
haift  the  iiij  of  Januar  1567  • 

3our  brother 


lmy\r^^'^h^iyK 


Sir  William  Kirkcaldy  of  Grange  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  ■ 

30  R.ycht  honourabill  I  haue  inquyret  quhat  I  cann  to  gett  the  trew  knaw- 
lege  of  all  them  that  wer  of  the  confaill  and  confpyracye  of  the  Quene 
taken  out  of  Lochleavin  and  as  git  I  beleif  I  haue  not  gottin  the  veritye 
of  all  thyngis  but  this  far  is  tauld  me  •  It  wes  anes  myndit  to  haue  tane 
gour  gret  boitt  with  difguyffet  men  and  fa  cum  to  the  place  and  tane  hir 
out  perforce  but  feyng  that  ge  laid  vp  the  gret  boitt  It  wes  anes  devylet 
to  haue  maid  iiij  boittis  that  Ibuld  haue  careit  xl  men  in  the  nycht  and 
lykwys  tane  hir  owt  perforce  feyng  that  this  could  not  tak  eiFe6t  It  wes 
devyffit  to  haue  ftollin  men  in  Sand  Serfis  ynche  and  the  moyen  Ibuld 
haue  be  drawin  be  George  to  haue  caulet  30W  carey  the  Quene  furth  to 
haue  playet  hir  in  the  faid  ynche  Seyng  that  all  thir  iij  tuk  na  effeft  this 
laft  wes  tane  on  hand  and  executed  devyflet  be  the  Quene  lelf  George 
and  the  lad  Willie  and  Curflell  wes  on  the  confaill  quha  relauit  all 
writyngis  meflages  and  takens  fra  Willie  fend  be  George  to  the  Quene  • 
I  can  try  na  may  of  gour  fervandis  to  be  of  this  confaill  /  and  git  I  per- 
faue  Johne  Dryfdaill  to  haue  bene  a  carier  of  bayth  lettres  and  meffages 
fra  hir  but  fa  far  as  I  can  learne  he  wes  not  derefitlye  vpone  the  confaill 
of  hir  way  taking  but  fufpeSed  /  and  that  becaufe  they  did  anes  fpaik  of 
the  gret  bott  to  hym  quhilk  thay  Juget  to  be  revelit  be  hym  but  to  fay 
the  truth  It  apperis  to  me  the  lad  Willie  wes  lang  of  confaill  /  and  it  wes 
confailit  hym  to  tell  gow  that  quhilk  he  tauld  gow  as  to  them  that  cam 
in  cumpany  with  the  Lord  Seiton  I  neid  not  to  tell  gow  their  names  but 


30  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [skc.  xvi. 

James  Wartlaw  wes  their  guyd  and  laid  them  quyetlye  in  the  hill  quhar 
thay  mycht  fe  the  goyng  in  and  out  of  the  boitt  quhen  I  knaw  farther  ^e 
fall  vnderftand  It  and  fa  I  commit  30W  to  the  eternall  at  Edinburgh 
caftell  the  firft  of  Junij 

2ouris  to  his  power 


To  the  Rycht  honorabill 
Lard  of  Lochlewin  . 


The  dwbill  of  the  Letter  fend  to  the  King  of  France  fra  the  Nobilite  for 
our  Soverane  . 

31  Pleife  30ure  Maieftie  to  Reduce  to  your  memorie  how  we  wreit  to  your 
Maieftie  of  the  ewill  handilling  of  our  Ibuerane  Lady  be  certane  of  hir 
wnfaythfuU  and  defaitfull  fubieftis  In  quhom  fcho  had  maift  confidens 
and  had  the  haill  reule  of  hir  eflParis  /  Be  takkin  of  hir  graceis  perfoune 
and  haldyn  in  prefoun  and  takkyn  hir  ftrynthis  mwnitioun  and  all  hir 
ryches  Jouellis  revenuis  and  all  that  fcho  had  and  left  hir  na  thing  / 
And  how  thai  Intend  and  gitt  Intendis  to  Reif  hir  bayth  of  hir  lyf  and 
crown  and  autorite  fene  fcho  efchaipit  furtht  of  thair  handis  and  prefoun  • 
And  at  thatt  tyme  we  maift  humblie  focht  goure  Maiefteis  help  and  fup- 
port  to  hir  /  be  goure  Imbadadoure  S'  de  Bevmond  futtit  to  hir  /  to 
repone  and  ftabilis  hir  Maieftie  In  hir  awin  place  and  autorite  royell 
And  ficlyk  at  thatt  tyme  thair  wes  with  hir  grace  certane  of  ws  hir  nobilite 
quhay  evir  hes  and  wilbe  hir  faythfull  fubieftis  at  all  tymes  /  be  quhom 
hir  grace  defyrit  to  be  convoyit  of  Hamiltoun  to  ane  of  hir  awin  ftrynthis 
callit  Dumbartane  (albeit  the  greiteft  part  of  hir  nobilite  with  thair 
forces  hir  graceis  faworaris  and  affifterris  wes  nocht  cumit  to  hir)  And  be 
the  way  the  Erie  of  Murray  and  certane  wnnaturall  and  Inobedient 
fubieftis  be  his  and  thair  confpyraceis  lay  In  the  way  for  hir  diftruftioun 


MARY.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  31 

and  flauchter  or  fcho  niycht  half  pad  to  Dumbartane  quhair  be  the 
temerite  and  rafchenes  of  goung  men  /  and  Incircumfpeft  conditt  of  our 
folkis  thair  wes  fum  lytill  defait  of  ane  part  therof  to  lytill  effe6l  /  Except 
takkin  and  haldin  in  captyve  fum  of  our  pryncipell  men  /  Quhairby  thair 
freindis  and  feruandis  may  nocht  fa  weill  tak  armoure  to  do  feruice 
Indwrand  the  tyme  of  thair  captiuite  /  And  be  this  ocatioun  Oure  fouer- 
rane  Lady  hes  now  mair  neid  of  goure  Maiefties  help  and  fupple  with 
gour  forces  nor  of  befoir  •  And  als  fcho  Is  cumit  In  proper  perfoun 
ongaitvort  In  Ingland  to  gour  Maiellie  for  to  feik  goure  Maiefties  help 
and  affiftans  •  And  fen  goure  Maieftie  forbearis  hes  ay  bein  proteftouris 
and  defenderis  of  this  our  realme  and  ane  auld  leig  therapoun  betuix 
tham  •  Now  at  this  prefent  We  will  maift  humblie  fwte  at  goure  Maiefties 
hand  to  fchaw  and  declair  In  deid  goure  aflFe6tionat  kyndnes  tovert  this 
realme  In  haifte  niakkin  of  fupport  to  the  releif  of  our  Ibuerrane  that 
It  may  be  knaving  till  all  contrayis  and  nationis  that  ge  will  Ichaw  gour 
pryncelie  favouris  In  furtht  fetting  of  our  fouerrane  and  mantenying  of 
hir  In  hir  neceffite  Quhairthrow  that  gif  goure  Maieftie  fall  haif  ado 
with  oure  feruice  in  ony  tymes  cuming  /  We  falbe  redde  to  wair  our 
guddis  and  bodeis  In  goure  Maiefties  fervice  As  findre  of  our  forbeyaris 
hes  doun  of  befoir  And  for  our  felfis  we  ar  all  fuUie  delyuert  to  lett  ford- 
wort  our  fouerrane  Lady  to  hir  pryncelie  honour  and  autorite  as  Juft 
heretour  of  this  realme  with  all  our  forces  bayth  of  men  I'ubftans  our 
landis  and  lyffis  •  And  that  goure  Maiefties  help  and  fupport  be  heir  with 
all  dilligens  In  fchort  tyme  maift  humblie  we  defyre  /  This  eftir  our  maift 
humlie  commendatioun  of  our  feruice  /  Prayis  almichty  God  to  preferue 
goure  Maieftie      Of  Dunnoun  the 


Lietter  to  the  Duik  of  Alva  fra  the  Nobilitie  for  our  Soverane  • 

32    A-d  Celfitudinem  veftram  dum  has  literulas  damus  /  lUuftriffime  prin- 
ceps  /  hoc  tantum  In  votis  habemus  /  vt  quam  Indigne  /  ne  dicam  Im- 


32  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xm. 

maniter   et  barbare   princeps   noflva   Scotorum   Regina  /  ab   Anglorum 

regiiia  traftata  fit  et  detenta  notum  et  compertum  habeas  •  Noftra  fiquidem 

regina  (alterius  Illeda  multiplicibus  poUicitis  /  partim  Scriptis  /  partim 

ab  oratoris  fui  ore  prolatis  /  de  tutela  /  auxilio  /  et  proteclione  Ipfius  / 

contra  fuos   quofdam    feditiofos  hoftes  /  rebelles  et   confpiratores  <  qui 

dolofe  et  proditorie  manus  Iceleratas  In  ipfam  coniecerunt  /  Incarceratam 

diu  detinuerunt  /  arces  et  fortalicia  dolls  et  technis  Interceperunt  /  Scep- 

truni  et  autboritatem  eius  regalem  vfurpauerunt  /  eique  affiftentes  occi- 

derunt)  eandem  In  angliam  Ingrefia  eft  /  vt  Iliac  proficifceretur  In  Gal- 

liam  et  Hifpaniam  •  Nihilominus  regina  noftra  Illic  adhuc  moram  trahente  ' 

altera  quam  pro  forore  habuit  refcidit  pacta  et  conuenta  /  Sic  ut  per  ilia 

ftaret  quo  minus  regina  noftra  /  aut  maieftatis  fue  oratores  per  angliam 

proficifcerentur  in  galliam  vel  vt  ipfa  tuta  et  Incolumis  In  natale  folum 

repedaret  atque  rediret  Id  quod  principibus  omnibus  Inuifum  odiofum  et 

abominabile    effe    debet    dum    audiunt    roginam    a   regina    fpe   pollicite 

amicitie  tam  Inimice   [dejtineri  •  Quocirca  •  C  •  veftram  fiippliciter  ob- 

teftamur  /  vtpote  In  quem  Regine  nol'[tre]  fpes  tota  ynclinata  recumbit 

vt   caufam   eius   tam   lachrymabilem   fedulo   perpendas  /  et   vt   Scribas 

efficaciter  ad  Anglic  reginam  /  Remque  ipfam  ob  oculos  magnificentiffirai 

Hifpaniarum  regis  proponas  /  quatenus  Ipfe  pro  regina  noftra  cum  Anglie 

regina  Uteris  agat  afperrimis  /  vt  vel  eius  aufpiciis  libertate  donetur  ut 

citra  Impedimentum   In   galliam  fi   velit  proficift;atur  /  vel   In  patriam 

luam  reuertatur   •  Principum  revera  eft   principibus   opitulari   [potius] 

quam  oppreffos  et  pef[funda]tos  remorari  et  in  arfta  cuftodia  concludere 

[Nunquam  n]os  fugit  qua  formidabilis  quam  que  terribilis  fit  •  C  •  veftra 

reo-ine  anglorum  /  et  Literis  tuis  [amicifi'Jimis  non  mediocre  calcar  illi 

addetur  •  Leftis  Interim  literis  veftris  aliorumque  principum  Adifque  et 

procefiibus  quibus   vfa   eft  in   Regine   noftre   maieftatem   /  longe  Infra 

rep-alem  honorem   et  dignitatem  /  ad  amuffim    trutinatis    et  perpenfis  ' 

movebit  ipfam   baud   dubie  vt   regine   noftre   Iter   patefaciat  vt  libere 

reo-ni    fui    limites    egredi    poflit   •    Quia   fi    Amplitudo    veftra    regine 

noftre  excellentiara  tantam  profequatur  gratitudine  /  Nos  qui  Maieftati 


JAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  33 

eius  per  omnia  obfequimur  perpetuo  •  C  •  veftre  obnoxios  effeceris  • 
Itidem  ardentiffimis  votis  humilime  precamur  ut  nobis  prefidio  efle 
veils  /  militibus  aliquot  et  munitionibus  bellicis  hue  miffis  ad  regine 
noflre  fublimitatem  ad  recuperandas  expugnandalque  arces  Ipfius  /  que 
ab  eius  aduerfariis  fallaciter  Intercipiebantur  •  Apud  Largis  penultimo 
die  raenfis  Julij  1568  • 

Per  veftre  illuftriffime  celfitudinis 
obfequitiffimos  • 


J.  his  prefent  Is  to  certifie  gour  •  C  •  of  the  wncurtis  and  Inhumane 
handilling  (ne  dicam  barbaricam)  of  our  fouerrane  the  Quenis  Maieftie 
of  Scotland  be  the  Queue  of  Ingland  •  Quha  wnder  the  hoip  of  the  greit 
and  monifauld  promis  of  the  faid  Quein  of  Ingland  bayth  be  wrytingis 
and  hir  Imbaffadouris  fpeikin  of  the  fupple  affiftans  and  mantennyng  of 
hir  agane  ane  certane  of  hir  awyne  rebellis  and  confpiratouris  (that  had 
falflie  be  treffoun  pwt  handis  in  hir  pevfoun  and  lang  haldin  in  captiuite 
takin  of  hir  ftrynthis  /  wfurpyng  of  hir  authorite  and  crovne  and  flaying 
of  hir  men  afliftant  to  hir)  Intrat  In  Ingland  to  haif  cumit  throucht  to 
France  and  to  Spauge  •  Nochttheles  our  Quein  being  within  that  realme  / 
the  fair  promeffis  wer  brokkin  and  forget  fa  that  fcho  wald  noder  tholl 
our  Quein  to  pas  throw  hir  cuntre  to  France  nor  hir  Imbafladoris  nor  git 
hir  felf  returne  hame  frelie  to  hir  avin  cuntre  as  git  ■  quhilk  is  ane  odius 
thing  to  all  prences  to  heir  fie  wnfrindfull  handilling  wnder  the  promefs 
of  freindfchep  and  kyndnes  •  Quhairfor  We  maift  humblie  befeikis  gour 
C  •  as  he  quhom  Intill  our  Quein  maift  fpecielly  confydis  In  /  to  pondir 
hir  caufe  •  And  to  wreit  exprefle  and  effeftuflie  to  the  Quein  of  Ingland 
(raein  It  to  the  maift  magnifik  the  kyng  of  Hifpan  gour  fouerrane  to  writ 
feharplie  to  the  Quein  of  Ingland)  to  thoill  hir  odir  to  cum  to  France  or 
returne  hyr  to  hir  awin  cuntre  and  nocht  to  ftay  hir  •  quhilk  is  all 
prynees  partis  rather  to  fupport  prynces  that  ar  oppreflit  or  Iniurit  be 
thair  awin  fubieftis  nor  to  hald  thame  captyve  •  We  knaw  the  Quein  of 

e 


34  ORIGINAL  PAPEES  [sec.  xvi. 

Ingland  ftandis  in  gretar  feir  of  gour  •  C  •  and  gour  gud  and  fcharp 
wryting  will  caufs  hir  do  mekill  And  quhen  fcho  feis  gour  •  C  •  letter 
and  wther  prynces  •  And  als  feand  hir  awin  procedingis  tovert  our 
Ibuerane  fa  fer  agane  all  pryncelie  honour  and  dignite  It  will  caufe  hir 
delyuir  our  Quein  owt  of  hir  realme  /  And  gour  •  C  •  doand  this  gratitud 
to  our  Quein  and  fouerrane  fall  addett  ws  that  ar  faythfuU  fervandis  and 
fubiedlis  to  hir  Maieftie  to  gour  feruice  And  als  we  maift  humblie  befeik 
gour  •  C  •  with  help  of  ane  part  of  gour  foldartis  and  mvnitioun  to  our 
fouerane  to  recover  hir  ftrynthis  quhilkis  ar  falflie  tane  be  the  confpyra- 
touris  that  Is  contrar  to  hir  • 


Liord  Hereis  to  the  Archbifliop  of  Sanft  Andrews  • 

33  My  Lord  after  my  hai'tlie  commendationis  of  feruice  I  reflauit  ane 
writtin  of  my  lord  of  ergylis  this  fryday  at  twa  houris  in  the  mornyng 
defyrand  me  to  be  vpone  fonday  in  Glafgo  with  my  freindis  and  folkis 
My  Lord  I  haue  writin  to  his  Lordftiip  that  glalgo  is  far  furth  of  my  way 
And  I  cane  nott  fa  far  laive  my  cuntre  haveand  fa  mony  ennemeis  behind 
my  hand  hot  vpone  fum  gret  purpois  being  fullie  aduerteift  thorof 
befoir  / 1  haue  promeift  to  be  vpone  monday  at  evin  about  Crafurd  John 
or  vpone  the  head  of  the  watter  of  Douglas  quhilk  in  a  manner  is  all  ane 
And  gyf  his  Lordfliip  thair  will  aduerteis  me  that  nycht  quhat  gud  refo- 
lutioun  he  has  fullie  determinat  with  the  adwyfe  of  gour  Lordfliip  I  will 
fett  fordwart  to  it  and  thairin  do  my  vtter  power  •  gour  Lordfliip  knawis 
rycht  weill  that  glafgo  is  rycht  far  fra  me  and  werie  troublefum  to  bring 
my  folkis  throw  thay  cuntreis  and  quhen  we  flcall  and  I  haid  neuer 
fafar  faid  in  the  contrarie  thay  will  tak  our  freindis  geir  or  thay  want  / 
And  therfoir  I  wald  be  werie  laithe  ge  in  a  manner  I  cane  nocht  weill 
cum  fua  far  doun  in  that  cuntre  And  as  gour  Lordfhip  knawis  to  cum 
throw  Douglafdaile  and  the  head  of  Cliddifdaile  and  Drumlangrik  and 
thair  fauoraris  thair  till  haue  thame  fa  lang  aduerteifl-  to  ly  in  my  way 


JAC.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  35 

in  my  returne  /  it  is  nocht  efy  to  be  done  And  thei-foir  this  is  to  be 
adwyfit  in  his  Lordfliips  dire6tionis  •  I  wnderftand  that  the  day  of  our 
foirfaltour  is  the  xviij  day  •  alffar  as  mycht  convenientlie  be  I  wald  that 
tbirnoin  paft  or  we  invaidit  thame  ffor  that  we  mycht  declair  to  the 
Quene  of  Ingland  it  come  of  thair  perfut  the  brekino-  of  the  commonyng 
fche  haid  appointit  /  howbeit  I  wnderftand  be  Gavis  Riche  quha  is  laitlie 
cumit  fra  the  Erie  of  Murray  that  he  menis  nocht  to  keip  his  writtin  maid 
to  the  faid  Quene  faying  the  lordis  his  fallois  ar  diflparit  and  will  nocht 
gyf  him  leve  nochtwitbftanding  he  intendis  efter  the  parliament  to  fend 
twa  or  thre  in  Ingland  for  to  reflbun  that  matter  gyf  the  Quene  will  fa 
accept  it  oppinyng  thir  headis  to  gour  Lordfliip  fpecialie  becaus  I  was 
ane  fpekar  in  to  it  with  the  Quene  and  counfale  of  Ingland  avaiting 
vpone  gour  commandement  one  monday  at  evin  vpone  the  head  of 
Douglas  watter  defyring  gour  Lordfliip  to  refpeft  quhat  inconvenient 
it  is  to  me  to  pas  to  glafgo  except  I  fe  thairin  befoir  fik  vrgent  neceffitie 
Leving  to  trouble  gow  farder  I  pray  God  haue  gow  in  his  keipyng  Off 
Lochmaben  the  xiij  of  Augufl  at  twa  houris  in  the  mornyng  1568  • 

5our  Lordfliip  to  command  with  feruice  at  my  power  • 


To  my  Lord  My  Lord  Arifbifchop  of  Sanftandros 


JMary  Queen  of  Scots  to  the  Archbifliop  of  San6t  Andrews  • 

34  xveuerend  fader  •  We  greit  gow  veill  •  We  haif  reflauit  gour  vrytingis 
be  the  bifchope  of  Rofs  and  hes  vnderftand  the  famyn  We  haif  vrittin  in 
ciphere  to  my  Lord  Flemyng  quha  will  mak  gow  participant  therof  And 
fall  wryt  to  gow  at  mair  lenth  quhen  the  nixt  occafioun  fervis  Referring 
the  reft  thairto  and  to  gour  gud  difcretioune  Swa  committis  gow  to  the 


36  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

proteftioune  of  God  Almychtie   OflF  Bowtoune  the  xxvij   of  feptember 
1568  . 


To  Ane  Reuerend  fader  The  Archibifchop  of  San6bandrois  • 

(_/opy  of  my  Lord  Argill  Cypher  fra  the  Quene  xvj  Decenibris  [1568  ■] 

35  As  to  the  eftait  of  my  effaris  I  dowt  nott  bot  ge  half  outherftand  at  the 
convention  in  3ork  our  rebellis  wes  confundit  in  all  that  thay  culd  allege 
als  for  covering  of  thair  infurreftion  and  imprefonyng  of  me  perfaving 
the  quhilk  thay  did  faymekill  be  moyen  of  fum  of  the  Queyn  of  Ing- 
landis  miniftei'is  that  aganis  hir  promefe  fche  hes  lattln  thame  half  hir 
prefens  and  to  colour  thair  cummyng  towart  hir  laid  fche  wald  hir  felf 
outherftand  the  continvation  of  this  conferens  to  the  effeft  the  fammyn 
fuld  be  the  mair  promptle  endit  with  fum  happy  owtgait  to  my  honour 
and  contentment '  and  therfor  defyrit  that  fum  of  my  commiffionaris  fuld 
pas  towart  hir  immediately  /  Bot  the  procedingis  hes  fenfyne  fchawin  it 
wes  nocht  the  But  fche  fchoit  at  for  the  mater  hes  beyn  prolongit  be 
delayis  /  in  the  meyn  tyme  the  rebellis  praftefit  fecreitly  with  hir  and  hir 
minifteris  Sway  thay  haif  convenit  and  accordit  that  my  fone  falbe 
deliverit  in  hir  handis  to  be  nvrefit  in  the  cuntre  as  fche  fall  think  guid  / 
Item  declaring  hym  to  be  abill  to  fuccede  eftir  hir  dethe  in  kaife  fche 
haif  na  fucceffione  of  hir  bodye  /  and  that  for  hir  fecurite  the  caftellis  of 
Edinburgh  and  Sterling  falbe  in  the  Inglis  menis  keping  on  the  faid 
Quenis  expenfis  /  Item  with  hir  moyen  and  concurrens  of  the  erle  of 
Murraye  and  his  adherentis  the  caftell  of  Dunbartan  falbe  affegit  and 
tane  owt  of  Flemynis  handis  and  lyikwyis  randerit  to  the  Quene  of  Ing- 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  37 

landis  behuif  and  keping  Provyding  that  the  premiffis  be  kepit  I'che  hes 
promifit  to  fupport  and  mantein  the  eile  of  Murray  and  his  adherentis  in 
the  vfurpatione  of  my  authorite  /  and  cauie  hym  be  declarit  legittime  to 
fuccede  to  the  crowne  of  Scotland  efter  the  decefs  of  ray  laid  fone  in 
kaife  he  be  but  barnis  gottin  of  his  bodie  And  thairby  the  erle  of  Mur- 
raye  fall  acknawlege  to  hald  the  realme  of  Scotland  in  few  of  the  Quene 
of  Ingland  /  this  is  all  the  equite  of  my  caufe  (the  congnofcens  of  the 
quhilk  I  traiftit  in  the  faid  Queyn)  hes  beyn  reverfit  and  miferabille 
lauld  for  the  rwyne  of  my  realme  gyf  God  and  guid  Icottis  hartis  of  ni}- 
fay thfull  fubieftis  Remeid  nocht  the  famniyne  /  git  this  is  nocht  all  /  thair  is 
ane  wthir  intelligence  and  ligue  mair  fecreit  betuix  the  erle  of  Murraye 
and  the  erle  of  Harford  quhay  fuld  marie  fecretar  Cecillis  dochthir  that 
dreffis  all  thir  drachthis  The  quhilk  legue  the  faidis  erle  of  Murraj-e  and 
Harford  fuld  manteine  and  fortefye  ilk  ane  wther  in  the  fucceffioun  that 
ilk  ane  of  tham  pretendis  on  his  awine  fyid  that  is  to  faye  /  the  erle  of 
Murraye  on  the  fyid  of  my  realme  be  rafoun  of  the  faid  Legittimatione 
And  the  erle  of  Harford  on  the  fyid  of  Ingland  becaus  of  vmquhvill 
Dame  Katharene  on  quhom  he  begat  twa  barnis  /  Sway  thay  will  bayth 
be  bent  to  my  fonnis  dethe  /  quhay  beyng  anis  owt  of  my  fubiedis  handis 
quhat  cann  I  hoip  for  hot  ane  lamentabill  tragedie  :'  Thir  things  ar  con- 
cludit  amangis  the  chief  of  my  rebellis  and  the  antient  and  natural! 
enymeis  of  my  realme  /  And  thair  reftis  nay  thing  now  hot  moyen  to 
eftablis  and  alfuir  the  faid  erle  of  Murraye  in  his  vfurpacione  /  To  begin 
the  fammyne  thay  wald  haif  perfuadit  me  be  craft  to  haif  liberallie 
demittit  my  crowne  and  content  to  the  regencie  of  the  faid  erle  of 
Murraye  And  to  caufe  me  condifcend  to  (ik  ane  vnhappye  thyng  thair 
hes  beyn  all  craft  with  boding  and  fair  promefis  that  wes  poffibill  /  Bot 
feyng  I  wes  refoluit  to  do  nay  thing  therin  to  thair  profeit  the  Queyne 
of  Ingland  hes  namit  new  commiffionaris  with  thayme  that  wes  all  radye 
deput  in  nummer  of  the  quhilk  the  faid  Cecill  and  wtheris  of  his  fadione 
ar  therin  And  nocht  permitting  me  to  pafs  thair  and  declair  my  awin 
refonnis  that  thay  wald  haif  pretendit  in  the  faid  conference   Quhilk 


38  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

beyng  brokin  for  contravenyng  that  the  faid  Queyn  of  Ingland  hes  maid 
of  hir  promefis  quhilk  wes  that  fche  luld  nocht  permit  the  erle  of  Murraye 
cum  in  hir  prefence  affoir  that  the  faid  conference  wes  endit  And  Mair- 
attour  that  thair  fuld  be  nay  thing  dwin  to  the  preiudice  of  my  honour 
eftait  and  rycht  that  I  may  haif  in  this  cunti*e  eftir  hir  /  My  faidis  com- 
miffionaris  left  the  faidis  conference  the  Text  of  this  mvneth  with 
lolempnit  proteflacionis  that  all  quhilk  war  dwin  thairin  to  my  pre- 
iudice in  ony  fort  falbe  null  and  of  nay  effeft  nor  valour  /  And  thairon 
thay  ar  deliberat  to  cum  away  fay  fwne  as  thay  maye  /  Quhairof  I  thocht 
guid  to  adverteifs  gou  to  the  effect  that  ge  may  ondirftand  the  verite  of 
the  mater  /  and  informe  gour  freyndis  of  the  famyne  I  pray  ge  to 
affembill  all  my  fathfuU  fubieftis  togidder  and  fyrft  releve  the  caftell  of 
Dumbartane  fray  Invading  therof  be  rebellis  as  I  haif  wryttin  to  Huntlie 
to  cum  forthervartis  in  gour  affiflance  and  do  all  hyndir  and  ewill  ge 
may  to  the  faidis  rebellis  And  floppe  thair  returnyng  haymvart  gyf  it 
may  be  poffibill  for  thaye  wilbe  radye  affoir  gou  gyf  ge  mak  nocht  haift 
Sway  ge  beyng  all  togyddir  affemblit  in  conventione  nocht  fering  that  I 
fall  difchairge  ge  in  gour  procedingis  as  I  did  the  laft  tyme  /  ge  fall 
declair  and  fchawe  publiftly  be  oppin  proclamation  the  foirfaid  con- 
fpirace  and  trafone  quhilk  the  rebellis  hes  confperit  aganis  the  weill  of 
the  realme  Intending  to  put  the  fammyn  to  execution  to  the  wtir  diftruc- 
tione  therof  gyf  thay  be  nocht  ftoppit  in  dew  tyme  And  thairfor  gyf  ge 
with  my  haill  fathfull  fubieftis  and  all  trew  fcottis  hartis  will  do  diligence 
to  ftoppe  the  performatione  of  thair  intention  and  hyndir  thaym  of  this 
wyntyr  tyid  quhilk  maift  erniftly  git  as  of  befoir  I  pray  goue  to  do  We 
ar  maift  affuirit  that  on  the  fpring  of  the  geir  ge  fall  haif  fufficient  releif 
of  wthir  freyndis  • 

This  is  the  Copy  ofmyfephar  quhilk  your  Lor d/liip  fall  rq/aue  • 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  39 

The  Earl  of  Huntly  to  Mary  Queen  of  Scots  • 

36  Pleis  your  Maieftie  fen  my  laft  difpeche  to  your  bines  I  come  heir  to 
Aberdeine  qubair  I  had  of  befoire  prowidit  to  remane  ane  part  of  this 
winter  And  prewenit  fum  part  be  reffone  of  your  Maieflies  laft  lettre 
Ichawand  me  to  hawe  beine  debarrit  frome  balding  of  fwm  courttis  heir 
qubilk  your  hienes  may  perlawe  to  be  bot  faStionis  for  I  firft  dreflit  me 
to  the  north  partis  quhair  I  tuik  ordour  for  your  hienes  I'ervvice  And  now 
hes  done  the  lyk  heir  for  the  proweft  of  Aberdene  hes  randerit  all  to  me 
in  your  Maiefties  name  And  I  hawe  his  howfs  git  in  my  polTeflioune  And 
alls  his  pledge  for  his  ferwice  to  gour  Maieftie  In  all  tymis  heirefter  /  by 
his  the  haill  townifchippis  fubfcriptioune  of  ane  generall  band  to  the 
lamyn  effeft  Swa  that  with  Goddis  helpe  your  Maieftie  fall  fynd  your 
ferwice  weill  adwancit  in  thir  partis  quha  ewir  wald  the  contrar  Als  the 
erle  of  AthoU  hes  bene  at  ane  conwentioun  in  Dundic  quhair  he 
defyrit  all  the  noble  men  and  barronis  to  cum  that  he  belewit  fawourit 

him  felf  or  the  erle  of  Murray  in  Angowfs  mernis  or  the  north 

partis  that  be  •  •  •  adwyfis  he  mycht  hawe  exceptit  the  lewetennendrie 
of  the  faid  erle  of  Murray  •  •  •  nane  come  thair  bot  Robert  Dowglal's 
callit  erle  of  Bochane  the  lord  Glamys  •  •  •  lardis  of  Inuerforrettie 
Pittarrow  Mafter  James  Halyburtoun  and  the  proweft  of  fan6tandrois 
The  ei'le  of  Atholl  hes  contenewit  his  conwentioun  to  the  xij  day  of  this 
moneth  /  quhat  procedis  thair  your  Maieftie  falbe  aduertifit  Alwayis  gif 
the  erle  of  Atholl  except  fie  office  with  Goddis  helpe  your  grace  fall 
heir  that  his  commoditie  thairby  fall  be  fmall  efter  the  making  of  the 
premiffis  I  reflauit  thre  of  your  Maiefties  lettres  the  thrid  day  of  this 
moneth  And  ane  of  the  dait  the  vj  day  of  december  Ane  vther  the  xvij 
day  and  the  laft  fra  George  Skynner  him  felf  the  firft  twa  be  my  Lord 
Arbrothokis  conwoy  thankand  your  Maieftie  humblie  of  your  graceis 
aduertifment  and  newis  and  perl'awis  thairby  the  vnthankfulnes  of  your 
hienes   awin    lubiedis    to    quhome    your    grace    hes   ichawin   fa   greit 


40  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

guidnes  And  yit  I  traift  in  God  that  he  fall  mowe  the  Quene  of  Ingland 
to  confidder  the  Rycht  of  your  graceis  cawfe  and  hir  awin  preparatiue 

And  vther  princes  gif  this  be  fufferit  vnpuniffit 

fall  tak  file  ordour  for  your  Maiefties  honour  as  becumis  ane  prince  to 
do  for  ane  vther  And  as  to  the  perticuUarris  contenit  in  your  Maiefties 
lettre  I  fall  leif  na  thing  vndone  fafar  as  my  fobir  Judgement  or  power 
may  to  the  adwancement  of  your  graceis  ferwice  Als  the  bifchope  of 
Rofs  howfs  wes  ftollin  be  my  Lord  of  Murrayis  ferwandis  and  ane  fer- 
wand  of  the  bifchopis  flaine  And  Incontinent  therefter  in  Kynlofs  the 
tutour  of  Lowett  And  the  archeden  of  Rofs  afleigit  the  lam  agane  with 
xij"  men  that  it  wes  recowerit  agane  within  xxiiij  houris  And  the  men  tane 
and  Juftefiett  forther  quhat  ferwice  pleifs  your  Maieftie  command  me 
with  fall  be  ewir  fulfillit  efter  my  power  And  this  tc"  Efter  maift  humbill 
commendatioune  of  my  ferwice  to  your  hienes  prayis  the  eternall  God  to 
be  your  graceis  preferwer  in  gud  health  and  profperows  fuccefs  in  all 
your  Maiefties  cawfis  At  Aberdene  the  viij  day  of  Januar  1568  • 

The  wedder  hes  bene  fa  ewill  heir  this  tuentie  dayis  paft  that  it  wes 
nocht  poffible  till  ane  to  trawell  vtherwayis  I  fuld  hawe  maid  your 
Maieftie  fowner  aduertifit  of  my  procedingis  In  this  cuntrie  quhair  I  am 
now  occupyit  in  balding  cowrttis  for  your  Maiefties  obedience  tc'  ■ 

3our  Maiefties  humbill  and  obedient  fubieft  and  fervitour  • 

HUNTLIE  • 

To  the  Quene  • 


The  Earl  of  Argyll  to  the  Proveft  and  Baillies  of  Edinburgh  • 

37  Treft  freindis  eftir  my  hartle  commendatioun  this  prefent  falbe  to 
aduerteis  gow  that  we  are  informit  be  our  fouerane  Ladeis  vrittin  how 
the  Erll  of  Murray  intendis  to  deliuer  our  prince  the  caftellis  of  Edin- 
burgh and  Striueling  in  Inglifmenis  handis  for  the  vter  Rewyne  of  this 
realme  and  nobilitie  therof  /  and  therfor  We  thocht  guid  to  mak  publik 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EAELS  OF  MORTON.  41 

proclamationis  of  the  famyn  to  latt  all  fcottis  men  knavv  the  famyn  that 
thai  pretend  na  ignorance  therin  •  Heirfoir  hes  fend  to  30W  fiklyk  to 
aduerteifs  gow  therof  ane  copie  of  the  faid  proclamatioune  to  be  pro- 
clamit  at  the  mercat  croce  of  Edinburgh  to  lat  all  guid  fcottis  men  knaw 
the  veritie  The  quhilkis  we  pray  30W  ger  proclame  the  fame  as  ve  dout 
nocht  bot  ge  will  do  /  and  fua  committis  yow  to  God  Of  Glafgw  the  xj  day 
of  Januar  anno  1568  • 

3our  guid  frynd  • 


To  our  treft  freindis  the  Proueift  and  Bailgeis 
of  Edinburgh  • 

The  Earl  of  Argyll  to  the  Archbiflaop  of  Sanft  Andrews  • 

38  JVly  Lorde  eftir  hertlie  commendationis  I  reflauit  your  Lordfliippis  lettir 
this  xxvj  of  Januare  efter  none  togidder  with  ane  pakatt  of  the  Quenis 
Maieftie  fent  to  me  and  hes  decyphirit  the  faming  quhairof  I  will  nocht 
writ  to  your  Lordfhip  at  this  prefent  bot  referris  to  meting  •  I  perfaue 
na  thing  therin  bot  gude  like  as  I  beleif  your  Lordfliip  hes  reflauit  the 
lyke  /  as  to  my  direftionis  to  the  gentill  men  of  nychttifdaill  and  galloway 
I  dire6tit  the  faming  to  thame  /  how  lone  I  fend  to  your  Lordfliip  the 
wther  lettres  •  As  to  the  inftrumentis  tane  be  my  Lord  of  Huntlie  and  me 
at  the  deliuering  of  the  prince  to  the  erle  of  Mar  I  fall  fend  to  Johnne 
Grahme  for  the  faming  quhilk  I  doubt  nocht  to  get  •  As  to  the  cuming  of 
the  Abbot  of  Dryburghe  to  fpeik  with  your  Lordfhip  I  am  verie  glaid 
therof  fua  that  ther  intentis  be  to  be  the  Quenis  Maiefl;ie  trew  feruandis 
and  I  doubt  nocht  bot  it  is  hir  will  that  all  thai  that  may  be  drawin  to  hir 
feruice  be  acceptit  gif  thai  will  knaw  ther  dewitie  '  As  to  the  reft;  of  Wille 
Bellis  Ipeiking  of  reportis  the  faming  halily  is  nocht  to  be  fermlie  creditit 

/ 


42  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

at' all  tymes  hot  fafer  as  thai  ar  confortable  latt  tham  (land  in  effed  as 
thai  ar  •  As  to  the  gathering  of  our  aduerfarie  partie  I  will  nocht  ftur 
thairat  for  gif  we  ferit  ther  convenyngis  we  Ibuld  nocht  gather  •  And  it 
is  fua  now  that  ather  man  we  be  maifter  of  the  feildis  or  ellis  thai  /  and 
as  to  oure  cumpany  at  the  leift  (gif  we  be  nocht  ma)  we  falbe  na  fewar 
nor  we  promeft  •  As  to  the  chargis  to  be  maid  to  the  men  of  the  Levenax 
as  your  Lordfliip  writis  becaus  I  am  nocht  faweill  praftefit  therwith  as 
your  Lordfliip  is  ge  fall  caus  mak  thame  to  fik  men  as  ye  pleis  and  haift 
thame  to  me  and  I  fall  fubfcrive  and  fignet  the  faming  and  fend  tham  to 
yow  agane  Sua  that  thai  may  be  execute  be  ane  officer  of  armes  becaus  I 
haif  nocht  ane  heir  of  my  awin  and  lat  thaim  be  chargit  to  fik  day  as  your 
Lordfliip  plefis  /  quhilk   30  fall  leif  out  quhill  thai   cum  abak  fra  me 
ao'ane  /  And  as  for   the   dounfending   of  my  peifs  I  haif  had  feruandis 
awaytand  daly  fen  the  beginning  of  this  eift  wynd  to  haif  brocht  hir 
doune  and  thai  mycht  neuer  remoif  of  this  coift  hot  how  fone  poffible 
thai  may  travell  the  faming  wilbe  at  your  Lordfliip  alwayis  thocht  the 
wedder  fl;ay  hir  I  fall  God  willing  cum  forwardis  myfelf  with  my  cum- 
pany Praying  yow  to  caus  the  wrychtis  do  the  thing  thai  cann  for  hir 
grathing  quhill  fche  cum  doun  hir  felf  /  I  thank  your  Lordfliip  hartly  of 
the  reft;  of  the  novellis  contenit  in  your  Lordfliippis  lettre  and  So  referring 
the  reft  to  new  aduertifment  or  meting  having  no  Forder  occafioun  to 
writt   prefently    Committis   your   Lordfliip  to   the   Almychtie   God   Off 
Strachquhur  this  xxvij  daye  of  Januare  1568  Forder  I  pray  your  Lord- 
fliip to  aduertis  me  gif  ye  be  myndit  to  fend  the  man  away  to  the  Quenis 
Maieftie  that  I  may  writ  fum  cypheris  to  hir  hienes  with  him  and  to  ftay 
him  ane  quhile  quhill  I  be  aduertefit  therof  that  I  may  fend  my  writtingis 
with  him  to  the  Quenis  grace  • 

3our  Lordfliips  Cofing  at  his  pwar  • 


To  my  Lorde  of  Sanftandrois 


JAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  43 

(charge  to  ferche  and  apprehend  Thomas  Irland  • 

39  W  illiame  Dowglas  of  Lochlevin  We  charge  gou  in  our  Soverane  Lordis 
name  To  ferche  feik  tak  apprehend  bring  and  prefent  before  ws  at 
Sanftandrois  or  quhair  it  falhappin  ws  to  be  for  the  tyme  Thomas  Irland 
in  the  parrochyn  of  Portmook  upoun  the  fext  day  nixteftir  the  prefenting 
of  this  Valentyne  to  gow  As  ge  will  aniuer  upoun  the  generall  band  and 
under  the  panis  contenit  in  the  famyn  Subfcrivit  with  our  hand  At  San£t- 
androis  the  vj  day  of  Maij  the  geir  of  God  I'^  V"  Ixix  geris  • 

James  Regent ■ 


Charge  to  deliver  the  Abbay  and  place  of  Melrofe  to  William  Douglas 
of  Lochleven  • 

40   J  ames  be  the  grace  of  God  King  of  Scottis  To  our  louittis 

Meffingeris  Trc"- 
We  charge  gou  ftraitlie  and  commandis  that  incontinent  thir  our  lettres 
lene  ge  pas  and  in  our  name  and  authoritie  command  and  charge  all  and 
findrie  havaris  keparis  withhaldaris  and  indwellaris  of  the  Abbay  and 
place  of  Melros  with  the  gairdis  or  ony  thing  belanging  to  the  faid  place 
To  rander  and  deliver  the  famyn  to  Williame  Douglas  of  Lochlevin  fader 
and  lauchfull  adminiftratour  to  James  Douglas  his  fone  Commendatare 
of  the  faid  Abbay  To  be  kepit  be  the  faid  Williame  to  his  utilitie  and 
proffit  tc"-  And  ficlyke  that  ge  command  and  charge  Sir  Walter  Scott 
of  Branxholme  knycht  baillie  of  Melros  To  fe  thir  our  lettres  put  in 
executioun  '^c"  •  Gevin  under  our  Signet  and  fubfcrivit  be  our  faid 
deareft  Coufing  and  Regent  At  Sandandrois  the  xvj  day  of  Maij  And  of 
our  regnne  the  fecund  geir  1569  • 


/7.s5K^^MJ-^  .^v^k4^/; 


44  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

Teftificat  be  fome  Monks  of  Melros  of  their  being  compelled  to  fubfcry  ve 
the  Earl  of  Bothwells  feu  • 

41  Be  It  Kend  Till  all  men  To  quhome  thir  prefentis  falbe  lene  Ws  brethair 
of  the  Abbay  of  Melros  and  the  lefs  pairt  of  the  convent  thairof  vnder- 
writting  /  hailing  refpeft.  to  God  and  gud  confcience  and  for  the  werray 
zeill  and  lufe  that  ather  of  ws  bei-is  to  the  eternall  trewth  and  for  the 
exoneratioun  of  cont'cienfis  Be  this  prefent  teftimoniall  affirmis  ratyfeis 
and  apprevis  that  the  few  that  we  fubfcriuit  to  James  erle  Bothwell  wes 
lublcriuit  by  all  gud  ordour  for  werray  dredour  and  feir  of  our  lyfis  and 
tynlyll  of  our  levyngis  quha  faid  In  prefens  of  diuers  honorable  men  that 
he  fuld  exyle  ws  of  the  place  of  Melros  tak  the  keis  of  our  chalmeris 
frome  and  fchortle  burne  and  mark  ws  with  het  keis  on  our  chykkis  with 
mony  vther  Iniurious  wordis  •  And  therfor  as  we  fall  anfuer  befor  the 
eternall  our  God  quhateuer  we  did  in  his  fauouris  we  did  the  famyn  for 
werray  feir  of  our  lyflBis  nocht  haiflBng  refpeft  to  God  nor  gud  confciens 
common  weill  of  the  cuntre  nor  git  our  awin  wyllis  hot  as  faid  is  for 
werray  feir  Be  this  our  teftimoniall  Subfcriuit  with  our  handis  AT  Melros 
the  xviij  day  of  September  1569  Befor  thir  witnefis  Jhone  Stewart  of 
Aldone  Robert  Wallace  in  Melros  and  William  Lynlythgw  in  Drygrange 
with  vtheris  diuers  • 

Thomas  Meyn  • 
Jhone  Fourrois  • 
I  Jhone  Fourrois  confeffis  be  this  prefent  to  hawe  fubfcriuit  James  erle 
Boutwell  fewe  In  name  and  behalf  of  Alexander  Bellendan  quha  culd 
nocht  requhyr  me  to  do  the  famyn  hot  for  feir  dyd  for  hyme  as  for  myfelf  • 

Bernard  Bowston  • 


JAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  45 

J.  he  Earl  of  Mar  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

42  X  raift  coufing  Sen  my  pacquett  wes  dire6lit  to  gow  this  efternune  I  have 
reflavit  a  letter  fra  David  Orme  towart  his  wardouris  meanyng  It  is 
difficill  to  him  to  have  the  chairge  of  thame  And  as  I  writt  of  befoir  the 
lyk  I  have  written  now  Thairfor  I  think  it  gude  ge  fend  fum  fpeciall 
freind  to  him  with  your  mynd  And  to  tak  ordour  thairintill  for  aucht  or 
ten  dayis  This  mekle  I  doubt  not  hot  ge  will  do  Remitting  all  uther 
thingis  to  meting  quhilk  I  luik  for  Ichortlie  Committis  gow  to  God  Fra 
Striviling  Caltell  the  xxix  of  Januar  1569  • 

3ouris  att  power  • 
To  My  traift  coufing  the  Mar  • 

Laird  of  Lochlevin  • 

Jjame   Annas   Keyth  widow  of  the  Regent  Murray  to  the  Laird  of 
Lochleven  • 

43  orother  after  my  maift  hartly  commendatioun  I  haif  refaued  gour  hartlj^ 
letter  and  hes  confyderit  gour  lowing  defyir  thairin  quhairof  I  may  thank 
gou  with  all  my  hart  /  gour  guid  will  in  fie  caces  I  haif  amply  found  and 
experimented  in  tymis  paft  And  yff  my  dewyte  wald  permitt  me  wald 
wle  the  fame  at  this  prefent  /  butt  being  refolued  with  my  felf  for  monj- 
confideratiouns  to  haif  done  the  fame  •  I  haif  bene  anis  or  twyis  bayth 
be  wryttingis  and  meffage  preafled  be  my  Lordis  fader  to  cum  to  his 
houfe  •  And  knawing  my  detfuU  obedience  to  him  beyond  all  vtheris  nou 
on  lyiff  I  haif  promeift  him  afluredlye  to  be  at  him  /  quhilk  I  dar  not  nor 
may  not  brek  •  Always  quhen  It  fall  pleis  God  to  grant  to  me  my  hoip 
and  defyir  of  the  yffliue  that  I  haif  efperance  of  boyth  I  and  It  with  me 
fall  Returne  to  gou  •  to  whome  and  whois  houfe  I  hald  and  wald  the 
fame  maift  tender  and  deyr  •  And  for  all  uther  thingis  I  will  direft  M' 
Jhone  Wod  towardis  gou  to  hald  gou  in  Remembrance  of  thay  thingis 


46  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

quhilkis  ar  neceffair  to  be  obteyned  for  the  welefair  of  gour  brotheris 
pofterite  and  poor  ferwandis  and  help  of  his  creditouris  to  whais  fuffy- 
ciencye  I  refer  the  reft   frome  Sandtandrois  the  fyift  of  februar  1569  • 

3our  fefter  hartly  at  powir  • 

Annas  Keyth  • 
[To  my  brother  the  Laird  of  Lochlevin  •] 

Decreit  Arbitral  betuix  Gabriell  Merfer  of  Sawling  and  George  Dury  • 

44  ^fV^e  Patrik  Lord  Lyndefay  of  the  byres  Robert  commendatar  of  Dun- 
fermeling  and  S'  James  Balfour  of  Pittendreiche  knycht  pretident  of  the 
college  of  Juftice  Juges  arbitratouris  and  amicable  compofitouris  chofin 
for  the  part  of  David  Dury  of  that  Ilk  takand  the  burding  vpone  him 
for  George  Dury  his  bruthir  german  on  that  ane  parte  And  William 
Douglas  of  Lochlewin  S'  William  Scott  of  balweyrie  knycht  and  Robert 
Coluill  of  cleiflie  Juges  arbitratouris  and  amicable  compofitouris  chofin 
for  the  parte  of  ane  nobill  and  potent  Lord  Johnne  erle  of  Mar  Lord 
Erfkyn  takand  the  burding  vpon  him  for  Gabriell  Merfer  of  Sawling  on 
that  vther  perte  Anent  the  hurting  of  the  faid  Gabriell  Merfer  and  mutu- 
lation  of  Charles  Painter  his  feruand  And  als  anent  the  fclauchter  of 
vmquhill  Dauid  Fynlayfone  feruand  to  the  faid  George  Dury  committit 
in  the  moneth  of  feptember  laft  bypaft  wyth  all  vther  materis  aftionis 
and  cauffis  that  ftandis  In  variance  and  queftion  betuix  thame  theranent 
as  the  compromit  maid  therupone  of  the  dait  the  xvj  day  of  Maij  Inftant 
mair  fuUie  beiris  Haveing  harde  proponit  and  layit  out  befoir  ws  the 
clamis  allegeances  anfueris  and  defenlTis  of  athers  parties  wyth  fik  cog- 
nitioun  and  knawlege  of  the  beginning  occafioun  and  committing  of  the 
hurting  of  the  allegit  mutulatioun  and  (lauchter  foirfaid  Eftir  lang  refon- 
ino-  and  conference  therupone  triall  and  vnderftanding  of  the  veritie  God 
and  gude  confcience  being  befoir  Eis  All  in  voce  wyth  confent  of  the 
faidis  burding  takkaris  and  perteis  thame  felffis  Decernis  Decreittis  and 
for  band  and  fentence  arbitrall  finall  pronuncis  and  deliueris  that  the  faid 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  47 

George  Dury  fall  In  prefens  of  the  laid  Gabriell  Merl'er  and  his  freindis 
the  day  off  Compeir  and  prefent  him  felff  opinlie  in  this 

toun  of  Sandlandris  as  thai  fall  think  gude  and  thair  declare  and  confefs 
that  the  hurting  of  the  faid  gabriell  and  mutulatioun  of  his  feruand  wes 
done  vpone  na  foirthocht  felony  malice  Invy  nor  hid  heitred  hot  chanceit 
and  cafuall  happinnit  vpone  fuddentey  vithout  ony  motioun  preceiding 
And  for  amendis  fall  grant  he  hes  oifendit  the  faid  gabriell  is  penitent 
for  the  famin  and  require  meift  Inteirlie  reconciliatioun  wyth  the  faid 
gabriell  and  to  remayn  in  prefence  familiaritie  freindfchipe  and  kyndnes 
lyk  as  fie  accidentis  and  occafioun  of  trublis  had  neuir  happinnit  nor 
fallin  betuix  thame  And  according  therto  We  decern  thame  to  Hand  in 
amitie  kyndnes  lufe  and  freindfchipe  in  all  tymes  cuming  And  that  all 
adioun  that  may  redound  vpoun  the  trublis  forfaidis  may  be  removit  and 
ceis  Ordanis  the  faid  Gabriell  Merfer  to  delyuer  ane  Lettre  of  flanis  and 
difcharge  to  the  faid  Geoi-ge  Dury  for  the  faid  mutulatioun  of  his  fervand 
and  of  all  flcayth  and  danger  that  may  Infliew  thairfoir  and  of  all  a6lioun 
and  caus  that  may  be  movit  aganis  thame  for  the  famin  in  the  maifl  lure 
and  ample  forme  for  the  faid  george  and  his  feruandis  weill  and  fecuritie 
as  falbe  devpifit  be  thame  And  ficlik  decernis  and  ordanis  the  faid  Gabriell 
the  fam  day  and  place  to  cum  in  prefens  of  the  faid  George  Dury  and  his 
freindis  and  thair  declair  and  publiclie  confefs  the  faid  vmquhill  dauid 
fynlayfone  wes  flane  fair  aganis  his  will  and  that  he  mycht  nocht  than 
Hope  nor  flay  the  famin  and  git  is  penitent  for  the  fchlauchtir  committino- 
and  cravis  forgifnes  to  the  faid  charlis  paintar  his  feruand  for  the  famen 
And  that  he  fall  enter  in  reconciliatioun  with  the  faid  George  Dury  and 
remayn  in  familiaritie  freindfchipe  lufe  and  kindnes  in  all  tymes  cuming 
removing  all  Rancour  malice  and  grudge  contermit  or  hade  aganis  him 
be  occafioun  of  the  faid  flauchtir  And  als  ordanis  the  faid  Georo-e  to  o-iff 
and  deliuer  to  the  faid  Gabriell  and  his  feruand  ane  fufBcient  lettre  of 
flanis  and  difcharge  of  the  famin  flauchtir  of  all  flieyth  danger  and  perell 
thai  may  Incur  thairfor  and  of  all  aftioun  and  caus  thai  may  haiff  aganis 
thame  for  the  famin  in  maift  fure  and  ample  forme  falbe  dewyfit  And  als 


48  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

We  ordane  the  faid  Charlis  Paintar  to  compeir  befoir  the  Abbot  of  Dun- 
fermeling  vpoune  the  xxij  day  of  this  Inftaat  and  thair  in  his  prefens 
require  forgifnes  of  the  faid  vmquhill  dauid  fynlayfouns  breider  for  the 
llauchter  committit  be  him  aganis  the  faid  vmquhill  dauid  And  this  oure 
decreit  arbitrall  in  all  pointis  befoir  writtin  We  decern  to  ftand  in  ftrenth 
and  eflfea  in  all  tymes  heireftir  but  revocation  or  agancalling  quhatfum- 
euir  In  witnes  quhairofF  We  with  the  faidis  perteis  in  takin  of  thair  con- 
lent  heirto  hes  fubfcriuit  the  famin  with  our  handis  At 
the  day  off  The  geir  of  God  I""  V  Lxix  geiris  • 

Jhon  erle  of  Mar  •         S'  J  •  Balfour  of  Pyttyndreych  • 

WiLLiAME  Douglas  of  Lochleuin  • 


luetter  from  the  Lords  of  Scotland  to  Elizabeth  Queen  of  England  • 

4t5  JVlay  it  pleis  gour  Majeftie  knawing  be  long  experience  and  fecreit 
conference  (quhilk  natour  did  procure)  the  grete  and  ernift  affeftioun 
that  noble  man  the  leitt  Regent  of  this  realme  bure  to  gowr  Majefties 
feruice  and  how  far  he  wald  haiff  vtterit  the  fame  to  gour  Majefties 
contentement  giflf  it  had  plefitt  God  to  haiff  grantit  langer  (ik  ane  fervand 
to  goure  heychnes  and  our  goung  maifter  and  his  fubieftis  fik  ane 
gouernoure  And  thairfoir  hawing  that  honour  to  be  his  bruther  and  of 
natour  and  dewitie  mair  neir  towchit  wyth  the  vnnaturall  and  vnvorthie 
takene  away  of  fa  notable  ane  Inftrumentt  frome  his  cuntrey  and  all 
that  crawit  the  continuance  of  the  purytie  of  the  religioun  the  amitie  and 
quietnes  of  boith  the  realmes  and  confequentlie  goure  Majefties  feruice 
and  fureity  of  goure  coufing  our  foueran  and  beyth  the  realmis  from 
Invafioun  of  Strangearris  I  knaw  nocht  ather  to  quhom  mair  Juftlie 
I  can  or  may  lament  and  deploir  the  creuaU  morther  of  fik  ane  Innocent 
prince  nor  to  goure  Majeftie  Nocht  doubting  hot  as  gour  Majeftie  wes 
dureing  his  dayis  fa  gude  and  fauorable  ane  maiftres  and  freind  to  him 
and  wpone  the  vther  parte  he  fa  faythfuU  and  trew  ferwand  to  gour 


Orio-     I'aj)     I' 5) 


(^^ 

■n 


..^>^    (',: 


y 


(1    .^lA-'-i     /  wl-/: 


-"7 


v.^y        /  ^^<? 


■^ 


y^a.^^ 


L_ 


JAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  49 

heichnes  bott  30ur  Majeftie  vill  appardoun  me  to  be  the  baulder  to  craife 
in  thir  few  termis  that  it  may  (land  with  goure  Majefties  plefour  to  leik 
be  all  menis  the  Juft  revenge  of  his  Innocent  murther  vith  the  mentenaris 
and  fortefearris  of  the  famin  that  in  manifeft  example  and  awancement 
of  goure  Majefties  honour  throuch  all  nationis  thai  may  be  brocht  to 
wttir  wrack  and  ruyn  quhilk  being  done  goure  Majeftie  will  procure  that 
na  Impediment  of  frendfchipe  fauour  and  feruice  be  ane  occafioun  to 
hinder  the  herttis  of  our  foueran  gour  Majefties  coufingis  true  lubieftis 
towardis  gour  hichnes  quhom  to  the  abominable  faft  Is  fa  detettable  that 
thai  will  feik  all  moyance  princes  and  all  nationis  to  thair  fupport  befoir 
the  famen  pas  vnrevengit  in  the  eis  of  the  world  quhairthrouch  it  may  be 
knawin  to  all  vther  nationis  that  there  is  in  this  realme  as  vtheris  honeft 
herttis  that  rather  will  geild  the  lyfe  or  that  fik  notable  attemptis  ga 
without  dew  pvneifment  quherin  we  will  humilie  craife  gour  Majefties 
affiftence  and  fupport  befoir  all  vther  Submitting  our  felffis  haillie  in 
gour  heychnes  proteftioun  quhom  almychty  God  euer  preferue  • 

Band  for  purfuing  the  murderers  of  umquhill  James  Earl  of  Murray  • 

46  We  the  Erlis  Lordis  gentlemen  and  barronis  undir  fubfcrivand  Con- 
fidering  the  grete  lofTe  quhilk  the  commoun  welth  of  tliis  realme  and  the 
gude  vill  favour  and  kyndnes  that  everie  ane  of  ws  is  dettitute  of  ,  In 
particular  throw  the  leitt  treftbnable  odius  vile  and  abominable  flawchter 
and  murthoure  of  umquhill  James  erle  of  Murray  Lord  Abernethy  Regent 
to  our  Soverane  Lord  his  realme  and  lieges  quha  reftis  with  God  movit 
thairfoir  of  oure  debt  bound  dewtie  and  allegeance  aijcht  to  oure  fouerane 
Lord  and  be  proximitie  of  blude  affured  freindfchipe  and  affeftioun 
quhilkis  everie  ane  of  ws  bure  towardis  him  that  is  with  God  •  Wit  ge  ws 
to  be  bundin  and  obleift  and  be  the  tennour  heirof  bindis  and  obleifis 
ws  and  everie  ane  of  ws  to  utheris  to  tak  efauld  trew  and  plane  part 
togidder  and  for  that  eflfecc   to  concur  in  ane  mynd  and  deliberatioun 

g 


50  OKIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

for  the  avancement  of  the  Kingis  Majeftie  cure  foverane  Lordis  author! tie 
and  fervice  And  in  perfute  and  feikene  of  the  revenge  of  the  faid  mur- 
thour  aganis  the  authoris  dewifaris  fortifiarris  and  mentenaris  of  the  fame 
as  in  honour  noble  and  honeft  men  profeffing  ane  quarrell  aucht  to  do  And 
thereon  we  fall  bellow  and  wair  oure  lyffis  and  guidis  and  neuir  fchrink 
nor  feparat  this  our  convi6tioun  for  ony  caus  bot  quhatfumevir  adlioun 
falbe  attemptit  and  execute  be  ony  of  ws  tending  to  this  end  or  giflp  ony 
of  us  in  profecutioun  of  this  quarrell  fufferis  harme  We  fall  efteme  the 
famin  commoun  and  elik  deir  to  ws  as  we  will  anfuer  to  God  and  upoun 
our  honouris  treuthis  and  honefteis  And  under  the  pane  of  perpetuall 
Infamy  and  perjury  giff  on\  of  ws  feillis  or  dois  in  the  contrar  In  witnes 
heiroff  We  haiff  fubfcrivit  tliir  prefentis  with  our  handis  as  foUowis  at 
the  dayis  and  places  particularie  efterfpecifiet 

Glencarn         Ruthven  Sympyll       Aj.lan  Lord  Cathcart 

Mar  Patrick  L  •  Lyndsay  Wchiltre 

X  atrick  Lord  Lindfay  to  the  Laird  of  LochlcTen  • 

Jjrother  efter  my  mod  hartly  commendatioun  Pleis  gow  to  wyte  that 
the  Superintendend  hes  written  ane  letter  to  me  quhilk  ge  fall  refaue 
t'ra  this  berar  and  luk  quhatt  ge  think  beft  to  be  done  in  the  matter 
advyfe  and  advertife  me  agane  and  in  lykmaner  I  think  beft  ge  ryd 
gourfelf  to  the  Lords  and  gett  ther  myndis  therintill  quhat  is  beft  to  be 
done  and  ther  effter  we  may  do  / 1  reffar  the  reft  to  the  Berer  quho  to 
gj^ff  creditt  / 1  will  uocht  trubbill  gow  to  longer  letter  bot  command  me  to 
gour  mother  and  to  gour  bedfellow  and  fwa  committis  gou  to  God  Of  the 
Stincher  the  xxtj  of  marche  1570  • 

Be  gours  at  puer  • 

Patrick  L  •  Lyndsay  • 
To  my  Brother  the  Laird  of  Lochleuyn  Delyuer  this  • 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  51 

Jjame  Annas  Keyth  widow   of  the    Regent   Murray  to   the  Laird  of 
Lochleven  • 

48  13ruther  after  my  maift  hartlie  commendatioun  •  I  haif  wnderftand  be 
diuers  meanis  that  for  na  laubouris  I  can  mak  Hendrie  Lawmonthe  and 
wtheris  Joynit  wyth  hym  will  nocht  be  content  I  haif  my  awne  habullia- 
mentis  feparatit  frome  the  reft  of  the  geir  arreftit  be  hym  and  ieildome 
hes  bene  fene  that  gentilvemenis  geir  and  ornamentis  fuld  be  thus  trublit 
and  ftayit  for  thair  huifbandis  Dettis  •  I  will  hartlie  defyir  30W  for  the 
favour  of  hym  that  reftis  wyth  God  that  ge  will  caus  me  be  red  of  fie 
fafchius  men  and  vnpleafand  bufynes  and  that  I  may  haif  my  clething 
and  fic  thingis  as  concernis  ray  bodie  relewit  that  I  may  tranfport  my 
neceffaris  and  lat  thai  gentilmen  wle  the  reft  of  that  geir  as  thay  pleis 
and  as  thay  think  thay  will  anfwer  thairfoir  /  for  as  to  me  I  will  nawayis 
meddle  thairwith  nayther  wald  I  wifche  it  war  loift  hot  wald  pray  ,:^ow 
for  the  wele  of  ^our  brutheris  barnis  to  caus  fum  truflie  feruand  of 
gouris  will  the  proweft  and  baillies  tranfport  the  fame  out  of  the  fchipe 
and  place  it  in  the  garderobe  quhair  It  wes  or  ony  wthir  fwir  houfe 
taking  ane  Juft  Inventario  thairof  befoir  autentik  perlbunis  vnto  my 
cuming  fowth  quhen  God  plefis  to  mak  me  hable  And  then  wyth  gour 
adwife  ordour  may  be  takiu  wyth  that  and  all  wther  thingis  for  the  weile 
of  the  barnis  and  quhen  the  cowfferis  ar  feyrchit  that  may  awne  geir  may 
be  deliuerit  to  my  fervandis  depending  thairvpoun  mair  nor  this  monethe 
bygane  •  this  favour  I  will  craif  of  gow  that  ge  will  trawaill  wyth  my 
Lordis  feruandis  for  this  my  realbnable  requeift  as  my  truft  is  ge  will  do 
the  fame  and  nocht  fuffer  me  thus  to  be  handillit  wythout  deferving  • 
I  knaw  nocht  to  quhome  rathar  I  fuld  meine  me  vnto  nor  vnto  gow  And 
my  truft  is  to  fynd  gow  ane  faythfull  bruther  and  loving  freind  wnto  my 
barnis  ay  and  quhill  ge  fall  fie  me  deferue  wthirvayis  quhilk  God 
willing  ge  fall  neuir  Lett  malitius  toungis  be  talking  the  werft  thai 
can  that  hes  nocht  lernit  to  fpeik  weile  •  The  reft  of  all  befines  and 


52  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

fpecialie  concerning  the  mater  of  Buchquhane  I  refar  to  maifter  Jhone 
Wod  berar  heirof  •  to  quhome  I  truft  ge  will  gif  credyt  and  fa  after  my 
hartlie  commendatiounis  to  my  mother  and  my  fifter  gour  bedfallow  ■ 
I  commit  gow  to  God  frome  Dunnotter  the  xxvj  Day  of  marche  1570  • 

3our  fifter  at  hir  power  Tsc"  • 

Annas  Keyth  • 
To  my  bruther  the  Laird  off  Louchlevine  • 


J  ohn  Knox  to  Sir  William  Douglas  of  LochLeven  • 

49  After  harty  commendatioun  of  my  feruice  unto  you  rycht  wyrfliipfuU 
I  receaved  your  miffive  this  lafl  of  March  perceaving  tharby  the  bruite 
that  ye  hear  of  the  puq)ole  of  fome  to  tack  the  Caftell  of  Sanftandrois 
(luhilk  bruite  I  eafely  beleve  be  not  aUtogidder  vane  for  men  will  not 
faill  to  hurt  what  thei  can  the  quietnes  of  this  realme  and  to  reenter  in 
thare  vfurped  pofl'effiouu  and  iniuft  vplifting  of  the  fruitis  that  never 
juftlie  did  apperteane  to  fick  Idill  bellies  •  How  fick  trublaris  may  be 
ftayed  of  thare  Interprlfes  I  remitt  to  God  to  whofe  counfall  I  com- 
mitt  yow  in  that  and  all  other  cafes  worldly  for  I  haue  tacken  my  gude 
nycht  of  it  and  therfor  bear  with  me  gude  fir  albeit  I  writ  not  to  the 
Superintendent  of  Fiff  in  the  adioun  that  ye  defyr  as  concernyng  the 
excufe  of  the  tua  minifteris  to  our  Superintendent  I  fliall  do  the  belt 
that  I  can  when  I  meitt  with  him  and  thus  with  my  harty  commendatioun 
I  committ  you  to  the  protedioun  of  the  Omnipotent  Of  Edinburghe 
the  fam  hour  I  receaued  youris  this  friday  att  5  after  none  1570  • 

Yours  to  power  in  God 

trubled  in  body 

JoHNE  Knox • 
To  the  Ryght  WorfhepfuU 
the  Lard  of  Lochlevin  • 


JAC.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  53 

Charge  to  deliver  the  Caftle  of  St.  Andrews  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

50  Dauid  Orme  chalmerlane  of  fanftandrois  •  Becaufe  of  this  difficill  tyme 
and  apperance  of  trubles  /  I  think  it  meit  ^e  delyuer  the  caftcU  of  fanft- 
androis  to  the  Laird  of  Lochlevin  And  for  gour  warrand  ge  fall  keip  this 
my  lettre  /  wnto  the  tyme  ge  obtene  the  erle  of  Mortonis  and  the  reft 
of  the  confall  /  gif  that  houfe  be  nocht  fwrelie  kepit  to  the  Kingis  feruice 
it  may  truble  his  obedience  /  this  niekle  I  doupt  nocht  Bot  ge  wnder- 
fland  '  remitting  the  reft  to  the  Laird  of  Lochlevins  aduerteifment  • 
Subfcriuit  with  my  hand  at  Striuiling  caftell  the  x  off  aprile  1570  • 


To  my  traift  treind 

Dauid  Orme  chalmerlane  of 

Sanftandrois  • 


X  he  Earl  of  Mar  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  ■ 

51  Xvycht  honorable  and  traift  coufing  eftir  hartlie  commendationes  I  haue 
reffauit  gour  writing  /  Towart  the  Lettre  ge  defyrit  to  Dauid  Orme  ge 
fall  reffaue  the  fame  fubfcriuit  be  My  Lordis  of  Mortoune  Glencairne  and 
me  •  As  to  the  erle  of  Lenox  ferwand  he  wes  of  mynd  to  haue  cumed  to 
gow  /  Bott  he  alterit  purpoife  and  depertit  with  all  diligence  to  meit  his 
Maifter  /  the  lettres  he  fould  haue  delyuerit  Drumquhafill  hes  fent 
thame  with  my  Lord  Lindfayis  ferwand  •  The  erle  of  athole  hes  bene 
heir  defyring  a  begynnyng  of  conference  /  As  I  wnderftand  my  Lord  of 
Mortoune  hes  writtin  to  the  Lord  Lindfay  to  that  effeft,  ge  fall  defyre 
him  nocht  to  faill  to  cum  as  he  beis  aduerteifit  ffor  he  hes  bene  ouir  fweir 
this  quhyll  •  As  ffarder  occafioun  fall  ferue  ge  falbe  aduertefit  I  will  nocht 
writt  any  farder  in  perticular  quhill  our  meting  •  Sua  Eftir  my  hartlie 


54  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

commendationes  to  my  filler  and  all  the  reft  of  ^our  gude  cumpany 
Committis  gow  to  God  ffira  Striueling  caftell  the  xv  day  of  aprile  1570  • 
3our  Rycht  aflurit  freind  to  my  powar  • 

Jhon  Erle  ok  Mar  • 
To  the  Rycht  Honorable  and  my 

traift  coufing  the  Laird  of  Lochlevin  • 


Earls  of  Mar  Mortoun  and  Glencairn  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

52  Eftir  our  hartlie  commendatioune  /  vpoun  the  Reflett  of  gour  lettir  we 
haue  written  to  Dauid  Orme  To  deliuer  the  caftell  of  Sanftandrois  to 
gow  /  And  ficlik  hes  writtin  to  the  Laird  of  Rankilour  for  anfuering  gow 
of  ficlik  dewtie  as  was  appointit  of  befoir  to  Dauid  Orme  for  keiping  of 
the  faid  caftell  /  we  will  pray  gow  howlbne  ge  may  commodyouflie  to 
Reflaue  it  /  And  gif  the  pledgis  being  tharin  beis  not  deliuerit  to  the  erle 
of  Mortoune  befoir  gour  Reffett  therof  /  ge  fall  Reflaue  thame  and  keip 
thame  quhill  he  fend  for  thame-  quhilk  will  not  be  lang  /  My  Lord  of 
Mortoun  beis  the  morne  at  none  in  Dumfermeling  /  quhair  we  would 
wyfche  ge  fuld  meit  him  for  conferring  with  him  vpoune  fie  thingis  as 
ge  fall  knaw  at  gour  fpeiking  with  him  /  We  haue  writtin  to  Dauid  Orme 
that  ge  will  tak  ordour  with  him  for  the  byrun  exfpenflis  fen  our  com- 
mandyme.nt  gev\'n  Tnto  him  As  to  that  ane  day  mon  be  appointit  for 
hering  of  his  comptis  And  Ordour  taken  with  the  chalmerlane  of  the 
bifchoprig  for  payment  thairof  /  liia  fone  as  he  may  /  gif  the  fame  be 
not  done  alrady  ;  And  gif  ony  thing  be  Reftand  awand  '  preceding  our 
commandyment  gevyn  vnto  him  his  comptis  mon  be  fene  and  afligna- 
tionis  prowydit  tharfoir  And  fua  We  commit  gow  to  the  proteftioun  of 
the  Almichtie  /  fi-ome  Streveling  the  xv  of  aprile  1570  • 

3our  aflurit  freindis  • 
Mortoun  •  Mab  •  Glencabne  • 

To  our  traift  freind 

the  Laird  of  Lochlevyn  • 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  55 

Earls  of  Mar  Mortoun  and  Glencairn  to  the  Laird  of  Rankelour  • 

53  Eftir  our  hartlie  commendatioune  /  We  haue  diredit  our  writing  to  the 
Laird  of  Lochlevyn  /  to  Reffaue  tho  caftell  of  Sanftandrois  fra  Dauid 
Orme  As  allua  to  tak  Ordour  witli  him  Anent  the  Reftis  awand  to  him 
fen  commandyment  gevyn  be  ws  for  keping  of  the  faid  caftell  /  And 
Inlyikmaner  that  the  Laird  of  Lochlevyn  fall  haue  ficlik  appoyntment 
for  keping  of  the  faid  caftell  as  tho  faid  Dauid  had  of  befoir  heu-foir  we 
pray  30W  to  fpeik  with  the  faid  Laird  /  and  aduife  with  him  how  Dauid 
Orme  may  be  fatiffeit  anent  the  byganis  /  as  alfua  how  he  falbe  anfuerit 
in  tvme  cuming  of  ficlik  appointment  as  Dauid  Orme  had  of  befoir  on  the 
day  This  we  pray  50W  faill  not  to  do  as  ^e  will  Lnporte  our  fpeciall  thankis 
And  fua  hartlie  fair  30  weill  /  frome  Streveling  the  xv  of  aprile  1570  • 

3our  gude  freindis  • 


^(jn^/Y 


To  our  traift  freind 

the  Laird  of  Rankelour  tc- 


J.  he  Earl  of  Morton  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

54  iraift  freind  eftir  maift  hartlie  commendatioun  I  undirftand  the  Lordis 
in  Edinburgh  hes  written  to  a  greit  nowmer  quhome  thay  think  will  do 
for  thame  to  be  at  thame  in  Edinburgh  the  xix  of  this  Inftant  And  feing 
thay  meane  to  convene  ther  forcis  it  is  not  meit  that  thay  fuld  be  fleping 
Thairfoir  prayis  gow  to  haue  all  our  freindis  and  weilwillaris  abowte  gow 


56  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvr. 

warnitt  to  be  in  Redynes  upoun  ane  houris  warnyng  to  cutn  to  ws  quhan 
We  fend  aduertifment  quhilk  I  howip  fall  not  be  lang  to  do  /  The  Lordis 
in  Edinburgh  fend  the  Laird  of  Trabrowne  to  the  Erie  of  Suffex  with 
certane  Inftruftionis  delyring  him  to  leif  of  ony  Incurfioun  aganis  the 
fubje6bis  of  this  Realme  and  als  defyring  that  Maifter  Johne  Gordoun  the 
Byfchop  of  Gallowayis  fone  mycht  have  licence  to  pas  to  the  Quenis 
Majeftie  of  Ingland  with  a  lettre  of  thairis  /  baith  defyris  is  Refufit  for  he 
is  already  in  Tewedaill  and  hes  not  ftayit  the  Armie  bot  hes  ftayit  Maifter 
Johne  Gordoun  and  all  his  writingis  /  quhill  he  Reflave  anfuer  agane 
from  the  Courte  The  Erie  of  Levenox  come  to  Newcaftell  the  xvj  of  this 
Inftant  And  as  I  underftand  is  now  in  Berwick  /  Farder  ge  will  knaw  be  my 
Lord  Lyndefay  quhan  ge  pleis  to  confer  with  him  /  and  fua  committis 
gow  to  the  protedioun  of  God  frome  Dalkeith  the  xix  of  Aprile  1570  • 

3our  alTurit  freind  • 
To  my  traift  freind  Mohtovn  • 

the  Laird  of  Lochlevin  • 

The  Earl  of  Mar  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  ■ 

65  Rycht  honorable  and  traift  couling  efter  my  werray  hartie  commenda- 
tiones  this  is  till  aduertis  gow  I  have  reffavit  a  writing  from  the  Erie  of 
SuflTex  with  fum  proclamationis  laitlie  fett  out  be  the  Quenis  Majeftie  of 
Ingland  quhairof  ge  fall  reflave  ane  /  in  the  quhilk  ge  will  perfaif  hir 
Majefteis  gude  will  and  mynd  towart  this  realme  I  pray  gow  mak  my 
Lord  of  Buchane  and  the  proveft  of  Dundie  participant  of  the  fame  it  is 
a  werie  gude  dytement  and  proffitable  to  our  adioun  The  conference  at 
Dalkeith  hes  takin  lytill  eflFe6l  as  git  the  Erie  of  Athole  /  the  Lord  Bold  / 
the  priour  of  Coldinghame  and  the  Comptrollare  come  thair  to  fupper 
upone  Monunday  And  the  maift  eflPeft  of  thair  fpeking  is  to  alter  the 
melting  to  Muflilburgh  Edmeftoun  Craigmillar  or  Gilmertoun  quhUk  of 
na  wayis  wilbe  grantit  Sua  I  wuderftand  thair  menyng  is  of  nane  effeft  • 
Alwayis  as  forther  aftioun  fall  cum  ge  falbe  advertefit  /  The  Kingis 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  57 

Majeftie  and  all  freindis  heir  continewis  in  glide  helth  ge  will  mak  my 
hartie  commendatiounes  to  my  fifter  and  to  gour  bedfallow  ■  Sua  I  com- 
mitt  gow  to  the  proteftioun  of  the  Almychtie  Fra  Striueling  Caftell  the 
tuentie  day  off  Aprile  1570  • 

3our  Rycht  aflurit  freind 
To  my  powar  • 
To  the  Rycht  honorable  and  my  Mar  • 

train  coufing  the  Laird  of  Lochlevin  • 

±  he  Archbifliop  of  St.  Andrews  and  Commendator  of  Arbroath  to  John 
Hamilton  of  Grange  • 

56  ireft  Cufing  efter  muill  hartlie  commendatioun  this  prefent  is  to  adver- 
teis  gow  that  my  L  •  Duikis  grace  hes  fend  to  ws  and  caufit  us  warne  all 
his  freindis  and  forces  to  cum  to  him  to  Edinburgh  bayth  on  fuit  and 
horfe  that  will  do  for  him  And  therfoir  My  Lord  Claud  with  all  the 
forces  of  this  cuntre  and  partis  beis  in  Lynlythqw  this  fryday  the  xxviij 
of  Aprill  efter  none  /  bayth  on  fuit  and  horfe  Quhairfoir  prayis  gow  but 
faill  that  ge  warne  all  my  L  •  grace  tenneutis  of  Kynneill  Kerfe  Carriddin 
T;c"  and  all  the  tennentis  that  my  Lordis  grace  hes  in  tha  partis/  And 
ficlyk  warne  all  the  gentill  men  of  Lynlythqw  fchyir  or  therabout  to 
be  wyth  ther  haill  forces  bayth  on  fut  and  horfe  wythin  Lythqw  on  fryday 
or  euen  to  meet  my  Lord  Claud  and  the  reft  of  my  Lordis  freindis  and 
fervandis  wyth  viij  dayes  furneffing  efter  thair  cumming  /  and  that  thai 
be  all  weill  arrayit  with  Jak  and  fpeir  /  and  this  ge  man  do  wyth  diliirence 
that  thai  faill  nocht  as  thai  luif  my  Lord  gracis  weill  and  honour  and 
thair  awin  ,  and  fua  committis  gow  to  God  Of  Hamiltoun  the  xxvj  day 
of  Aprill  1570  • 

J-  Sanctandrois  • 
To  Johne  Hamiltoun  of  Grange  bailge  Arbrothe  • 

of  Kynneill  and  in  his  abfence  to  James 

his  broder  or  Arthour  of  the  Nefs  • 

A 


58  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

Annas  Keyth  widow  of  the  Regent  Murray  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

57  iJrother  efter  my  maid  hartlie  commendatioune  I  reflauit  gour  vriting 
quhairbj-  I  hawe  periauit  the  labouris  that  ge  hawe  takin  tweching  that 
matter  of  the  maifter  off  Forbes  and  as  I  wrat  to  gow  afor  I  think  It  be 
fume  wther  thing  that  he  be  feakand  thair  nor  the  bailgerie  I  wrat  to  the 
luperintendent  that  T  mycht  hawe  had  the  fyrft  euident  and  feifing  that 
my  Lord  gat  of  that  Lard  for  as  I  belewe  It  is  befor  this  bailgerie  of  the 
maifter  of  Forbes  •  The  fuperintendent  fayis  to  me  he  hes  nocht  that 
infefment  and  allegis  that  m^"^  Lord  commandit  hym  to  gywe  It  to  gow  as 
lie  layis  he  hes  done  thairfor  I  pray  gow  brother  gar  fe  quha  hes  It 
quhidder  ge  or  he  and  lat  me  hawe  the  tranfTump  of  It  or  ellis  the  dait 
thairof  for  I  wald  fane  be  quet  of  the  maifter  Forbes  fwit  and  fpeciallie 
gyff  I  may  do  It  be  rycht  •  And  tweching  that  ge  will  to  be  kepit  in  Leyth 
I  agre  to  the  fame  and  to  that  effeft  hes  vritin  to  my  Lord  of  Mar  and 
the  lard  of  Dwne  that  they  will  tak  the  pane  to  come  thayr  to  that  effeft 
bot  ge  and  my  Lord  of  Buquhane  man  aduertes  thame  quhat  day  ge 
think  meteft  that  thay  mak  nocht  trawell  in  wayn  and  as  for  mc  I  hawe 
fend  my  mynd  with  the  maiiter  my  brother  and  Robert  Kej  th  of  canter- 
land  for  the  Lard  of  Petterro  was  fick  and  nocht  weill  at  eis  quhilk  was 
the  caus  that  he  cummis  nocht  thair  at  this  tyme  I  defyr  nathing  to  be 
ftayit  in  that  matter  for  my  abfence  for  wpone  my  Lord  of  Mar  aduer- 
tel'ment  I  fall  come  ower  at  ony  tym  •  I  pray  gow  fir  that  gyff  thair  fettis 
ony  feflione  that  thair  may  be  ordour  takin  with  my  Lordis  executrie  and 
It  war  Weill  done  that  the  geir  quhilk  Is  in  the  Wardrop  war  vyfeit  be 
fume  tenty  hand  for  fwirly  I  belewe  the  maift  part  of  It  be  fpylt  quhilk 
will  profet  my  barnis  les  than  gyff  I  had  kepit  It  as  fum  tyme  I  did  and 
thus  leving  to  trubill  gow  with  langar  letter  quhill  forder  occafione  com- 
mittis  gow  maift  hartlie  to  the  proteftioune  of  God  Frorae  Dunnotter  the 
thrid  of  Julij  be 

3our  Sifter  at  power 
To  my  brother  the  Lard  Annas  Keyth  ■ 

off  Loychlewyne  '^c'*  • 


JAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  59 

Archibald  fifth  Earl  of  Argyll  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

58  rvycht  traift  coufing  Eftir  hertlie  commendationis  as  this  prefent  occa- 
fioun  fervis  and  nochtwithftanding  the  wariance  amangis  us  in  debett  and 
wnfettin  of  the  commone  caus  quhilk  fuld  nocht  be  aggreyit  amangis 
freindis  in  thair  awin  particularis  of  the  quhilk  we  defire  to  half  expe- 
riance  be  yow  and  in  fpeciall  in  thir  apperance  of  trublis  that  ye  will 
(land  as  ane  menteiner  of  our  tenneutis  and  puiranis  in  the  laiche  and 
gif  chance  cumis  that  we  may  do  the  lyk  wnto  yow  or  youris  our  gud 
will  and  deid  falbe  knawin  thairin  thinkand  you  maift  kyndlie  be  our 
opinyoune  of  auld  confawit  to  do  for  us  in  thir  behalfis  and  grettar  gif 
it  be  requirit  And  yf  ye  will  fchaw  this  benevolence  as  we  doubt  nocht 
bot  ye  will  the  tennentis  will  ufe  your  counfell  in  reafonabill  procedingis 
As  for  novellis  in  this  contrey  few  ar  belevit  with  yow  that  cumis  out  of 
this  airthe  Therfoir  I  omitt  the  faming  bot  gif  ye  pleis  to  aduertes  us  of 
ony  the  berar  will  caus  thara  be  convoyit  be  your  command  to  quhom  ge 
pleis  gif  credit  And  this  committis  you  to  God  Of  the  Carrik  the  xxij  day 
of  July  1570  • 

3our  guid  frynd 


Commend  me  to  my  Cwmar  your  ^f  I  hoyp  to  God  that  fortly  fryndis 
on  this  fyd  may  recompence  gow  of  ony  kyndnes  ge  fawe  • 

To  our  Rycht  traift  coufing  the  Laird  of  Lochlevin  • 

W arrand  to  charge  George  Ruthirfurd  of  Fernitoun  to  rander  the  hous 
and  place  of  Langnutoun  • 

59   J  ames  be  the  grace  of  God  King  of  Scottis  To  our  louittis 

Meffingeris  tc"- 


60  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

Our  will  is  and  with  advife  and  conl'ent  of  our  deareft  guidfir  Mathew 
erll  of  Levenax  Lord  Dernlie  our  lauchfuU  tutour  and  regent  to  ws 
our  realme  and  liegis  We  charge  gow  ftraltlie  and  commandis  that 
incontinent  thir  our  lettres  fene  ge  pas  and  in  our  name  and  authoritie 
command  and  charge  George  Ruthirfurde  of  Fernitoun  and  all  utheris 
havaris  keparis  detenaris  and  withhaldaris  of  the  hous  and  place 
of  Langnutoun  To  rander  and  deliver  the  lamyn  to  gow  our  officiaris 
executors  hcirof  within  fex  houris  nixteftir  thai  be  chargit  be  gow 
thairto  under  the  pane  of  trelToun  With  certificatioun  to  thame  and  thai 
failgie  Thay  I'albe  repute  haldin  eftemit  demanit  and  perfewit  with  fyre 
and  Iwerd  as  tratouris  tc-  •  l:c' ■  Gevin  under  our  lignet  and  Subfcrivit 
be  our  faid  deareft  guidfir  and  regent  At  Striueling  the  xvij  day  of  Auguft 
And  of  our  regnne  the  ferd  geir  1570  • 


IM//"/  M^^--^ 


W  arrant  to  aflTege  the  place  and  fortalice  of  Langnutoun  • 

<'t)    James  be  the  grace  of  God  King  of  Scottis  To  our  lovittis 

Meflingeris  "t  c"  • 
Forfamekill  as  We  and  our  deareft  guidfchir  Mathow  Erll  of  Levenax 
Lord  Dernlie  our  lauchfuU  Tutour  and  Regent  to  ws  oure  realme  and 
liegis  underftanding  that  albeit  George  Rutherfurde  of  Fernitoun  hes 
bene  charcrit  under  the  pane  of  treflbun  To  rander  and  deliuer  to  William 
Douolas  of  Lochlevin  his  place  and  fortalice  of  Langnutoun  ic  ■  Quhair- 
foir  We  haif  grantit  commiffion  to  the  faid  William  Douglas  of  Loch- 
levin to  convocat  our  liegis  and  pas  and  periew  and  affege  the  faid  hous 
and  place  of  Langnutoun  And  to  that  effe6t  gif  neid  be  to  raife  fyre  and 
ufe  all  kynd  of  force  and  weirlyke  ingyne  that  can  he  had  for  wynning 
and  recovering  thairof  T:c"-  T;c~  •  Oure  will  is  and  with  advife  and  con- 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  61 

ent  of  our  faid  deareft  guidfchir  and  regent  We  charge  gow  ftraitlie  and 
commandis  that  incontinent  thir  our  lettres  I'ene  ge  pas  and  in  our  name 
and  authoritie  command  and  charge  Ker  goungar  of  Ceffurde 

Wardane  of  the  Middill  Marches  of  our  realme  and  our  Schireif' 

of  To  convocat  and  affembill  our  liegis  togidder  within 

thair  boundis  and  pas  furthwart  with  the  faid  William  Douglas  of  Loch- 
levin  'ic-  •  'tc  ■  Given  under  our  Signet  and  Subfcryvit  be  oure  laid 
deareft  guidfchir  and  regent  At  Striueling  the  day  of  Augult  And 

of  our  regnne  the  ferd  geir  1570  ■ 

Matheu  Regent • 


•  JMathew  Earl  of  Lennox  Regent  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

61  J.  raift  freind  Eftir  maift  hartlie  commendationis  It  is  not  unknawiu  to 
gow  how  thair  is  ane  Taxatioun  grantit  be  the  eftaittis  for  making  of  the 
.expenffis  of  the  honorabill  ambaftat  that  is  to  be  dire6l  it  to  the  Quenis 
Majeftie  of  England  for  the  weill  of  the  King  oure  ibverane  Lord  his 
realme  and  obedient  people  As  ge  will  perl'ave  be  the  direftionis  and 
chargeis  fend  for  that  effe6l  Thairfoir  We  delyre  and  pray  gow  effec- 
tuuflie  That  ge  will  not  faill  to  ufe  all  poflibill  diligence  ffor  ingetting  of 
the  faid  taxatioun  fa  far  as  concernis  gour  part  be  reffbun  of  gour  office 
and  deliver  the  famyn  to  the  Laird  of  Djumquhalfill  colle6tour  appointit 
for  the  reffait  therof  And  gif  be  gour  gude  will  and  laubouris  ge  ma\ 
cans  the  haill  or  a  reffonabill  part  be  brocht  to  the  oolleftour  afoir  the 
day  ge  fould  do  ws  maift  fpeciall  plefure  becaus  the  ambaffatouris  wilbe 
louked  for  /  befoir  thair  furniffing  can  be  reddy  Thus  We  commit  gow  to 
the  proteftioun  of  God  from  Edinburgh  the  xxvj  day  of  Oftober  1570  • 

3oure  gude  freind 

Matheu  Regent  ■ 
To  our  traift  freind  the 
Laird  of  Lochlevin  • 


62  OEIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

J_  he  Earl  of  Morton  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

62  Ooufing  I  Reflkvit  ^our  writing  /  And  befor  the  reffait  of  the  fame  wes 
in  hand  with  the  Regent  for  gow  /  he  is  prefentlie  content  in  fatiffaftioun 
of  gour  coiftes  and  expenffis  fuflenit  divers  wayes  to  let  gow  have  the 
bifchoprick  of  Sanftandrois  the  penlions  Handing  quhilkis  ar  prefentlie 
gevin  furth  of  it  And  will  reflave  the  Erll  of  Northumberland  of  gour 
hand  gif  ge  be  fatiffeit  with  this  /  Let  me  be  adverteifit  /  or  utherwayes 
I  wald  gour  felf  came  heir  about  the  28  day  of  this  moneth  that  we  mycht 
reflbun  upon  all  matteris  at  lenth  to  fe  gif  thingis  may  be  brocht  to  gour 
fatiffadlioun  unto  the  quhilk  tyme  I  referre  the  refl  and  fua  efter  my 
hertie  commendatioun  commitis  gow  to  the  proteaioun  of  God  •  From 
Edinburgh  the  19  of  December  1570  • 

3our  affureit  frende  • 

MoRTOUN  • 

To  my  Coufing  the 
Lard  of  Lochlevin  • 

jMathew  Earl  of  Lennox  Regent  of  Scotland  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

63  Richt  traift  freiud  efter  hartlie  commendationes  Having  laitlie  reflavit 
anfuer  from  my  Lord  of  Dumfarmeling  ambaffadour  for  the  Kingis 
Majeflie  in  England  contening  materis  of  grit  wecht  quhilk  concernis 
the  haill  eftate  And  fua  requires  to  be  deliberatlie  confultit  upoun  with 
fie  expeditioun  as  poffiblie  may  be  ufit  Thairfoir  We  pray  gow  effec- 
tuoufle  That  ge  will  not  faill  to  be  heir  in  Edinburgh  upoun  Monunday 
nixt  the  xxv  day  of  this  inftant  To  gif  goure  avyife  and  Jugement  with 

the  remanent  to  be  convenit the  weill  of  the  Kingis  Service 

and  the  continewance  of that  commoun  caus  quhilk  is 

fa  deir  to  ws  all  And  fa  [referring  all]  uther  thingis  to  gour  cuming 


JAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  63 

Committis  gow  to  the  protedioun  of  Almychtie  God    At  Edinburgh  the 
xxj  day  of  December  1570  • 

3our  gude  freind 

Matheu  Regent  • 
To  our  richt  traift  freind  the  Lard  of  Lochlevin  • 


The  Earl  of  Mar  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

64  Jxycht  honorable  and  traift  coufing  eftir  my  vverie  hartic  comraendatioun 
having  the  occafioun  be  my  broderis  departing  towardis  gow  I  wald 
nocht  omitt  till  niak  gow  aduerteifment  be  thir  few  lynis  thatt  I  am 
werie  defyrous  to  fpeik  with  gow  And  belcvit  att  my  being  laft  in  Edin- 
burgh to  have  convenit  with  gow  /  git  my  Lord  of  Mortoun  and  1  wes  in 
purpofe  anent  gour  biffines  as  ge  haif  wnderftand  be  our  letteris  direftit 
to  gow  Thairfor  I  will  defyre  gou  to  cum  our  to  Edinburgh  att  this  con- 
ventioun  quhilk  is  appoyntit  the  xij  of  this  inftant  thatt  vvo  may  confer 
togidder  baith  for  our  awin  weillis  and  the  commowne  caus  1  remitt  the 
reft  to  my  broderis  declaratioun  quhill  our  meiting  And  committis  gow 
to  the  proteftioun  of  the  Almychtie  Fra  Strivihng  Caftell  the  levint 
day  of  Januar  1570  • 

3our  Rycht  aflurit  gude  freind  at  powar 

Mar  ■ 
To  my  Rycht  traift  coufing 
the  Laird  of  Lochlevin  • 


Ihe  Erll  of  Mortouns  Exemptioun  the  tyme  he  wes  ambafladour  in 
England  • 

65    James  be  the  grace  of  God  King  of  Scottis  To  our  Prefident  and  Lordis 
of  our  Counfale  and  Seffioune  tc"  ■  "tc-  •  Forfamekle  as  We  with  avile  of 


ti4  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xm. 

our  derrell  guidfchir  and  lauchfuU  tutour  Matho  erle  of  Leuenax  Lord 
Dernelie  T:c'  Regent  to  ws  our  Realme  and  liegis  and  of  the  Lordis  of 
our  fecreit  Counfale  haif  directit  our  rycht  traift  coufing  and  counfalour 
James  erle  of  Mortoun  Lord  of  Dalkeith  T:c"  our  Chancellar  and  greit 
Admirall  of  our  realme  To  the  partis  of  Ingland  in  the  commoun  lervice 
and  affairis  of  our  realme  and  furth  bering  of  our  audoritie  He  being 
tutour  of  law  for  the  tynie  to  our  rycht  traift  coufing  Archibald  erle  of 
Angus  Lord  Dowglas  and  Abernethie  tc  his  bruther  fone  And  having 
in  his  handis  the  laid  erle  of  Angus  haill  evidentis  and  writtis  quhairby 
he  luld  defend  and  perfew  his  adiouns  And  now  eftir  his  age  of  xiiij 
^eiris  compleit  Our  laid  rycht  traift  coufing  and  counfalour  and  certaue 
utheris  or  ony  twa  of  thamc  (the  faid  erle  of  Mortoun  being  ane  therof) 
ar  chofin  Curatouris  to  the  faid  erle  of  Angus  in  prefence  of  the  Lordis 
of  our  Counfale  and  Seffioun  Thairfoir  tc"  We  hail  luperfedit  delayit 
and  refpedit  all  and  findrie  a6tionis  and  caufis  movit  or  to  be  movit 
aganis  our  laidis  traift  coufingis  and  counfalouris  James  erle  of  Mortoun 
and  Archibald  erle  of  Angus  thair  kin  freindis  men  tenentis  and  fer- 
vandis  and  fpeciallie  thir  perfonis  underwritten  That  is  to  fay 
erle  of  Buchane  'ic  our  coufing  William  Lord  Hay  of  ^efter  William 
Douglas  of  Lochlevin  Archibald  Douglas  of  Killpindie  Patrik  Douglas  his 
lone  James  Foreftar  of  Corftorphin  knycht  Henry  Foreftar  his  bruther 
gprmane  Walter  Urquhard  our  Scheriff  of  Cromartie  Finlay  Manlbun 
in  Pitcalzeane  Alexander  Hume  of  Manderftoun  his  brether  thair  tenentis 
John  Douglas  of  Halthornden  1;c'  tc"  or  ony  of  thame  To  ceis  and  reft 
uncallit  perfewit  or  procedit  upoun  unto  the  returning  of  our  faid  traift 
coufing  and  confalour  James  erle  of  Mortoun  furth  of  the  faidis  partis 
of  Ingland  and  twentie  dayis  thaireftir  tc"  ■  Given  under  our  fignet  and 
I'ublcrivit  be  our  faid  derreft  guidfir  tutour  and  regent  At  Edinburgh  the 
xxvij  day  of  Januar  and  of  our  regnne  the  ferd  ^eir  1570  • 

Matheu  Regent • 


VI.] 


OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON. 


65 


Two  Lists  of  Perfons  of  the  Surname  of  Hamilton 


his  fonis. 


66    James   Duke   of   Chaftellarault  erle 
of  Arrane,  tc. 
Dauid  Hamiltoun, 
Claude  Hamiltoun, 
Gawin,  commendater  of  Kib\  ynning-. 
James  Hamiltoun  of  Sammelftoun. 
Gawin  Hamiltoun,  his  fone. 
James  Hamiltoun  of  Rouchbank. 
Johnne  Hamiltoun  of  Auchingemmill. 
James  Hamiltoun  in  Garrane. 
Robert  Hamiltoun  in  Torrence. 
Andro  Hamiltoun  iii  Heleis. 
Johnne  Hamiltoun  in  Blantyre. 
Robert  Hamiltoun  in  Letharae. 
Robert  Hamiltoun  in  Garrane. 
Arthure  Hamiltoun  in  Mirretoun. 
Thomas  Hamiltoun. 
Andro  Hamiltoun. 
James  Hamiltoun. 
Johnne  Hamiltoun,  fone  to  Sir  Thomas 

Hamiltoun. 
John  Hamiltoun  in  Bothuile. 
Michael  Hamiltoun. 
Johnne  Hamiltoun  in  Schavvtoun. 
Robert  Hamiltoun  in  Mylburne. 
James  Hamiltoun  of  Kincavill. 
James  Hamiltoun,  his  fone. 
James  Hamiltoun  of  Innerwik. 
James  Hamiltoun  of  Barefute. 
Andro    Hamiltoun    of    Goiflingtoun, 

knycht. 
Johnne  Hamiltoun,  his  bruther. 


fonis  to  the  Laird 
of  Preftoun. 


Dauid     Hamiltoun     of     Fingaltoun, 

knycht. 
Maifter  Robert  Hamiltoun,  his  bruther     deid. 

germane. 
George  Hamiltoun, 
Robert  Hamiltoun, 
Johnne  Hamiltoun, 
Johnne  Hamiltoun  of  Stanehous. 
Robert  Hamiltoun. 
Maifter  Robert  Hamiltoun. 
Maifter  Archibald  Hamiltoun. 
Maifter  Thomas  Hamiltoun. 
Johnne  Hamiltoun  of  Orbeftoun.  deid. 

Arthure  Hamiltoun. 
Maifter  Robert  Hamiltoun,  his  bruther. 
James  Hamiltoun  of  the  Haggis. 
Johnne  Hamiltoun,  his  bruther. 

James  Hamiltoun  of  Torrence. 

Robert  Hamiltoun  in  Over  Torrence. 

Gawin  Hamiltoun,  his  fone. 

Andro  Hamiltoun  of  Likprevik. 

James  Hamiltoun,  hi?  fone.  <^«'f^- 

Andro  Hamiltoun  of  Redoch.  ddd. 

Robert  Hamiltoun,  fone  to  Andro. 

James  Hamiltoun,  his  oy. 

Williame  Hamiltoun, 

James  Hamiltoun, 

Robert  Hamiltoun  of  Eglifmachane. 

Robert  Hamiltoun  of  Newhous. 

Maifter  James  Hamiltoun  of  the  Peili. 

Hew  Hamiltoun  of  Blantyre. 

Johnne  Hamiltoun  of  Bromehill. 


his  fonis. 


dad. 


66 


ORIGINAL  PAPERS 


[sec.  XVI. 


his  brether. 


Andro  Hamiltoun  of  Cochno. 
Robert  Hamiltoun  of  Dalferf. 
Robert  Hamiltoun, 
ddd.     Maifter  James  Hamiltoun, 

Patrik  Hamiltoun,  his  ibnis. 

Archibald  Hamiltoun, 

Johnne  Hamiltoun, 

James  Hamiltoun  of  Wodhill. 

Johnne  Hamiltoun,  his  fone. 

Archibald    Hamiltoun,    Capitane    of 

Arrane. 
Gawin  Hamiltoun,  his  fone. 
Johnne  Hamiltoun  of  Pedderfburne. 
James  Hamiltoun  of  Boithuelhauch. 
John  Hamiltoun, 
Dauid  Hamiltoun, 
Maifter  James  Haniltoun  of  Neillif- 

land. 
Johnne  Hamiltoun  in  Udftoun. 
Patrick  Hamiltoun,  his  bruther. 
Archibald     Hamiltoun      in     Spittel- 

fcheill. 
Alexander  Hamiltoun  in  Kittemuir. 
Adam  Hamiltoun  in  the  Holme. 
Thomas  Hamiltoun  there. 
Johnne  Hamiltoun  in  Vicaris. 
Johnne  Hamiltoun  in  Laugrig. 
Thomas  Hamiltoun  in  Udftoun. 
Gawin  Hamiltoun  in  Roploch. 
Williame  Hamiltoun  in  Torfchaw. 
Hannis  Hamiltoun. 
Johnne  Hamiltoun  in  Twediefyde. 
Mathew  Hamiltoun  in  Stanehous. 
Johnne  Hamiltoun,  his  fone. 
Arthure  Hamiltoun  in  Heleis. 


his  brether. 


his  fonis. 


Alexander  Hamiltoun, 

James  Hamiltoun, 

Robert  Hamiltoun, 

Andro  Hamiltoun, 

Andro  Hamiltoun  in  Over  Heleis. 

Alexander  Hamiltoun,  his  fone. 

Thomas    Hamiltoun   in   the   toun    of 

Hamiltoun. 
Olie  Hamiltoun, 
Maifter  Robert  Hamiltoun, 
Quintene  Hamiltoune,  burges  of  Ha-     ddd. 

miltoun. 
Robert  Hamiltoun  at  the  Croce. 
Maifter  Robert  Hamiltoun,  perfoun  of 

Torrence. 
Johnne  Hamiltoun  elder,  his 

Johnne  Hamiltoun  goucger,    brether. 
Robert  Hamiltoun  of  Auchingrymont. 
Johnne  Hamiltoun  in  Grenehill. 
James  Hamiltoun, 
Andro  Hamiltoun,      his  brether. 
Robert  Hamiltoun, 
Quintene  Hafiiiltoun  at  Crocefurde. 
Andro  Hamiltoun, 
Johnne  Hamiltoun, 
Richard  Hamiltoun  in  Auchingleii. 
Blais  Hamiltoun, 

Williame  Hamiltoun,      his  brether. 
Johnne  Hamiltoun, 
Alexander  Hamiltoun  in  Preftoun. 
George  Hamiltoun, 
Niniane  Hamiltoun,      his  fonis. 
Johnne  Hamiltoun, 
Johnne  Hamiltoun  in  Pannis. 
AlexanderHamiltoun,burges  of  Lanark. 


his  fonis. 


JAC.   VI.] 


OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON. 


67 


his  fonis. 


Gawin  Hamiltoun  in  Newlandis. 

William  Hamiltoun  in  Hill. 

Alexander  Hamiltoun, 

James  Hamiltoun, 

Robert  Hamiltoun, 

Rowy  Hamiltoun, 

Thomas  Hamiltoun  in  Schawtoun. 

Johnne  Hamiltoun,  his  bruther. 

Thomas  Hamiltoun  in  Overtoun. 

Johnne  Hamiltoun, 

James  Hamiltoun,     his  brether. 

Andro  Hamiltoun, 

Arthure  Hamiltoun  in  the  Nefs. 

James  Hamiltoun  there. 

George  Hamiltoun,  browftar. 

Richerd  Hamiltoun, 

Johnne  Hamiltoun, 

Johnne  Hamiltoun  in  Grange. 


his  brether. 


Gawin  Hamiltoun  in  Errane. 

James  Hamiltoun  in  Letter. 

Johnne  Hamiltoun  in  Kirk. 

George  Hamiltoun  in  Glencofie. 

James  Hamiltoun  in  Straquheling. 

James  Hamiltoun  in  Knokandquhillie. 

Williame  Hamiltoun  in  Sunnok. 

James  Hamiltoun  in  Burnebray. 

James  Hamiltoun  in  Mirretoun. 

Johnne  Hamiltoun  in  Burneltoun. 

Thomas  Hamiltoun, 

Johnne  Hamiltoun, 

Thomas  Hamiltoun  in  Boithuile. 

Johnne  Hamiltoun  of  Brouncaftell. 

Johnne  Hamiltoun  of  Towitcoit. 

Archibald  Hamiltoun  of  Rybrayis. 

Robert  Hamiltoun  of  Mordoch. 

Alexander  Hamiltoun  of  Bathcat.  dml. 


officiaris. 


Jhonne  fumtyme  Bifchope  of  San6t- 

androis. 
Claude  Hamiltoun   fumtyme  Den   of 

Dunbar. 
Johnne  Hamiltour  fumtyme  of  Sten 

houfe. 
Andro    Hamiltoun    of    Goiflingtoun, 

knycht. 
Andro  Hamiltoun  of  Lekprevik. 
Dauid  Hamiltoun,   bruther  to  James 

Hamiltoun  of  Boithvilehauche. 
Andro  Hamiltoun  of  Cochno. 


Johnne  Hamiltoun,  his  fone. 

Robert  Hamiltoun,  Chalmerlane  of  Kil- 
winning. 

James  Hamiltoun  of  Sproufloun. 

Maifter  James  Hamiltoun  of  Nelilland. 

Alexander  Hamiltoun  of  Netherfeild. 

Robert  Hamiltoun  of  the  Grange. 

James  Hamiltoun  of  Rochbank,  callit 
Goudy  lokis. 

Jhonne  Hamiltoun  of  Corbitcock, 
mafer. 

James  Hamiltoun  of  Wodhall. 


68 


OEIGINAL  PAPERS 


[sec.  XVI. 


James  Hamiltoun  of  Boithuil- 

hauche. 
James     Muirheid     of     Law- 

chope. 
Arthur  Hamiltoun  of  Muir- 

town.  f"^^'^'^ 

Jhonne  Hamiltoun  of  Twey-        .j^ 

dyfyde.  Juiike, 

James  Hamiltoun  of  the  Peill       ^c. 

of  Lewingftoun. 
Mungow  Hamiltoun  of  Per- 

duven. 
Alexander  Hamiltoun  of  In- 

nerwik. 
mortints.  James  Hamiltoun  of  Garrane. 

Jhonue  fumtyme  Commen- 

dator  of  Aberbrothok.  ckclarit 

Jhonne  Hamiltoun,  Proveft  ^«'^«to"''i. 
of  Boithvile. 

Eobert  Hamiltoun  of  Inchemau- 
cban. 

James  Hamiltoun  of  the  Haggis. 

Robert  Hamiltoun  of  Garrane. 

Robert  Hamiltoun  of  Milburne. 

James  Hamiltoun  callit  of  the 
Toungis. 

Gawin  Hamiltoun  of  the  Hill. 

Jhonne  Crawfurde,  baillie  of  Monk- 
land. 

Jhonne  Crawfurde  younger  of  Feme. 
Clelland  of  that  Ilk. 

Cuthbert  Hamiltoun  of  Cauder. 

Jhonne  Quhytfurde  of  Miltoun. 


Jhonne     Hamiltoun     of 

Dairy,  fones  to  the 

William  Hamiltoun,  his       Bil'chope. 

bruther. 
All  the  brether  of  the  Helyis. 

Hamiltoun  of  Orbeiftoun. 
Hamiltoun  of  Fairholm. 
Hew  Hamiltoun  of  Blantyre. 
James  Hamiltoun,  his  fonc. 
Jhonne  Hamiltoun  of  Schawtoun  and 

his  twa  fonis. 
Jhonne  Hamiltoun  of  Kilbowy. 
Dauid  Forfyth  of  the  Dykis. 
The  thre  brcider  of  Dalferff. 
The  Hamiltounis  of  Dalbene. 
Robert  Hamiltoun  of  Torrence,   and 

the  reft  of  that  gange. 
Arthour  Hamiltoun  of  Orbeiftoun. 
Jhonne  Hamiltoun,  ^"^"^s  to  the 

Iroveft  of 
M'  Robert  Hamiltoun,        Hamiltoun. 
Thomas  Hamiltoun  of  the  Toun. 
Jhonne  Hamiltoun  of  Boithvile. 
Thomas  Hamiltoun  of  Boithvile. 
Gawin  Baxter  thair. 
Gawin  Hamiltoun,  ibne  to  the  Abbot 

of  Kilwinning. 
Mathow  Hamiltoun  of  Philpftoun. 
Patrik  Crummy  of  Carriddin. 
James  Muir,  burges  of  Lynlythqw. 
Jhonne  Hamiltoun  in  Turnlaw. 
Archibald  Hamiltoun,  his  bruther. 
James  Hamiltoun  in  Kirkhill. 
Arthour  Hamiltoun,  bruther  to  James 
Hamiltoun  of  Boithuelhauch. 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  69 

A  CommifRoun  to  compeir  before  quhatfumevir  Juge  to  perfew  and 
defend  in  all  my  Lord  Chancellaris  aftiounes  • 

67  JjE  IT  Kend  till  all  men  be  thir  prefent  lettres  Ws  James  erle  of 
Mortoun  Lord  of  Dalkeith  tc  Chancellar  and  grete  Admarall  of  Scot- 
land That  forfamekle  as  we  ar  prefentlie  direftit  be  our  foverane  Lord 
with  avife  of  my  Lord  Regentis  grace  and  of  the  Lordis  of  Secreit  Coun- 
fale  to  the  partis  of  Ingland  in  the  commoun  fervice  of  this  realme  and 
furthbering  of  his  Majefties  auftorite  fwa  that  we  may  nocht  be  our  felf 
await  upoun  our  awne  effaris  and  befynes  within  this  realme  Thairfbir  to 
have  maid  conftitute  and  ordanit  tc"  honorable  men  and  our  weilbelovits 

our  procuratouris  T;c"  Gevand 
grantand  and  committand  to  thame  conjundlie  and  feverallie  our  verie 
full  free  and  plane  power  fpeciall  commandment  cxpres  bidding  and 
charge  for  us  and  in  our  name  To  compeir  befor  the  Lordis  of  our 
Soverane  Lordis  Counfale  and  Seffioun  Ic"  To  do  perfew  follow  or  de- 
fend As  occafioun  fall  ferve  Oure  richtis  and  reflbnis  to  Ichaw  our 
abfence  To  excuis  ws  to  defend  Litis  conteftatioun  to  mak  The  aith  of 
fuithfaftnes  and  utheris  aithis  neidfull  in  our  faule  to  Iweir  Our  parties 
adverfar  to  heir  be  fworne  tc  In  witnes  of  the  quhilk  thing  to  thir  pre- 
fent lettres  of  Procuratorie  fubfcriuit  with  our  hand  our  fignet  is  affixt 
At  Thomptalloun  the  ferd  day  of  Februar  the  geir  of  God  I^  V°  and 
fevinty  geiris  • 

Mortoun  • 


W  arrand  to  charge  the  Surnames  of  Burnfeild  and  Haitlie  • 

68    James  be  the  grace  of  God  King  of  Scottis  To  our  lovittis  George  S^ung 

Meffingeris  our  fchereflBs  in  that  part  conjunftlie  and 

feuerallie  fpecialie  conftitute  greting  Forfamekill  as  We  our  deareft  guid- 

fchir  Mathow  erll  of  Levenax  Lord  Dernlie  our  lauchfull  tutour  and  recent 


70  ORIGINAL  PAPEES  [sec.  xvi. 

to  ws  our  realme  and  liegis  and  Lordis  of  our  fecreit  counfale  Confidering 
the  lang  variance  and  difcord  that  hes  continewit  betuix  the  furenames 
of  Burnfeildis  and  the  furenames  of  Haitleis  this  tyme  paft  And  that  gif 
the  famyn  be  fuflferit  langar  to  remane  greittar  inconvenient  may  follow 
And  thairfoir  willing  to  tak  fura  fpedy  ordour  thairin  to  the  fatiffaStioun 
of  bayth  the  partiis  for  the  quietnes  of  the  cuntre  And  that  aggreement 
being  maid  thai  may  be  the  mair  abill  to  joyne  and  afRft  togidder  as  our 
trew  liegis  in  furthfetting  of  our  authoritie  and  fervice  Oure  will  is 
HEiRFoiR  and  We  charge  gow  ftraitlie  and  commandis  that  incontinent 
thir  our  lettres  fene  ge  pas  and  in  our  name  and  authoritie  command  and 
charge  Williame  Burnfeild  in  Grenelawdene  1:C"°  and  fie  utheris  thair  kin 
and  freindis  as  falbe  gevin  to  gow  in  bill  And  als  Alexander  Haitlie  of 
Lambden  George  Haitlie  in  Hoodlaw  "tc"  and  fie  utheris  thair  kin  and 
freindis  as  falbe  ficlyke  ge^dn  to  gow  in  bill  To  compeir  perfonallie 
befoir  our  faid  deareft  guidfchir  and  regent  and  lordis  of  our  fecreit 
counfale  At  Leyth  or  quhair  it  falhappin  thame  to  be  for  the  tyme  the 
xvj  day  of  Auguft  inftant  To  the  effeft  that  ordour  may  be  tane  alfweill 
towart  the  faid  variance  and  contraverfy  as  towart  the  affurance  allegeit 
brokin  be  athir  of  the  partiis  to  utheris  Swa  that  the  cuntre  may  leif  in 
the  bettir  quietnes  in  tymes  cuming  tc"  T;c"  Gevin  under  our  fignet  and 
fubfcrivit  be  our  faid  deareft  guidfchir  and  regent  At  Leith  the  fyft  day 
of  Auguft  And  of  oure  regnne  the  fift  geir  1571  • 

Matheu  Regent  • 


Licence  to  George  Ufufru6tuar  of  Dunfermling  to  remane  in  ward 
within  the  place  of  Dury  and  fex  myles  about  the  fame  • 
REX- 
69  Vt  e  and  our  deareft  guidfchir  Mathew  erll  of  Levenax  Lord  Dernlie 
our  lauchfuU  tutour  and  regent  to  ws  our  realme  and  lieges  underftand- 
incr  George  Ufufruftuar  of  Dunfermling  wes  chargeit  be  vertew  of  oure 
utheris  lettres  to  remane  in  ward  within  the  place  of  Dury  and  ane  myle 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  71 

thairabout  and  on  na  wayis  to  traufcend  the  boundis  thairof  T:C"  Nocht- 
withftanding  for  certane  reflbnabill  caufis  and  confiderationis  moving  ws 
and  our  faid  deareft  guidfchir  and  regent  be  the  tennour  heirof  gevis 
him  licence  and  libertie  to  remane  in  the  faid  place  of  Dury  and  fes 
mylis  about  the  fame  for  paffing  his  tyme  at  his  plefure  T:c-  Gevin  under 
oure  fignet  and  fubfcrivit  be  our  faid  deareft  puidfchir  and  regent  At 
Leyth  the  xj  day  of  Auguft  and  of  oure  Regnne  the  fyft  geir  1571  • 

Matheu  Regent  • 


Precept  by  John  Earl  of  Mar  Regent  to  Alexander  Douglas  • 
REX. 

70  Fewar  of  Colbrandifpeth  and  ^our  Chalmerlanis  quhatfumevir  /  For- 
lamekle  as  the  males  and  fermis  of  the  landis  of  Colbrandifpeth  of  the 
crop  and  geir  of  God  I""  V°  threfcoir  ten  geris  lafl  bipaft  wos  affignit  to 
the  fuftentatioun  of  the  hous  of  umquhile  our  deareft  guidfchir  Mathew 
erll  of  Levinax  Lord  Dernlie  our  lauchfull  tutour  and  Regent  to  ws  our 
realme  and  liegis  /  And  underftanding  that  thair  is  awand  to  Maifter 
Alexander  Douglas  ftewart  of  the  faid  hous  the  foume  of  four  fcoir  twa 
pundis  xj  s  •  money  of  this  realme  for  expenfis  maid  be  him  As  his  tickett 
of  compt  beiris  Thairfore  it  is  our  will  and  with  avife  of  our  richt  traift 
coufing  Johne  Erie  of  Mar  lord  Erlkin  Regent  to  ws  our  realme  and 
liegis  We  charge  gow  that  incontinent  this  precept  (ene  go  content  pay 
and  deliver  to  the  faid  Maifter  Alexander  Douglas  the  faid  foume  of  four 
fcoir  twa  pundis  xj  s  •  money  forfaid  Off  the  firft  and  reddieft  males  and 
prices  of  fermis  of  the  faid  crop  and  geir  of  God  I""  Y'  threfcoir  ten  geiris 
And  the  fame  falbe  thankfullie  allowit  to  gow  kepand  this  our  precept  with 
the  faid  Maifter  Alexanderis  acquittance  for  gour  warrand  Subfcrivit  be 
our  faid  coufing  and  Regent  At  Striveling  the  xvij  day  of  September  the 
geir  of  God  Y"  Y°  threfcoir  ellevin  geris  • 


72  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

Cyharge  to  George  Rutherforde  of  Farnytoun  to  appear  before  the  Privy 
Council  1;c~"  • 

71    James  be  the  grace  of  God  King  of  Scottis  To  our  louittis  Stewin 

Riddall  Meflingeris  T;c'  Our  will  is  and  with 

avife  of  our  richt  traift  coufing  Johnne  erle  of  Mar  Lord  Erfkin  Regent 

to  ws  our  realme  and  liegis  We  charge  30W  flraitlie  and  commandis  That 

incontinent  thir  our  lettres  fene  36  pas  And  in  our  name  and  au6toritie 

Command  and  charge  George  Rutherfurde  of  Farnytoun   To  compeir 

perfonalie  befoir  our  faid  Coufing  and  Regent  and  Lordis  of  our  Secreit 

Counfell  At  Leith  T;c"  upon  the  fext  day  nixt  efter  he  he  chargit  he  gow 

thairto  T:c-  Gevin  under  our  Signet  and  fubfcrivit  be  our  faid  Coufing 

and  Regent  At  Leyth  the  penult  day  of  October  and  of  our  Reigne  the 

fift  geir  1571  • 

Jhon  Regent • 

Apud  Leyth  xxviij  Novembris  Anno  ^c  Lvxj  • 

The  quhilk  day  George  Rutherfurde  of  Farnytoun  being  oftymes  callit 
Compeirit  not  Quhairfoir  My  Lord  Regentis  grace  with  avile  of  the  Lordis 
of  Secreit  Counfale  Ordanis  ane  officiar  of  Armes  To  pas  and  put  thir 
lettres  to  dew  executioun  Be  denuncing  of  the  faid  George  our  Soverane 
Lordis  rehell  and  putting  of  him  to  the  home  And  to  efcheit  and  inbring 
all  his  movabill  gudis  to  his  Majefties  ufe  for  his  contemption  Efter  the 
forme  and  tennour  of  thir  lettres  • 

Jhon  Regent • 


J.  he  Earl  of  Mar  Regent  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  - 

2  xvicht  traift  coufing  efter  maift  bertlie  Commendationes  ^x^rene  the 
Marifliall  of  Berwick  and  Maifter  Randolphe  come  heir  fra  San6l  John- 
neftoun  and  hes  maid  ws  privie  to  ane  aduertifment  quhilk  thay  hauu 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  73 

refTauit  laitlie  with  diligence  furth  of  England  how  thair  is  a  practize  in 
heid  and  intendit  to  be  execute  about  the  end  of  this  moneth  or  begyn- 
ning  of  the  nixt  /  for  convoying  away  of  the  Erll  of  Northumberland  out 
of  Lochlevin  /  ethir  to  the  Caftell  of  Edinburgh  or  then  to  Abirdene  / 
That  thair  fuld  be  fum  thing  alfua  attemptit  aganis  the  King  /  howfoeuir 
It  be  the  aduertizment  is  not  to  be  contempnit  /  for  it  is  thocht  the  Lord 
Seytonis  fpeciall  meflaige  from  Duke  Dalua  tendis  to  this  end  /  Keip  this 
to  gour  felf  /  and  prouide  for  the  werft  quhill  ge  fee  to  quhat  liklyheid 
thingis  drawis  /  Heirof  I  thocht  gude  to  aduertize  gow  /  And  fua  leving 
for  the  prefent  to  mak  langar  letter  Committis  gow  in  the  prote6lioun  of 
Almichtie  God  At  Striueling  the  xvj  of  marche  1571  • 

3our  aflurit  freind 


To  our  richt  traift  Coufing  the 
Lard  of  Lochlevin  • 

Licence  to  George  Leirmonth  of  Balcomy  to  abyde  at  hame  fra  all 
oiftis  wappinfchawingis  1;c"  • 
REX. 
73  At  e  be  the  tennour  heirof  with  avife  and  confent  of  our  richt  traift 
coufing  Johne  Erie  of  Mar  Lord  Erfkin  Regent  to  ws  oure  Realme  and 
liegis  Underftanding  that  Griffell  Meldrum  mother  to  our  lovit  George 
Leirmonth  of  Balcomy  hes  the  twa  part  of  his  leving  and  heritage  per- 
tening  to  hir  be  reflbun  of  conjuntSlfee  lyfrent  terce  or  utherwife  Swa 
that  the  faid  George  hes  bot  ane  fmall  part  thairof  to  fuftene  himfelf  his 
wiff  bairnis  and  famelie  Thairfoir  and  for  divers  utheris  reflbnable  cauffis 
and  confiderationis  moving  ws  gevis  and  grantis  licence  to  him  To  remane 

k 


74  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

and  abycle  at  hame  fra  all  and  findrie  our  oiftis  armeis  raidis  weris  wap- 
pinfchawiiigis  and  affembleis  quhatfumevir  to  be  maid  be  ws  tc"  be  fey 
or  land  TrC  tc  Gevin  under  our  Signet  and  fubfcrivit  be  our  faid 
Coufing  and  Regent  At  Striveling  the  xxiij  day  of  Marche  and  of  our 
Reigne  the  fift  geir  1571  • 

Jhon  Regent  ■ 


X  he  Earl  of  Mar  Regent  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

74  rtycht  traift  freind  efter  maift  hertlie  Commendatioune  •  We  haue  fpokin 
with  the  Marflieall  and  Maifter  Randolphe  '  quha  lettis  ws  to  vnder- 
ftand  /  that  thay  haif  inftruftioun  to  fatiffie  gow  touard  ray  Lord  of 
Northumberland  /  and  for  that  purpos  hes  defirit  ws  to  write  for  gow  to 
be  heir  with  diligence  quhilk  wc  think  beft  ge  do  /  for  apperandlie  gour 
Jorney  fall  not  be  without  frutc  /  We  pray  gow  thairfoir  expeid  gou  /  And 
fa  remitting  all  other  thing  to  meting  committis  gou  in  the  protedlioun 
of  Almichtie  God  At  Leyth  the  xxvij  of  marche  1572  ■ 
•  3^^^  rycht  affurit  freind 

Jhon  Regent • 
To  our  rycht  traift  Coufing  the 
Lard  of  LocMevin  • 


jNly  Lord  of  Mortonis  Commiffioun  of  Levetenentre  to  ryde  upoun 
Clydifdaill  • 

Apud  Leith  xx°  die  menfis  Junij  Anno  Domini  Y^  V'^  Ixxij'  ■ 

£  orfamekle  as  the  declairit  traitouris  rebellis  and  confpiratouris  aganis 
our  foverane  Lord  and  his  auftoritie  continewand  in  thair  treflbnable 
attemptatis  and  wickit  deidis  Tending  to  the  overthraw  and  diftruftioun 
of  the  commoun  weill  hes  of  late  maid  convocatioun  of  his  hienes  liegis 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  75 

and  forrajdt  certane  laiidis  within  the  Levinax  and  about  the  citie  of 
Glafgow  ,  as  alfua  within  Strivilingfhire  and  utheris  partes  of  the  reahne 
obedient  to  his  hienes  auftoritie  /  and  hes  herreit  the  peciable  and  gude 
fubjeftis  of  thair  guides  mynding  be  fie  tyrannie  to  mantene  and  continew 
thair  reif  of  uther  menis  guides  to  the  greit  hurt  and  prejudice  of  the 
Kingis  obedience  and  fubverfioun  of  the  ftate  of  the  commoun  weill  gif 
the  fame  be  not  fpedalie  refiftit  For  remeid  quhairof  My  Lord  Regentis 
grace  with  avife  of  the  Lordes  of  Secrete  Counfale  hes  thocht  meit  deli- 
berat  and  concludit  that  the  cuntrie  of  Cliddifdale  and  utheris  boundes 
adjacent  famekle  thairof  as  is  inhabitc  be  the  traitouris  tc"  tc"  falbe 
perfewit  with  fire  and  fword  quhill  they  be  exterminat  or  ellis  reducit  to 
our  Soverane  Lordes  obedience  And  for  executioun  of  the  fame  gevis  and 
grantis  full  power  and  commiffioun  tc"  to  James  erll  of  Mortoun  lord  of 
Dalkeith  Chancellar  "tc"  To  convocat  our  foverane  Lordes  lieges  in 
weirlikmaner  and  to  pas  furthward  invaid  and  perfew  the  faidis  declairit 
traitouris  rebellis  and  confpiratouris  tc"  with  fire  and  fword  thair  houfes 
and  dwelling  places  to  caft  doun  and  dimolifche  thair  perfonis  to  execute 
and  demane  to  the  death  thair  guides  and  cattell  to  forray  intromit  with 
and  expone  in  pray  with  all  uther  kynd  of  punifment  and  hoftilite  /  all 
houffis  and  ftrenthes  kepit  be  thame  aganis  our  foverane  Lord  and  his 
auftoritie  to  afiTeige  and  be  force  recover  1c^  "tc""  tc  • 

Jhon  Regent • 


A.  he  Countefs  of  Northumberland  to  the  Earl  her  hufband  • 

76  X  he  rumors  and  brutis  here  geven  furthe  of  your  Lordfliipis  deliuery 
into  Englande  hathe  trobled  many  but  for  my  felf  and  for  them  that  be 
of  the  wifer  forte  and  of  more  iudgement  it  could  neuer  finke  into  our 
myndes  that  euer  ony  of  honour  or  credite  wold  agree  to  fuch  a  con- 
dicioun  efpeciallie  in  that  nation  that  haue  fo  often  tailed  of  the  love  of 
their  neighbours  in  cafes  like  to  yours  /  and  that  hathe  fo  often  neded 


76  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

therunto  •  Or  that  the  Larde  (who  is  of  that  honour  and  wifdome  /  as 
he  is  taken  to  be  /  and  hitherto  hath  (liewed  him  felf)  wold  lay  vpon  his 
howfe  or  honor  fuch  a  burden  as  in  flieweing  the  prefident  by  you  that 
never  hathe  bene  before  fliewed  by  ony  of  his  nation  in  any  other  /  or 
that  by  him  the  mifliappe  might  fall  to  you  /  which  all  we  by  helpe  and 
luccurre  of  other  of  the  Nobilitie  of  the  fame  haue  efchewed  and  avoyded  • 
This  (I  lay)  could  never  feame  lykely  vnto  vs  /  and  therfor  did  we  leflTe 
accompte  of  fuche  fayeingis  /  as  thofe  that  haue  more  grounded  opinion 
of  the  Lardis  dexteritie  and  honorable  dealing  /  and  do  hoape  more  in 
him  for  the  perfeding  and  accompliftiing  of  our  longe  defired  fewte  for 
your  enlargement  /  then  that  we  can  conceave  or  diftruft  ony  finifter 
meenyng  or  vndew  devife  at  his  handis  tending  to  your  vndoeing  or  ouer- 
throw  •  Althoughe  we  are  not  of  that  mynde  but  that  your  ennemyes  do 
and  will  by  all  the  meanes  they  can  worke  by  worde  /  promife  /  and  fayre 
glofes  pra6tife  what  they  may  to  draw  the  Larde  to  agree  vnto  them  • 
yet  we  ftande  in  no  dowbte  of  him  but  that  he  hathe  that  confideracioun 
over  his  owne  honour  /  and  is  of  that  wifdome  that  he  will  paffe  ouer 
their  requeflis  in  wife  order  /  and  yet  ftande  as  flialbe  moft  agreable  to 
his  calling  /  feing  it  reftithe  in  his  only  power  and  will  /  without  their 
impeachement  or  others  comptroUement  /  to  do  for  you  in  this  cafe  as  to 
him  felf  fhall  feame  beft  /  he  foly  having  the  order  and  poffefRon  of  you 
without  bonde  or  charge  to  ftay  him  from  doeing  for  you  as  he  fliall 
thinke  good  /  of  whom  alone  you  are  to  feke  your  releafe  /  and  that  way 
to  follow  it  that  it  may  be  graunted  with  expedition  /  feing  we  be  prepared 
and  readie  to  fatiffie  him  vpon  the  vnderftanding  of  ony  fufficient  aflur- 
ance  wherby  we  may  vpon  the  payment  of  the  money  be  fewre  to  haue 
the  poffeffion  of  your  body  /  and  that  by  long  delay  and  protra6te  of 
tyme  /  many  inconveniencis  may  chance  /  muche  hindrance  cumme  aUweill 
by  the  hazarde  and  perill  of  your  feruantis  in  paffing  to  and  fro  /  inter- 
cepting or  mifcariage  of  letters  and  other  mifhappes  /  as  by  the  great 
chargis  whiche  I  am  at  in  the  often  fending  and  in  the  expence  of  tyme 
which  confumithe  muche  of  the  litle  that  I  haue  wherby  myne  habilitie 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  77 

will  grow  to  be  lefle  /  and  your  frendis  wax  weary  /  you  fliall  not  be 
hable  to  yeld  fo  muche  benefits  to  the  Larde  as  now  you  may  do  /  nor  he 
can  take  the  commoditie  whiche  now  he  may  haue  /  which  as  it  liethe 
you  vpon  to  forfee  and  to  purfew  to  a  conclufion  that  may  take  a  fpedie 
effefte  /  fo  we  hoape  that  the  wifdome  of  the  Larde  will  not  let  pafle  this 
beft  and  offered  oportunite  /  whiche  ftandithe  moft  with  his  honour  and 
commoditie  to  take  holde  vpon  /  but  will  refolue  with  yow  in  fuche 
reafonable  order  as  we  may  with  expedition  receaue  the  fine  of  your 
agreement  /  and  he  may  haue  from  vs  his  benefite  with  all  benevolence 
favour  and  commendacioun  •  Thus  befiching  our  Lord  to  fende  you  a  good 
and  fpedie  ende  of  your  lang  and  paynfull  trebles  as  may  be  moft  for  the 
eafe  of  your  harte  and  to  your  greateft  conforte  /  with  humble  remem- 
brance of  my  dew  I  ende  this  xxj*  of  Marche  1572  • 

Your  Lordflilpis  moft  humble  wif 

A.  Northumberland  • 
To  the  right  honorable  and  good  L  •  and 
hufbande  Northumberland  • 


J  ohn  Earl  of  Mar  Regent  in  favor  of  James  Commendator  of  Melros  • 

REX- 

77  W  e  be  the  tennour  heirof  with  auife  and  confent  of  our  richt  traift 
Coufing  John  erll  of  Mar  lord  Erflvin  Regent  to  ws  our  realme  and  liegis 
promittis  that  howfone  the  penfioun  furth  of  the  abbay  of  Melros  perten- 
ing  to  George  Lord  Seytoun  or  his  fone  fall  fall  be  law  and  be  our  dif- 
pofitioun  We  fall  mak  richt  and  fecurite  of  the  fame  to  James  now 
Commendatar  of  Melros  And  mak  title  and  interefle  to  na  other  perfoun 
of  the  fame  Gevin  under  our  fignet  and  fubfcrivit  be  our  faid  Coufing 
and  Regent  At  Leyth  the  xxvij  day  of  Aprile  and  of  our  Reigne  the  fyft 
yeir  1573  • 

Jhon  Regent • 


78  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

John  Earl  of  Mar  Regent  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

78  Traift  coufing  eftir  our  hartie  commendatioun  /  this  berar  gour  lerwand 
James  Dryfdell  hes  at  our  command  delyverit  to  our  lerviture  Robert 
Porterfeild  the  fowme  of  ane  thowfand  markis  in  Ryellis  And  be  this  our 
tikatt  We  mak  it  knawin  wnto  30W  that  the  faid  James  hes  thankfullie 
delyverit  the  faid  fowme  Subfcrivit  with  our  hand  At  Leith  the  tuentie 
ane  day  of  Junij  1573  • 

Jhon  Regent  • 


The  Archbifliop  of  St.  Andrews  to  William  Douglas  of  Lochleven  • 

79  Rycht  honorable  Sir  Eftir  maift  hartlie  commendatione  pleafe  wit  I 
writt  to  30W  befor  defyring  gow  to  haif  fend  to  me  the  few  mailes  of  the 
landis  of  Bifchopfchyre  and  alfo  fo  many  barrellis  of  cilis  as  ge  had  wont 
to  pay  to  my  predeceflburls  and  becaus  of  gour  abfence  at  that  tyme  of 
Lochlevin  as  I  underftuid  be  the  berair  of  my  lettres  he  delyverit  the 
faid  writting  to  the  Lady  gour  fpoufe  the  quhilk  (as  I  beleif )  ge  haif  fein 
becaus  I  haif  gottin  na  anfuer  thairof  I  tuik  occafione  to  wrytt  again  to 
gow  for  the  fam  eflfeft  defyring  gour  anfuer  with  this  berair  John  Steuin- 
foun  my  fervant  quhat  ge  will  do  in  thir  premifles  And  gif  ge  dowtt  the 
perfuitt  of  utheris  for  the  faid  few  mailes  I  will  warrand  gow  at  all  uther 
handis  •  Commend  me  harthe  to  the  Lady  your  fpoufe  quhom  with  gow 
I  committ  to  the  prote6lione  of  the  Eternall  Off  Sandandros  the  xviiij 
of  februar  1573  • 

3ouris  at  pouer 

J  •  Sanctandrois  • 
To  the  rycht  honorable  William  Dowglas  off  Lochlevin  • 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EAELS  OF  MORTON.  79 

Annabella  Countefs  of  Mar  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

80  Rycht  honorabill  Sir  eftir  my  vcray  hartlie  commendatioun  •  Having 
reflavit  gour  writting  concerning  gour  fylvcr  Off  to  my  honour  I  declairit 
the  trewth  to  gour  feruand  James  Dryifdaill  I  am  veray  forie  ge  fuld 
conceave  fie  ane  opinioun  of  me  that  ge  knaw  I  may  borrow  that  Ibume 
and  mair  •  for  gif  that  war  I  think  ge  mycht  juftlie  fay  ■  I  wer  in  the 
wrange  gif  I  mycht  do  that  /  and  leit  gow  be  in  fie  pane  as  ge  ar  in  • 
ffor  I  will  affuir  gow  on  my  honour  houbeit  my  Lord  my  hufband  haid 
nocht  bene  debtfuU  to  gow  gif  it  had  bene  in  my  poflibilitie  •  ge  fuld 
haue  haid  it  with  als  gud  hairt  as  ge  wald  haue  fuittit  the  fame  •  I  am 
aflurit  gour  wifdome  confidderis  quhat  occafioun  I  haue  gottin  fen  my 
hufbandis  departing  to  fay  my  credeit  ^it  nochtwithftanding  to  caus 
gow  knaw  my  part  /  mak  ge  the  moyen  to  prouyid  that  foume  upoun  land 
and  fall  bind  my  felff  in  the  maift  fuirrefl;  forme  that  ge  can  deuyl'e  to 
releiff  the  fame  ay  and  quhill  the  thoufaudis  merkis  falbe  payit  The 
quhilk  I  wald  nocht  do  to  na  vthir  in  Scotland  bot  to  gow  And  tliink 
nocht  that  I  mene  any  defraude  or  excuife  but  to  fatiffie  gow  gif  I  mycht 
ony  way  to  gour  contentment  As  knawis  God  Quha  mot  haue  gow  in  his 
keping  At  Striviling  Caftell  the  XTJ  day  of  Maij  1574  • 

3our  affurit  gude  freind  at  pouer 

Annabell  Countess  of  Mar  • 
To  the  richt  honorabill  and  my  veray 
ffude  freind  the  Laird  of  Lochlevin  • 


Jueonard  of  Cuper  to  the  Lady  Lochleven  • 

81  JMademe  efter  my  maift  hartle  commendatione  I  relauit  ane  wreting  fra 
gow  ane  monethe  fyin  Ichawin  me  that  gour  eldeft  dochter  was  to  be 
mareit  on  fondaye  next  on  the  gong  lard  of  Wemes  of  the  quhilk  I  am 


82 


80  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

werraye  gleid  and  defyrit  me  to  prouyd  for  all  the  weild  meit  and  wene- 
fone  I  mycht  gwidlie  get  /  war  nocht  the  ewell  wedder  that  hes  bein  this 
oulk  ge  hed  bein  better  ftokit  prayand  gow  therfor  to  aperdone  me  at 
this  tyme  and  refaue  fra  this  berer  ane  hyind  and  xxij  mowir  fowlis  with 
onne  wder  fteid  or  plefur  that  lyis  in  my  powar  falbe  rede  at  all  tymes 
quhan  gour  La  /  pleifis  chargis  as  knawis  God  quhae  mat  haf  gour  La  ' 
in  proteftioune  Frome  Cuper  the  xj  day  of  Junij  1574  be  gour  La  / 

Affurit  kennifman 

Leonarde  of  Cuper  • 
To  my  Lade 
Lade  of  Loichlewin  • 


Oommiffion  to  William  Douglas  of  Locbleven  to  mak  convocation  of  the 
liegis  T;c"  • 

REX- 
W  e  be  the  tennour  heirof  with  avife  and  confent  of  our  richt  traift 
coufing  James  erll  of  Mortoun  Lord  of  Dalkeith  Regent  to  ws  oure 
realme  and  liegis  for  certane  caufis  and  confiderationis  moving  ws  haue 
gevin  and  grantit  and  be  thir  our  lettres  gevis  and  grantes  full  power 
commiffioun  and  auftoritie  to  our  weilbelovit  WiUiame  Douglas  of  Loch- 
levin  To  mak  convocatioun  of  oure  liegis  in  weirlik  maner  And  to 
fearche  feik  tak  and  apprehend  George  Ruderfurde  oure  rebell  ic  "tc" 
Gevin  under  oure  fignet  and  fubfcrivit  be  oure  faid  Coufing  and  Regent 
AT  Dalkeith  the  xxiiij  day  of  October  And  of  oure  Reigne  the  aucht 
geir  1574  • 


JAC.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  81 

John  Carmichael  younger  of  that  Ilk  to  the  Chamberlain  of  Melros  • 

83  iraift  freind  efter  hartlie  commendationis  this  is  to  adverteis  gow  that 
I  am  to  keip  day  of  Marche  on  Thurifday  at  the  Reidfwyir  be  nyne 
houris  therfoir  I  mon  requeift  gou  to  accompanle  ws  hither  with  gour 
haill  fervandis  /  As  ge  will  do  me  L  •  Regent  and  my  L  •  of  Angus  plefure 
Swa  leving  to  trubill  gou  quhill  meting  I  commit  gou  to  God  At  Jed- 
burgh the  2  day  of  Julij  1575  • 

Be  gouris  alTurit  freind 

JOHNE   CaRMYCHALL 

I  pray  gow  faill  nocht  to  caus  all  the  Lairdis  goungar  of  that  Ilk  • 

fervandis  of  Langnewtoun  cwm  with  gow  • 

To  my  traift  freind  Mr  William  Henderfon 
chalmerlane  of  Melros  • 


J.  he  Lord  Ruthven  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

84  Jtvycht  honorable  Sir  and  weilbeluflBt  Eyme  eftir  my  hertlie  commenda- 
tiounes  I  receaved  your  writting  fra  ane  boy  of  gouris  this  efter  none 
And  hes  fpokin  this  morning  my  coufmg  Patrik  Murray  of  Tibbermure 
to  quhome  I  haue  declarit  my  mynd  to  be  fchawin  to  gow  at  lenth  And 
lalbe  reddie  at  all  tymes  to  gour  honorable  caufis  quhene  ge  falhappin  to 
haue  ado  I  being  deulie  foirfeyne  and  aduerteift  heirof  Remitting  to  the 
forder  declaratioun  of  my  faid  coufmg  Committis  gow  to  the  proteftioun 
of  allmychtie  God  frome  Ruthven  the  viij  day  of  Auguft  1575  • 

Youris  affurit  att  power 

Ruthven  • 
To  the  Rycht  honorable  and  his  weilbeluffit 
Ejme  the  Laird  of  Lochlevin  1c"- 
/ 


82  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xm. 

Andrew  Rutherfurd  of  Hundolee  and  others  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

85  Ixicht  honorable  Schir  Efter  cure  hartlie  commendationis  Pleis  gour  M  / 
to  be  rememberit  of  the  wrytting  quhilk  we  fent  to  50W  for  the  fchuit- 
ting  of  the  tryift  quhilk  we  defyrit  gour  M  to  appoynt  concernyng  the 
aftionis  betwixt  gour  M  /  and  George  Rutherfurd  in  Pharyngtoun  The 
caus  of  the  fchuitting  of  the  faid  tryift  was  /  becaus  of  my  Lord  Regentes 
grace  cuming  in  the  cuntrie  And  in  our  wrytting  we  defyrit  gour  M  / 
to  appoynt  ane  new  tryift  quhair  and  quhat  tyme  we  fould  meitt  withe 
gour  M/  And  becaus  as  git  we  have  hard  of  no  new  appoyntment  maid 
be  gour  M/  We  clefyre  gow  /  gif  gour  M  /  thinkis  guid  to  meitt  in  Edin- 
burgh upone  the  elevint  twelt  threttine  or  fourtene  dayis  of  Februar 
nixtocum  or  ony  uther  quhatfumever  day  or  places  gour  M  /  will  appoynt 
Defyrand  gow  to  be  fa  guid  that  all  executionis  of  law  at  gour  M  /  in- 
ftance  aganis  the  faid  George  may  ceile  to  our  meitting  as  gour  M  / 
appoynttis  quhilk  we  fall  nocht  faill  to  keep  God  willing  And  this  we 
pray  gour  M  /  to  do  for  this  our  requeift  Luiking  for  gour  M  /  anluer 
quhat  we  (all  lowk  for  committis  gour  M  '  to  the  proteftioun  of  God 
From  Jedburgh  the  xix  day  of  December  1576  • 

Be  gour  affurit  freindis 

Andro  Rutherfurd  of  HundoUe  • 
JoHNNE  Rutherfurd  of  Hunthill  • 
RicHART  Rutherfurd  of  Edgerfton  • 
To  the  Richt  honorabill  and  oure  affurit 
freind  the  Laird  of  Lochelevin  • 

W  illiam  Stewart  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

86  rvicht  honourable  Sir  efter  my  humble  commcndatioun  of  feruice  calling 
to  rememberance  my   dewtie  I  culd  do  na  les  than  to  mak    gour  M  / 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  83 

aduertefit  how  that  the  tua  tratoris  of  boduelhauch  lies  bene  thir  foure 
monethis  pad  heir  in  prefoun  quhar  the  ane  doith  ^It  i-emane  in  fure 
kepeing  /  and  the  vther  (the  eldeft  I  meane)  efcapit  within  thir  tua 
nichtis  be  the  moyane  of  ane  voman  that  had  credit  of  the  kepeing  of 
him  '  To  my  grit  greiff  and  hawie  dilj)lefour  •  ifor  Capitane  Traill  and  I 
had  determinat  to  haiff  beftowit  viij  ""  guldingis  for  thair  chargis  as  we 
had  conducit  with  your  keparis/  And  to  haiff  tranfportit  thame  to  Zeland/ 
thair  to  haiif  remanit  in  fure  cuftodie  till  gour  M  /  and  vtheris  my 
Lord  regentis  g  /  freindis  (quha  reftis  with  God)  had  bene  aduertefit 
The  Ranfoun  that  vas  demandit  for  thame  baith  vas  vj*^  crownis  hot  [our] 
vtter  determinat  anfwer  was  iii*^  crownis  Marie  now  in  refpocl  of  the 
abfence  of  the  principale  tratour  quhat  falbe  done  with  the  vthair  I  am 
nocht  certane  till  It  fall  pleis  gour  M  '  to  niak  me  aduertefit  /  with 
the  quhilk  gour  aduerteilinent  /  It  war  requelit  alfo  (faiffand  gour  M  / 
wifdome)  That  fauorable  lettres  var  direft  frome  the  regentis  grace  and 
nobilitie  to  the  goucrnour  of  this  toun  Randcring  him  thankis  for  the 
gritt  honour  he  hes  done  to  our  Kingis  maieftie  and  au6loritio  in  detening 
thai  tratoris  fua  lang  confidering  the  grit  requeiftis  and  manaffingis  that 
hes  bene  vfit  to  him  be  the  haile  nobilitie  and  principale  papiftis  of  this 
countrey  in  the  fauouris  of  thai  tua  tratouris  /  In  the  meane  tyme  I  am 
conllranit  to  enter  my  felff  in  band  to  him  that  vas  the  firft  occafioun  of 
thair  apprehenfioun  /  vthairuayis  I  culd  nocht  be  aflurit  of  his  fure 
kepeing  that  git  remanis  •  Thairfuir  It  vill  pleis  gour  M  /  Togidder 
with  the  reft  of  gour  wyfe  freindis  to  deliberat  and  avys  quhat  is  heft 
to  be  done  in  the  premifles  Quhairin  my  gude  will  /  piffance  /  and  creditt , 
falbe  employit  vpoue  gour  M  aduertcifment  as  in  all  thingis  ellis 
quhairin  /  I  may  be  able  to  do  gour  M  /  honour  and  feruice  •  Taking 
to  vitnes  the  eternale  God  quha  mf>t  haift'  gour  M  /  in  his  protedioune 
Frome  Briffellis  the  xxij  day  of  December  1576  • 

3our  M  '  at  his  power  to  command  with  feruice 

William  Stewart  • 


84  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xm. 

J  ames  Earl  of  Morton  Regent  to  warne  and  poind  Thomas  Brown  • 

37  il^ftir  our  hartlie  commendatioun  ge  fall  reflave  thir  twa  preceptis  the 
ane  to  warne  Thomas  Brown  to  Remove  fra  our  twa  pairt  of  the  toun 
A  and  lands  of  Stevinftoun  and  Howburn  occupiit  be  him  /  and  the  uther  to 
poind  his  reddieft  comes  cattell  guidis  and  geir  for  the  mailles  and 
deweteis  therof  of  the  geris  bigane  fen  the  deceis  of  umquhile  Williame 
Ker  of  the  ^aar  thair  is  rowme  left  in  the  precept  of  poinding  for  the 
tvme  of  the  faid  umquhill  Williame  deceis  /  for  the  fpace  of  the  geris 
lenlyne  /  and  for  the  quantitie  of  the  geirlie  deweties  as  ge  may  perfave 
quharintill  ge  fall  fpeik  the  laid  Thomas  and  according  to  his  declara- 
tioun  or  as  ge  may  have  ferder  tryall  thair  fill  up  the  faidis  blankis  of  the 
precept  aud  caus  John  Giifert  execute  baith  the  preceptis  of  wairning 
and  poinding  and  lat  the  guiddis  and  cornes  be  prayfit  and  deliver 
thame  agaue  to  the  faid  Thomas  upoun  his  promeis  of  payment  of  the 
laidis  deweteis  betuix  this  and  the  feill  of  Witfonday  nixtocum  And  fend 
the  preceptis  with  u,  tikket  of  the  cxecutiones  therof  to  ws  with  diligence 
And  fwa  we  bid  gow  fair  weill  ffrom  Malierudhous  this  xviij  of  Marche 
\^76  ■ 


> 


To  our  traift  freind  George  Douglas  fone 
to  Heftor  Douglas  in  Spittlehawch  and  in 
his  abfence  to  the  faid  Heftor  his  fader  ■ 


JAC.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  85 

James  Earl  of  Morton  Regent  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

88  ivycht  traift  coufing  eftir  our  hartlie  commendatioun  vpoun  complaint 
maid  of  the  lait  dilpleafour  offerit  be  30W  to  my  lord  of  Abirbrothok  as 
he  raid  throw  Fyff  IT  is  thocht  convenient  be  the  counfall  that  the  mater 
tending  to  the  troubill  and  brek  of  the  cuntre  I'albe  tryit  and  ordourit  be 
the  nobilitie  and  counfale  And  that  ge  and  the  lord  Abirbrothok  fall  bayth 
fend  gour  commiffionaris  heir  agane  the  xx  day  of  Maij  nixtocum  in- 
(truftit  to  informe  ws  and  the  counfall  particularlie  of  gour  greiflls 
qwerrellis  and  cauffis  of  complaint  That  the  occafionis  being  confiderit 
of  afoir  hand  We  may  the  mair  eafelie  refolue  on  that  quhilk  is  to  be 
done  for  the  vveill  and  quietnes  of  the  cuntro  And  to  the  efte6t  that  this 
intendit  ordour  lall  not  be  impedit  with  ony  furtlier  troubill  We  haue 
fend  ane  affurance  to  gow  to  be  I'ubfcriuit  quhilk  we  delire  gow  efFec- 
tuuflie  to  do  and  returne  it  with  this  beraro  As  ge  will  declair  gour 
obedient  gude  will  to  the  obferuatioun  of  quietnes  and  do  ws  acceptabill 
pleafour  Sa  we  commit  gow  in  the  prote&ioun  of  God  At  Ilalyruidhous 
the  xxix  day  of  Marche  1577  • 

3our  affurit  freiud 
To  our  rycht  traift  coufing  the  James  Regent  • 

Laird  of  Lochlevin  • 

James  Earl  of  Morton  Regent  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

89  Ooufing  Lochlevin  •  We  reflauit  gour  lettre  declaring  that  the  erll  of 
Buchan  had  I'chevvin  gow  /  that  thair  wes  chargeis  direct  from  ws  and 
the  Counfale  /  to  charge  gow  to  fubfcriuc  ane  alfurance  to  the  abbat  of 
Arbroith  quhairof  ge  marvellit  •  It  is  trew  /  thair  is  a  charge  dire6l  vnto 
gow  /  in  the  kingis  name  and  counlale  /  that  affurance  falbe  gevin  and 
takin  on  baith  fydes  /  And  that  for  gude  order  and  rule  to  be  kepit  in 


86  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xm. 

the  cuntrie  /  quhilk  during  the  tyme  of  oure  office  and  charge  we  ar 
bound  of  dewty  to  fee  the  fame  obfervit  and  kepit  And  truftis  that  all 
oure  freindis  will  refpeft  the  fame  and  not  gif  occafioun  to  the  contrary  / 
gif  maters  fall  out  vtherwyfe  nor  may  Hand  with  law  and  reafoun  be 
oure  freindis  then  fall  the  burding  thairof  be  laid  vpoun  us  /  and  that  to 
oure  reproche  /  gif  order  beis  not  put  to  the  fame  /  We  traift  /  the  courfe 
we  haue  taken  be  als  honorable  and  eaffull  to  gow  as  ony  cours  befides 
that  quhilk  is  already  tane  /  can  be  taken  /  We  wiflie  gow  to  wey  and 
confider  thir  maters  and  tak  the  liklyeft  /  and  that  for  divers  refpeftis  • 

We  perfave  be  goure  lettre  /  that  the  commoning  betuix  gow  and 
Alexander  Balfoure  is  expyrit  and  not  appointit  /  thairfore  we  will  reft 
fra  ony  farther  dealing  in  that  matter  till  we  knaw  goure  mynd  • 

As  to  the  Lord  Maxwell  /  We  defire  gow  to  keip  bak  goure  hand  from 
making  him  ony  new  title  till  farther  refolution  be  taken  betuix  gow  and 
ws  /  Sa  We  commit  gow  to  God  At  Thomptalloun  the  aucht  day  of  Aprile 

1577  • 

3our  gude  freind 

James  Regent • 
To  oure  coufing  the  Laird  of  Lochlevin  • 


James  Earl  of  Morton  Regent  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

90  Rvcht  traift  couiing  eftir  our  hartlie  commendatioun  /  The  complaint 
maid  be  gow  to  ws  auent  the  generalitie  of  the  affurance  cravit  of  gow 
wes  declarit  be  ws  to  the  counfalc  ,  Be  quhais  auife  It  is  thocht  gude  that 
the  famyn  be  alterit  in  the  twa  fpeciall  poyntis  complenit  vpoun  Swa 
that  the  famyn  is  now  put  in  fic  termis  as  We  traift  with  reffoun  ge  can 
not  refuis  to  fubfcriue  /  And  feing  the  tyme  now  fchortlie  approcheis 
quhilk  wes  appointit  for  ofdour  to  be  takin  anent  the  contrauerfy  and 
that  na  thing  can  be  done  befoir  the  affurance  firft  be  paft  •  We  pray 
gow  thairfoir  To  fubfcriue  and  returne  this  afl'urance  with  fic  diligence  as 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  87 

ge  may  gudelie  /  quhairthrow  materis  may  be  the  bettir  handillit  for  the 
commoun  weill  and  quietnes  of  the  cuntre  in  tyme  cuming  As  ge  will 
declair  gour  affe6tioun  thairto  and  do  ws  pleafure  Thus  we  commit  30W 
to  God  •  At  Haliruidhous  the  xij  day  of  May  1577  • 

3our  affurit  freind 
To  our  rycht  traift  coufing  the  James  Regent  • 

Lard  of  Lochlevin  • 

Liitera  Roberti  Douglas  filii  Gulielmi  Douglas  de  Lochleven  • 

91  James  be  the  grace  of  God  King  of  Scottis  To  all  and  findrie  ic 
Wit  ge  ws  with  avife  and  confent  of  oure  rycht  treft  ^oufing  James  erle 
of  Mortoun  lord  Dalkeith  Regent  to  ws  our  realme  and  lieges  To  have 
gevin  and  grantit  to  oure  lovit  Robert  Dowglas  fone  and  appeirrand  air 
to  Williame  Dowglas  of  Lochlevin  the  waird  nonentres  malis  fermis  and 
dewiteis  of  all  and  findrie  the  townis  and  landis  of  Cuthill  Burngranys 
alias  Burnfyde  'tc"  lyand  within  our  fchirefdome  of  Perth  Of  all  geiris 
and  termis  byganc  that  the  famyn  hes  bene  in  oure  handis  tc"  be  reflToun 
of  waird  and  nonentres  or  athir  of  thame  fen  the  deceis  of  umquhile 
Jhonne  Charteris  of  Cuthilgurdye  tc"  Gevin  under  oure  Privie  leill  At 
Halyruidhous  the  levintene  day  of  Januar  The  geir  of  God  P^  V  thre- 
fcoir  fevintene  geiris  And  of  our  regnne  the  ellevint  geir  • 

Per  Jignaturam  manu  diSi  Domini  Regentis  fubfcrlptam  ■ 


•James  Earl  of  Mortoun  Regent  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

92  Xraift  ('oufing  efter  our  maift  hertlie  commendatioun  /  We  have  reifauit 
gour  lettres  the  firft  of  the  xxvj  of  Februare  /  deliring  ws  to  accept  gour 
guidwill  in  gude  part  /  quhairof  we  thank  gow  indeid  /  howbeit  we  be  not 
vnmyndfull  of  our  awin  eftait  nor  git  of  our  gi-und  as  ge  wrait  Neyther 
we  traift  in  reaibn  fall  it  be  fund  that  we  haue  omittit  our  dewitie  to- 


88  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

wardes  the  Kingis  Majeftie  '  Nor  in  our  default  loft  the  freindfliip  of  his 
hienes  weilwillaris  /  Quhat  ge  meane  be  the  treating  of  the  Kingis  inj'ineis  / 
we  can  not  weill  anluer  vnto  /  being  la  generall  /  Bot  gif  ge  wer  plane 
with  ws  thairin  /  we  wald  anfuer  gow  in  the  like  playnnes  /  Indeid  it  is 
knawin  that  the  neceffitie  of  his  hienes  awin  eftaitt  and  of  his  realme  and 
haill  fubjedis  efter  the  lang  troubles  (quhairin  our  awin  burding  wes  not 
leaft)  required  peax  /  quhilk  being  treatit  and  concludit  be  the  cheif 
nobilmen  then  obedient  to  his  hienes  audoritie  /  We  haif  fenfyne  bene 
alwayes  cairfull  to  prel'erve  it  /  Off  intent  with  Gods  grace  to  haif  deliuerit 
the  governament  peciable  and  quiet  in  his  awin  handes  /  thinking  na 
thing  mair  dangerous  in  his  minoritie  then  the  renouatioun  of  troubles 
And  the  better  to  interteny  this  quietnes  We  haue  done  iuftice  /  and 
fhewen  our  felff  thairin  /  and  in  thingis  promifled  indifferent  to  all  /  as  the 
only  meanis  to  retene  the  realme  in  vnitie  and  obedience  /  Quhat  is  now 
intendit  and  practil'ed  to  the  contrary  /  Or  quhether  the  alteracioun  of 
this  courfe  Ikll  pruif  for  the  honour  and  weill  of  his  Majeftie  and  the 
benefite  of  the  haill  realme  /  tyme  and  experience  will  declair  /  And  for 
our  proceidingis  and  adminiftratioun  in  our  charge  /  We  may  weill  jullefie 
it  prayfed  be  God  ,  before  the  King  the  Eftaittis  of  Scotland  and  all 
vtheris  in  the  warld  being  reafonable  and  indifferent  • 

As  tueching  the  Maifter  of  Harris  aduertifement  /  how  vpoun  knawlege 
of  the  erll  of  Ergilis  cuming  to  Striueling/  the  Kingis  Maieftie  commandit 
to  gif  him  acces  and  a  cbalmer  within  the  caftell  quhalranent  we  hard 
nathing  from  him  felf  •  Quhat  it  fall  pleas  his  hienes  to  command  fall 
alfua  pleas  ws  Bot  We  confidder  weill  anewch  /  that  his  Malofties  will  or 
commandment  is  not  to  command  onj'  thing  that  is  aganis  his  awin  obe- 
dience (as  this  is)  without  he  be  fmifterlie  perfuadit  fa  to  do  '  Neyther 
wes  the  Maifter  gour  vncle  now  ignorant  that  the  erll  of  Ergile  wes  at 
the  home  /  as  the  laft  time  he  pretendit  /  We  ar  evill  and  vnthankfuUie 
acquite  for  our  guidwill  borne  to  the  houfe  of  Mar  /  Bot  it  may  fa  fall 
out  that  as  thay  deale  with  ws  Sa  may  thay  be  delt  with  in  tyme  als 
vnmeitt  /  be  thair  new  freindfliip  • 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  89 

We  thank  30W  hertlie  of  ^our  laft  lettre  and  aduertifment  tueching 
the  erll  of  Athollis  repaix-ing  to  Striueling  ,  Prayand  30W  to  continew 
50ur  aduertifementis  as  ^e  fall  fee  occafiouu  from  tyme  to  tyme  /  And 
altliocht  We  will  not  defire  gowi-  felf  to  pas  to  Striueling  /  git  we  wald  ge 
fuld  haue  fum  thair  /  to  behald  and  confidder  the  maner  /  that  be  gour 
gude  ineanys  We  may  haif  fum  certane  intelligence  of  thair  ettilling  and 
proceidingis  ffor  the  Kingis  Majeflie  being  weill  quhilk  is  our  cheiff  cair 
We  are  the  lefs  thochtfuU  of  vther  thingis  /  hot  lall  meitt  thaim  as  we  may  • 

M'  Randolphe  is  to  be  in  Striueling  and  to  prefent  a  taken  and 
lettres  from  the  Quene  of  England  to  the  Kingis  Majeflie  this  nixt  tylday  / 
The  effeft  of  his  melTaige  as  wc  can  git  pcrceave  is  to  falute  the  King 
vpoun  report  of  his  vertuus  and  gude  qualities  and  to  declair  the  Quene 
of  Englandis  fauour  and  gude  afFectioun  towardis  him  and  his  efiaitt  / 
The  troublous  eftait  and  apparent  dangeris  in  Flanders  and  France 
movis  this  /  and  a  defire  that  flie  hes  of  the  contincwance  of  the  freind- 
lliip  of  this  cuntrie  •  In  Flanders  fen  the  defaitt  the  flates  ar  reportit 
to  haue  recoverit  fum  couraige  /  and  that  in  a  fkarmyfiie  the  eldell 
bruder  of  Boithwelhauch  fuld  be  taken  prelbner  we  haue  gottin  as 
git  na  aduertizeraent  of  thay  thingis  from  ouy  I'cottifman  /  Thus  red- 
ing for  the  prefent  quhill  we  fall  heir  further  from  gow  /  as  ge  fall 
find  the  apperance  and  proceiding  in  thingis  /  Committis  gow  in  the  pro- 
teftioun  of  the  Almichtie  AT  Halyruidhous  the  fecond  of  Marche  1577  • 

3'^'^''  alTured  freind 

James  Regent • 

Althogh  in  our  lettre  we  delyr  gow  to  fend  to  Striueling  ,  We  reniitt  it 
in  gour  awin  chois  and  confideratioune  quhether  ge  think  meittar  to 
gang  or  fend  /  As  ge  think  ge  may  haue  maift  lure  intelligence  of  thair 
intentionis  and  proceidingis  that  be  gow  we  may  be  certifiit  thairof  • 

To  cure  traift  Coufing  the 
Laird  of  Lochleven  • 


90  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

J  ames  Earl  of  Morton  Regent  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

93  J-raift  Coufing  efter  our  maid  hertly  commendatioune  /  The  Englis 
Ambaffadouris  as  we  fchew  gow  of  befor  rydis  the  morne  to  Striueling  , 
and  my  lord  of  Angus  the  Chancellair  and  Thefaurair  rydis  weft  lyke- 
wyfe  /  Quherfore  We  wald  think  it  meitt  that  ge  alfua  fuld  be  thair  weft 
at  the  fame  tyrae  • 

Prayand  gow  to  addrefs  gour  felf  to  be  thair  the  morne  at  evin  /  Or 
ellis  howfone  thairefter  as  ge  can  /  Seing  thair  tary  is  not  to  be  lang 
thair  /  And  thairfore  the  founair  the  bettir  /.  At  gour  cuming  ge  will 
vnderftand  be  my  Lord  of  Angus  my  awin  meaning  /  And  fa  leving  all 
vther  thing  thervnto  /  and  gour  anfuer  and  aduertizement  thairefter  we 
commit  gow  in  the  proteftioun  of  the  Almichtie  At  Halyruidhoufe  the 
thrid  day  of  marche  1577  • 

3our  aflured  freind  • 
To  oure  traift  Coufing  the  James  Regent  ■ 

Laird  of  Lochlevin  ■ 

•J  ames  Earl  of  Morton  Regent  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

94  _Lraift  Coufing  efter  our  maift  hertlie  commendatioune  •  We  reflTauit 
gour  lettre  of  the  thrid  of  marche  /  And  as  we  tak  gour  playnnes  thairin 
in  gude  pairt  /  As  proceiding  from  a  friend  and  kynnifman  /  in  quhais 
gude  affedlioun  toward  ws  we  neuir  doubtit  /  Sa  ge  may  not  think  it 
ftrange  That  we  purge  our  felff  of  fafer  of  gour  accufatioun  /  as  in  con- 
fcience  we  fynd  with  our  felf  to  half  ofFendit  in  /  As  tueching  our  offence 
to  God  /  we  intend  not  to  excufe  it  hot  to  fubmitt  ws  to  his  mercy  •  ffor 
ambicioun  furely  we  think  nane  can  juftlie  accufe  ws  ,  ffor  in  our  privat 
eftait  we  culd  and  can  leif  als  weill  contented  as  ony  of  our  degre  in  Scot- 
land /  without  further  alpiring  /  The  bearing  of  the  charge  of  the  gover- 


JAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  91 

nament  of  the  realme  indeid  mon  leade  ws  or  ony  vther  that  fall  occupy 
that  place  /  Not  fimpillie  to  refpe6l  our  lelf  hot  his  Majefties  rowme  quhilk 
we  fupplie  /  And  thairin  not  tranfcending  the  boundis  of  melbur  /  as  ue 
traift  it  fall  not  be  found  we  haue  done  •  It  aucht  not  to  be  attributit  to 
ony  ambicioun  in  ws  /  ffor  how  fone  as  euir  his  Majeftie  fall  think  him- 
felf  reddy  and  able  for  his  awin  governament  Nane  fall  mair  willinglie 
aggre  and  avance  the  fame  nor  I  /  Sen  I  think  neuir  to  fett  my  face 
aganis  him  quhais  honour  faulftie  and  preferuacioun  hes  bene  fa  deir  vnto 
me  /  Nor  I  will  neuir  beleif  to  find  otherwayes  at  his  hand  then  fauour  / 
althogh  all  the  vnfreindis  I  haif  in  the  earthe  wer  about  him  to  perfuaid 
him  to  the  contrary  As  we  wrait  vnto  gow  /  our  freindlie  dealing  and 
confidence  in  the  houfe  of  Mar  is  not  thankfullie  acquite  /  As  we  traill 
gour  felf  confideris  '  Bot  becaus  the  ambaffadouris  of  England  /  my  Lord 
of  Angus  the  chancellair  thefaurair  and  fum  noblemen  Rydis  weft  this 
day  to  fee  the  King  /  We  pray  gow  hertly  addres  gour  lelf  to  be  thair 
howlbne  ge  can  /  And  as  ge  fall  finde  the  liklyheid  of  all  thingis  /  Lett  ws 
be  aduertift  therof  with  gour  awin  aduife  be  Alexander  Hay  quhome  we 
haue  thocht  gude  to  fend  weft  /  Seing  my  Lord  of  Angus  from  Striuiling 
ridis  to  Douglas  And  fa  we  committ  gow  in  the  proteftioune  of  God  At 
Halyrudhous  the  fourt  of  marche  1577  • 

30  ur  affured  freind 

James  Regent • 

For  the  avaricioufnes  laid  to  our  charge  Indeid  It  lyis  not  in  ws  fa 
liberally  to  deale  the  Kingis  geare  as  to  fatiffie  all  cravers  /  Nor  neuir 
fall  ony  Ibuerane  and  native  borne  prince  /  lett  be  ane  ofBciar  elhew 
the  difdayn  of  fie  as  thinkis  thame  Jugeis  to  thair  awin  reward  •  In 
many  cauffis  I  doubt  not  to  fynd  the  affillence  of  my  freindis  /  Bot 
quhair  my  adionis  fall  appeir  vnhoneft  I  will  not  crave  thair  affiftence  / 
bot  lett  me  beare  my  awin  burding  • 
To  our  traift  Coufing  the 
Laird  of  Lochlevin  • 


92  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

JJifcharge  by  the  Privy  Council  of  Scotland  to  James  Earl  of  Mortoun 
of  his  Regiment  • 

Af  Str'milhig  Cajiell  the  twelft  daj^  of  Marche  the  ye'ir  of  Ood  V^  \' 
threjcoir feviuleiie  i/ein's  • 

05  1  HE  KINGIS  Maieftie  nobilitie  and  eftaittis  convenit  Vnderftanding 
how  eftir  the  lang  trublis  and  dangerous  ciuile  wear  quhairwith  this  Realme 
wes  inquietit  frome  the  birth  and  coronatioune  of  his  Majeftie  vnto  the 
moneth  of  Nouember  The  geir  of  God  I'^  V  Ixxij  geiris  vmquhile  Johnne 
erll  of  Mar  lord  Erfkin  than  regent  to  his  hienes  his  Realme  and  liegis 
being  laitlie  deceiffit  Att  the  erneft  I'uit  of  the  Nobilitie  and  eftaittis  than 
convenit  The  nobill  and  michtie  lord  James  erll  of  Mortoune  lord  of 
Dalkeith  being  nominat  and  eleftit  be  thame  Acceptit  vpoune  him  the 
regiment  of  our  louerane  lord  his  Realme  and  liegis  Quhilk  eledioune 
and  nominatioune  with  his  acceptatioune  of  the  laid  charge  being  dewlie 
ratifeit  and  confermit  be  his  hienes  and  his  eftaittis  in  his  Maiefteis  Par- 
liament haldin  at  Edinburgh  the  xxvj  day  of  Januar  The  geir  of  God 
foirfaid  /  He  according  thairto  enterit  in  the  adminiftratioun  of  the 
Regiment  of  this  realme  in  a  maift  peralous  tj'me  The  Caftell  of  Edin- 
burgh than  being  ftuffit  and  detenit  aganis  his  hienes  be  his  rebellis  and 
a  greit  nowmer  of  the  principallis  of  the  Nobilitie  than  ftanding  difobey- 
dient  to  his  hienes  authoritie  Quhilk  caftell  being  recoverit  and  the  diftb- 
bedient  I'ubiedis  and  haill  eftait  fchortlie  pacifiit  be  the  prudent  and 
diligent  travellis  of  the  laid  erll  of  Mortoune  regent  with  greit  and  lumj)- 
tuous  chairgis  He  hes  fenfyne  worthelie  vfit  and  execute  the  regiment  of 
this  realme  quhill  that  now  the  end  of  the  twelft  geir  of  our  fouerane 
lordis  aige  approcheing  His  Majeftie  with  auilb  of  the  I'aidis  Nobilitie  and 
eftaittis  hes  thocht  nieit  that  the  governament  of  his  Realme  I'albe  frome 
this  furth  exerceit  be  him  felf  The  faid  lord  regent  having  lang  wiftieit 
his  Majefteis  awin  habilitie  for  the  charge  and  craveing  na  thing  mair 
erniftlie  than  to  be  dilburdynnit  thairof  with  the  honoure  and  fuirtie  of 


JAC.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  93 

his  Majefteis  perfoune  and  eftait  and  the  publi6t  peace  and  tranquillitie 
of  his  Realme  and  fubiedlis  Hes  frelie  at  his  hienes  defyir  dimittit  and 
randerit  vnto  his  Majeftie  the  power  and  authoritie  of  the  faid  regiment 
to  be  vfit  and  exerceit  be  him  felff  And  his  Majeftie  having  gude  pruif 
and  experience  of  the  faithfull  and  trew  feruice  done  be  the  laid  lord 
regent  to  his  hienes  in  his  tender  aige  alfweill  befoir  the  acceptatioune 
of  the  Regiment  of  the  realme  as  fenfyne  for  the  defence  and  laulftie  of 
his  perfoune  and  authoritie  chieflie  in  the  dangerous  trublis  than  occur- 
ring And  being  myndfuU  of  the  faid  gude  and  faithfull  feruice  In  refpeft 
thairof  And  that  vtheris  of  the  nobilitie  that  may  happin  to  be  employit 
in  his  hienes  feruice  may  ferue  his  Majeftie  and  his  fuccelFouris  with  the 
gretar  affedioune  in  tyme  curaing  Hes  thairfoir  with  auile  of  the  faidis 
Nobilitie  and  eftaittis  Found  declairit  and  decernit  that  the  faid  lord 
Regent  hes  dewlie  lauchfullie  juftlie  and  diligentlie  exerceit  his  laid 
office  of  Regiment  and  all  effairis  cauffis  and  chairgis  thairto  appertening 
And  hes  trewlie  as  accordit  in  all  refpeftis  adminiftrat  the  fame  fra  the 
tyme  of  the  accepting  thairof  to  the  dait  of  thir  prefentis  And  euir  dur- 
ing the  fame  fpace  in  all  his  proceidingis  in  the  governament  of  this 
Realme  kepit  ane  trew  aufauld  and  juft  part  towardis  cure  fouerane  lord 
his  realme  and  liegis  in  all  the  effairis  thairof  without  cryme  offence  or 
fait  •  And  thairfoir  his  Maieftie  with  auife  and  counfall  of  the  faidis 
Nobilitie  and  eftaitis  hes  declairit  and  decernit  That  the  laid  lord  Regent 
his  airis  and  fucceflburis  fall  nocht  be  acculabill  of  ony  maner  of  cr3'me 
of  quhatfumeuir  greitnes  or  wecht  without  exceptioune  that  may  be 
alledgit  committit  be  him  in  tyme  bipaft  Bot  that  he  is  and  falbe  in  all 
tymes  cuming  frelie  difchairgit  and  exonerit  of  all  accufatioune  Or  ony 
vtherwyifs  proceiding  moving  of  pley  or  queftioune  aganis  him  or  his 
fucceftburis  for  ony  caus  cryme  or  occafioune  of  cryme  quhatfumeuir 
that  may  be  imput  to  him  how  greit  foeuir  the  fame  be  And  that  his 
hienes  foirfaid  declaratioune  be  ane  fufficient  exoneratioune  and  acquit- 
tance to  the  faid  lord  regent  his  airis  fucceflburis  and  aflignayis  Off  all 
crymes  queftionis  or  offences  that  can   or  may  be  criminalie  or  ciuilie 


94  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

imput  to  him  be  his  Majeftie  for  ony  fait  or  deid  done  be  him  his  minif- 
teris  and  feruandis  in  the  faid  adrainiftratioune  in  the  regiment  during 
the  fpace  and  tyme  thairof  And  the  faid  acquittance  and  difcharge  his 
hienes  with  auife  and  confent  of  the  faidis  Nobilitie  and  eftaittis  hes  willit 
and  grantit  to  be  als  vailliabill  and  of  als  greit  ftrenth  force  and  effeft  in 
all  refpeftis  As  gif  the  hieeft  cryme  that  can  or  may  be  Impute  to  ony 
perfoun  wer  fpecialie  expreffit  thairin  Difchairging  all  his  hienes  Judges 
and  Minifteris  of  his  lawis  That  nane  of  thame  attempt  ony  thing  in  the 
contrair  thairof  and  of  thair  offices  in  that  part  And  als  his  Majeftie  with 
auife  of  the  faidis  Nobilitie  and  eftaittis  hes  difchairgit  quitclamit  and 
exonerit  the  faid  lord  regent  his  airis  executouris  affignayis  and  fuccef- 
Iburis  his  minifteris  fadouris  and  feruandis  Off  all  fowmes  of  money 
cun3eit  and  vncun3eit  All  maillis  fermes  proffeittis  rentis  revenues  and 
dewiteis  baith  of  the  propir  patrimony  and  calualitie  of  the  realme  and 
dominionis  and  of  his  Majefties  cun3ie  and  proffeit  thairof  The  thriddis 
of  benefices  with  all  vtheris  guidis  geir  and  thingis  quhatfumeuir  alfweill 
vnnamit  as  namit  pertening  or  that  mycht  onywyifs  have  pertenit  to  his 
Majeftie  fen  the  faid  lord  Regentis  intromiflioune  with  the  faid  office  of 
Regiment  intromettit  with  be  him  his  Minifteris  fa(5louris  or  feruandis  in 
his  name  during  the  faid  fpace  And  hes  willit  and  grantit  that  the  faid 
exoneratioune  and  difcharge  be  als  vailiabill  and  of  als  greit  ftrenth  force 
and  effeft  to  exoner  quitclame  and  difcharge  the  faid  lord  Regent  his 
airis  executouris  affignayis  and  fucceftburis  of  ony  thing  of  quhatlumeuir 
valew  greit  or  fmall  that  may  be  afltit  requirit  or  perfewit  be  his  Maieftie 
or  his  fucceftburis  aganis  the  faid  Regent  his  airis  executouris  affignais 
or  fucceflburis  as  appertening  to  his  Maieftie  be  ony  richt  or  titill  during 
the  faid  Ipace  of  the  regiment  and  adminiftratioune  abonewrittin  lyke  as 
the  fame  bed  bene  fpecialie  expremit  in  this  prefent  Difcharge  And  like 
as  all  the  greteft  and  maift  vailliabill  thingis  with  the  quhilkis  he  may  be 
chairgit  had  bene  heirintill  expremit  Exceptit  alwyifs  the  Jowellis  and 
pleniffingis  of  his  hienes  houftes  cleithing  artailjerie  and  mvnitioune 
pertening  to  his  Majeftie  or  his  darreft  moder  Intromettit  with  and  Re- 


JAC.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  95 

coverit  be  the  faid  lord  Regent  quhilkis  his  hienes  willis  nocht  falbe 
comprehendit  in  his  faid  difcharge  Bot  the  faid  lord  Regent  to  Hand 
anfuerabill  for  the  fame  to  his  Majeftie  as  he  falbe  requirit  And  further 
his  Maieftie  with  auife  of  the  faidis  Nobilitie  and  eftaitis  Hes  promittit  in 
the  faith  and  word  of  a  prince  Neuir  to  reuoke  the  faid  difcharge  nor  to 
cum  in  the  contrair  thairof  in  ony  tyme  heireftir  Prouiding  alwyifs  that 
this  prefent  difcharge  be  nocht  preiudiciall  to  our  fouerane  lord  and  his 
fucceffouris  in  his  Maiefties  reuocatioune  or  reduftioune  of  quhatfumeuir 
Infeftmentis  gevin  of  his  hienes  propirtie  during  his  minoritie  Or  of  the 
richt  of  quhatfumeuir  landis  lordfchippis  offices  or  digniteis  fallin  or  be- 
cum  in  his  Maieflies  handis  be  reffoune  of  forfaltour  recognitioune 
baftardry  or  vtherwyis  pertening  to  his  hienes  be  priuilege  of  his  croune  • 
Quhilk  Exoneratioune  Difcharge  and  promeis  the  Kingis  Majeftie  with 
auife  of  the  faidis  Nobilitie  and  eftaittis  now  convenit  Ordanis  to  be 
dewlie  ratifeit  and  approvit  in  his  hienes  nixt  Parliament  to  be  haldin 
betuix  the  dait  heirof  and  the  twentie  day  of  Julij  nixttocum  As  alfua  to 
be  ratifiit  and  approvit  of  new  in  his  Maieflies  firft  Parliament  at  his 
lauchfuU  and  perfite  aige  And  ordanis  and  commandis  the  Chancellare 
to  append  his  hienes  greit  feill  to  the  faid  exoneratioune  difcharge  and 
promeis  now  fubfcriuit  with  his  Majefteis  hand  Nochtwithftanding  that 
the  fame  is  nocht  pad  his  hienes  fignet  and  priuie  feill  For  the  quhilk  this 
prefent  aft  and  ordinance  Subfcriuit  be  the  clerk  of  his  hienes  counfall 
falbe  to  the  faid  lord  Chancellare  full  and  fufficier.,  warrand  •  Extraiium 
de  libra  aStorum  fecreti  conjilii  S  •  D  •  N  •  Regis  per  me  Joannem  Andro 
clericum  deputatum  eiiifdem  Sub  meisjigno  et  fubfcriptione  rnanualibus  • 

Joannes  Andro • 

J.  he  Nobiliteis  Obligatioune  for  Ratifeing  my  Lord  of  Mortoun  difcharge 
maid  be  the  King  in  Parliament  tc"  • 

96    Be  it  KEND  till  all  men  be  thir  prefent  lettres  WE  THE  NOBI- 
LITIE Eftatis   and  vtheris   vnderfubfcryuand  Vnderftanding  how  efter 


96  OEIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

the  lang  trublis  and  dangerous  ciuile  weir  quhairwith  this  Realme  wes 
inquyettit  frome  the  birthe  and  coronatioun  of  the  Kingis  Majeftie  cure 
fouerane  lord  vnto  the  monethe  of  November  the  geir  of  God  I'^  V°  thre- 
fcoir  tuelff  geiris  vmquhile  Johnne  Erie  of  Mar  Lord  Erflvin  then  Regent 
to  his  hienes  his  realme  and  liegis  being  laitlie  deceiflit  /  at  the  eirnift 
fute  of  the  nobilitie  and  eftatis  then  convenit  The  noble  and  michtie  lord 
James  Erie  of  Mortoun  lord  of  Dalkeithe  being  nominat  and  eleftit  be 
thame  acceptit  vpoun  him  the  regiment  of  our  fouerane  lord  his  realme 
and  liegis  quhilk  ele6lioun  and  nominatioun  with  his  acceptatioun  of  the 
faid  charge  being  dewlie  ratifyit  and  confermit  be  his  hienes  and  his 
eftatis  in  his  Majefties  Parliament  haldin  at  Edinburgh  the  xxvj  day  of 
Januar  the  geir  of  God  foirfaid  /  He  according  therto  enterit  in  the 
adminiftratioun  of  the  regiment  of  this  realme  in  a  maift  porillous  tyme  ' 
the  Caltell  of  Edinburgh  then  being  ftuffit  and  detenit  aganis  his  hienes 
be  his  rebellis  and  a  gritt  nomber  of  the  principallis  of  the  nobilitie  then 
ftanding  diflTobedient  to  his  hienes  authoritie  Quhilk  Caftell  being  re- 
coverit  and  the  difTobedient  fubieftis  and  haill  cftaite  Ichortlie  pacifyit 
be  the  prudent  and  diligent  travellis  of  the  faid  Erie  of  Mortoun  Regent 
with  greitt  and  fumptuous  chargis  >  he  hes  fenfyne  worthelie  vfit  and 
exercit  the  regiment  of  this  realme  /  quhill  that  now  the  end  of  the  tuelft 
geir  of  our  fouerane  lordis  aige  approcheing  '  His  Majeftie  with  our  avyfe 
hes  thocht  meitt  that  the  governament  of  his  realme  falbe  frome  this 
furth  exerceit  be  him  felff/  The  faid  Lord  Regent  having  lang  wiftieitt 
his  Majefties  awin  habilitie  for  the  charge  and  craving  na  thing  mair 
eirniftlie  then  to  be  diftjurdeynit  therof  with  the  honor  and  fuirtie  of  his 
Majefties  perfoun  and  eftate  and  the  publiit  peax  and  tranquillitie  of  his 
realme  and  fubieftis  Hes  frelie  at  his  hienes  defyir  dimittit  and  randerit 
vnto  his  Majeftie  the  power  and  authoritie  of  the  faid  regiment  To  be 
vfit  and  exercit  be  him  felff  And  his  Majeftie  having  guid  pruiff  and 
experience  of  the  faithfuU  and  trew  feruice  done  be  the  faid  lord  Regent 
to  his  hienes  in  his  tender  aige  alfweill  befor  the  acceptatioun  of  the 
reo-iment   of  the   realme   as  fenfyne   for  the   defens  and  faulfftie  of  his 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MOETON.  97 

perfoun  and  authoritie  cheiflie  in  the  dangerous  trublis  than  occurring 
and  being  myndfull  of  the  faid  guid  and  faithfull  fervice  •  In  refpe6t 
therof  and  that  vtheris  of  the  nobilitie  that  may  happin  to  be  employed  in 
his  hienes  feruice  may  ferue  his  Majeftie  and  his  luccefTouris  with  the 
gretar  afFedioune  in  tyme  cumming  Hes  therfoir  with  our  aduyfe  found 
declarit  and  decernit  That  the  laid  lord  Regent  hes  dewtifullie  lauch- 
fullie  iuftlie  and  diligentlie  exercit  his  faid  office  of  regiment  and  all 
affairis  cauffis  and  chargis  therto  appertening  And  hes  trewlie  as  accordit 
in  all  refpedis  adminiftrat  the  fame  fra  the  tyme  of  the  accepting  therof 
to  the  daitt  of  thir  prefentis  and  euir  during  the  fame  I'pace  in  all  his 
procedingis  in  the  governament  of  this  realme  kepit  ane  trew  afauld  and 
juft  pairte  towarde  our  fouerane  lord  his  realme  and  liegis  in  all  the 
affaires  therof  without  cryme  offence  or  fault  And  therfoir  His  Majeftie 
with  our  aduyfe  and  counfale  hes  declarit  and  decernit  That  the  faid 
lord  Regent  his  airis  and  fucceffouris  fall  nocht  be  accufable  of  ony 
maner  of  cryme  of  quhatfumeuir  greitnes  or  wecht  without  exceptioun 
that  may  be  alledgit  committit  be  him  in  tyme  bypaft  Bot  that  he  is  and 
falbe  in  all  tyme  cumming  ficlic  difchargit  and  exonerit  of  all  accufa- 
tioun  or  ony  vtherwyis  preceding  moving  of  pley  or  queflioun  aganis  him 
or  his  fucceffours  for  ony  caus  cryme  or  occafioun  of  cryme  quhatfumeuir 
that  may  be  imput  to  him  how  gritt  fo  euir  the  fame  be  And  that  his 
hienes  foirfaid  declaratioun  be  ane  fufficient  exoneratioun  and  acquittance 
to  the  faid  lord  Regent  his  airis  fucceffouris  and  affgnayis  of  all  crymes 
queftionis  or  offenffis  that  can  or  may  be  criminallie  or  ciuillie  imputt  to 
him  be  his  Majeftie  for  ony  fa6t  or  deid  done  be  him  his  Mini  eris  and 
feruandis  in  the  faid  adminiftratioun  of  the  regiment  during  the  tyme  and 
fpace  therof  And  the  faid  acquittance  and  difcharge  His  Hienes  with  our 
aduyfe  and  confent  hes  willit  and  grauntit  to  be  als  valiable  and  of  als 
greitt  ftrenthe  force  and  effeft  in  all  refpeftis  As  gif  the  hieaft  cryme 
that  can  or  may  be  imputt  to  ony  perfone  wer  fpeciallie  expreffit  therin 
Difcharging  all  his  hienes  Judgis  and  Minifteris  of  his  Lawis  That  nane 
of  thame  attempt  ony  thing  in  the  contrare  therof  and  of  ther  offices  in 

n 


98  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

that  part  And  als  his  Majeftie  with  our  aduyfe  hes  dil'chargit  quyteclamit 
and  exonerit  the  faid  lord  Regent  his  airis  executouris  affignayis  and 
fucceflTouris  his  Minifteris  fadouris  and  feruandis  of  all  fowmes  of  money 
cun3eit  and  vncun^eit  all  maillis  fennis  proffittis  rentis  revennewis  and 
dewties  bayth  of  the  propir  patrimonye  and  cafualitie  of  the  realnie  and 
dominiones  and  of  his  Majefties  cun3e  and  profEtt  therof  /  The  thirdis  of 
benefices  with  all  vtheris  guiddis  geir  and  thingis  quhatfumeuir  alfweill 
vnnamit  as  namit  pertenyng  or  that  ony  wyis  mycht  haif  pertenit  to  his 
Majeftie  fen  the  faid  lord  Regentis  intromiffioun  with  the  faid  office  of 
regiment  Intromettit  with  be  him  his  Minifteris  faftouris  or  feruandis  in 
his  name  during  the  faid  fpace  And  hes  willit  and  grantit  that  the  faid 
exoneratioun  and  difcharge  be  als  valiable  and  of  als  greitt  ftrenthe  force 
and  effeft  to  exoner  quyteclame  and  difcharge  the  faid  Lord  Regent  his 
airis  executouris  affignayis  or  fucceflburis  of  ony  thing  of  quhatfumeuir 
valiew  grite  or  fmall  that  may  be  afldt  requyrit  or  perfewit  be  his  Majeftie 
or  his  fucceftburis  aganis  the  faid  Regent  his  airis  executouris  affignayis 
or  fucceffouris  as  appertening  to  his  Majeftie  be  ony  rycht  or  titill  / 
during  the  faid  fpace  of  the  regiment  and  adminiftratioune  abone- 
writtin  lyik  as  the  famyn  had  bene  fpeciallie  expreffit  in  this  prefent 
difcharge  •  And  lyik  as  all  the  greittaft  and  maift  valiable  thingis  with  the 
quhilkis  he  may  be  chargit  had  bene  heirintill  expremit  Except  alwayis 
the  Jowellis  and  pleniffing  of  his  hienes  houffis  and  clething  pertening  to 
his  Majeftie  or  derreft  mother  intromettit  with  and  recoverit  be  the  faid 
Lord  Regent  Quhilkis  his  hienes  willis  not  falbe  comprehendit  in  his  faid 
difcharge  Bot  the  faid  Lord  Regent  to  ftand  anfuerable  for  the  fame  to 
his  Majeftie  as  he  falbe  requirit  HEIRFOIR  We  be  thir  prefentis  Bindis 
and  obliffis  ws  our  airis  executouris  affignayis  and  fucceffouris  conjunctlie 
To  the  faid  Erie  of  Mortoun  now  Regent  his  airis  executouris  and  affig- 
nayis That  we  fall  move  and  perfuade  oure  faid  fouerane  lord  nocht 
onlye  to  caus  his  faid  exoneratioun  difcharge  and  promeis  and  euery 
poynt  therof  to  be  ratifyit  and  apprevit  be  his  hienes  and  his  eftatis  in 
his  nixt  Parliament  To  be  haldin  betuix  the  date  heirof  and  the 


JAC.  vr.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  99 

day  of  nixtocum    Bot  als  to  be    ratifyit  and  apprevit  [of 

new  in  his]  hienes  firft  Parliament  at  his  lauchtfull  and  perfyit  aige 
And  als  dewlie  to  fulfill  To  the  faid  Erie  now  Regent  his  airis  [execu- 
touris  affignjayis  and  fucceflburis  all  and  lindrie  the  premiflis  and 
euery  poynt   and   article  therof  as   is   abonelpecifyit  vnder  the  pane  of 

thoufand  pundis  money  of  this  realrae  PROUYDING 

alwayis  That  this  prefent  Difcharge  be  not  preiudiciall  to  our  fouerane 
Lord  and  his  fuccefTouris  in  his  reuocatioun  or  reduftioun  of  quhatfum- 
evir  Infeftmentis  gevin  of  his  hienes  propirtie  during  his  minoritie  or 
of  the  Rycht  of  quhatfumeuir  landis  lordfchippis  offices  or  dignities 
fallin  or  becumin  in  his  handis  be  reffoun  of  forfaltor  recognitioun  bal- 
tardrye  or  vtherwyis  pertening  to  his  Majeftie  [be]  privieledge  of  his 
crowne  And  for  obferuing  and  fulfilling  of  the  premiflis  We  ar  content 
That  this  our  obligatioune  be  inlert  in  the  buikis  of  our  fouerane  Lordis 
Counlale  and  Parliament  To  haif  the  ftrenthe  of  ane  a6l  and  decreitt 
therof  relpediue  with  the  authoritie  of  the  faidis  Lordis  of  counlale  and 
Parliament  refpeftiue  to  be  interponit  therto  with  executoriallis  to  be 
given  thervpoune  To  poynd  and  diftrense  ws  our  airis  executouris  aflig- 
nayis  and  I'ucceflTouris  for  payment  of  the  faid  fowme  and  lettres  in  the 
four  formes  to  denunce  ws  or  thame  our  fouerane  Lordis  rebellis  incais 
of  fail3e  in  the  premiflis  And  to  that  effeft  hes  maid  conftitute  and  or- 
dauit  and  be  the  tennor  heirof  makis  couftitutis  and  ordanis  Maifteris 
Dauid  M'Gill  Johnne  Schairpe  Thomas  Craig  Alexander  Sym  Clement 
Lytill  Richart  Strang  and  ilkane  of  thame  coniundlie  and  feuerallie  our 
lauchfull  vndowtit  procuratouris  Gevand  grantand  and  committand  to 
thame  and  ilkane  of  thame  our  verray  full  and  plane  power  expres  bid- 
ding mandiment  and  charge  for  ws  and  in  our  names  To  compeir  befoir 
the  faidis  Lordis  of  Counfale  and  Parliament  refpe6tiue  at  ony  tyme  or 
place  convenient  and  ther  prelent  therto  our  prefent  obligatioun  and  con- 
fent  and  caus  the  lamyn  be  regiftrat  in  the  faidis  buikis  of  counfale  and 
Parliament  refpeftiue  to  haif  the  ftrenthe  and  effect  of  ane  a6t  and  de- 
creitt therof  with  executoriallis  to  pas  thervpoune  as  is  abone  i'pecifyit 


100 


ORIGINAL  PAPERS 


[sec.  XVI. 


IN  WITNES  of  the  quhilk  thing  We  haif  fubfcryuit  thir  prefentis  with 
our  handis  AT  our  caftell  of  Striueling  the  Twelft  day  of  merche  The 
geir  of  God  I*^  V"  threfcoir  fevintene  geii'is  ■ 


Anguss  • 

E  •  Ergvll  • 

Jhon  L  •  Glammiss  • 

Mar- 

Erroll • 

Atholl  ■ 

montrois  • 

Dauid  erle  of  Craufurd  • 

Robert  Bylchope  oflF  Cathnes  • 

Erll  of  Mentht  • 

Ad  •  Orchaden  • 

MoRAUlEN  • 

r-  dunfermling  • 

Newbotil  • 

williame  l-  borthuik  • 

J  •  Constable  of  Dundc  • 

Deir  • 

Alexander  B-  of  Brechin  • 

Cathcart  ■ 

James  Steuart  • 

Alex"  •  Maifter  of  Mar  • 

TuLiBARDiN  Comptrollare  • 

WiLLIAME  Douglas  of  Lochleuin 

Villi  AM 

Andro  Ker  of  Faudonfyd  • 


Cathenes • 
Glencarn  • 

RUTHVEN  • 

Jhon  L-  Maxwell  • 

Patrik  L  •  Lyndsay  • 

Patrik  Mailer  of  Gray  • 

J  •  L  •  Ogilyy  • 

Hew  Lord  Somerwell  • 

J-  Dunkeld  • 

Robert  Mailer  of  Setoun  • 

In CHEF FRAY   • 

S*  James  Houme  • 
Alexander  Home  ■ 
Bargany  • 

Jhone  Stewart  of  Tracquair 
J  •  Seytoun  of  Tulibodye  • 
Lord  Innermeith  • 
Cambuskynneth  • 
Alexander  Commendatar  of 

Coldyngham  ■ 
Drybruch  • 
Drumquhassill  • 
Ro  ■  CoLUiLL  of  Cleifche  • 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  101 

L  he  Earl  of  Morton  to  the  Lord  Chancellar  • 

97  JMy  Lord  and  coufmg  -  I  reflfauit  a  copie  of  a  lettre  from  gour  fervand 
this  Sonday  at  efter  none  quhilk  lettre  wes  fend  to  gour  L  •  from  the 
Kingis  Majeftie  /  vpoun  informatioun  as  appeares  /  that  I  I'uld  be  forte- 
feing  and  viftualling  the  Caltell  of  Edinburgh  /  and  that  I  fuld  haue 
haldin  the  Irnes  of  the  cun3ehous  occupeit  /  and  that  thair  wes  giftos  and 
difpofitiones  paffing  the  feillis  vpoun  my  recent  fubfcriptioune  /  and  that 
I  fuld  retene  forces  and  wes  gaddering  ma  ■ 

For  anfwer  /  fen  my  conference  had  with  gour  L  •  nother  haue  I  gevin 
occafioun  Nor  git  was  I  of  mynd  to  mak  ony  novatioune  other  be  victual- 
ling or  fortefeing  the  Caftell  Nor  git  to  mak  the  Irnes  of  the  cun5ehous 
to  be  occupeit  Nor  hes  lubfcriuit  nor  pad  ony  gift  or  dilpofitioun  be  my 
fubfcriptioun  And  the  forces  quhilk  I  had  ar  brokin  and  nane  taken  vp 
Thairfore  quhafaeuir  hes  bene  the  reporters  hes  done  it  vpoun  malice 
and  that  vntrewly  ffor  as  trew  as  God  levis  I  nother  gaif  nor  myndit  to 
gif  ony  fie  occafioun  Bot  be  the  contrar  /  I  am  determinat  to  keip  everie 
word  fpokin  to  gour  L  •  and  the  refl;  of  my  lordes  being  in  Commiffioun 
with  gou  till  the  fame  be  fulfiUit  on  my  part  Other  maters  taking  efifeft 
according  to  oure  commoning  /  This  far  haue  I  thoclit  gude  to  affure 
gour  L  •  of  my  meanyng  /  And  prayis  gow  maift,  hertlie  to  mak  the  fame 
knawin  to  the  King  my  maifl;er  and  famony  of  the  noblemen  thair  as  ge 
think  gude  /  Farther  I  defire  to  vnderfland  howfar  gour  L  •  hes  procedit 
in  conclufioun  of  the  articles  gevin  be  me  vnto  gow  /  I  traili  thay  being 
red  and  weill  confiderit  /  thair  falbe  nathing  found  on  my  part  bot  guid 
faith  and  feruice  vnto  the  Kingis  hienes  my  maifter  And  thairfore  loukis 
to  reflaue  his  hienes  fauoure  and  guidwill  to  continew  towardes  me  •  I  am 
maifl;  defirous  to  be  certefeit  at  lenth  from  gour  L  •  or  Alexander  Hay 
be  gour  aduife  of  the  efl;ate  of  the  maters  prefent  quhairby  I  may  be  the 
mair  able  to  performe  thingis  promifit  on  my  part  And  loukis  that  ge 
will  fee  maters  to  be  vprichtlie  handillit  on  the  vther  lyde    quhairthrow 


102  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

all  Jelofy  and  fufpicioun  may  be  takin  away  and  the  mowthis  of  fic  to  be 
ftoppit  as  ar  bot  Inventares  of  lies  '  Sa  louking  for  the  returne  of  gour 
anfwer  be  this  berar  /  I  commit  gour  L  •  to  the  protettioune  of  God  •  AT 
Dalkeith  the  xvj  day  of  Marche  1577  • 

3our  L  •  affured  freind 

MORTOUN  • 

Many  of  thir  maters  quhairwith  I  am  chargit  /  I  doubt  not  bot  gour  L  • 
hes  lettin  the  trewth  thairof  be  vnderftaud  or  now  and  m\  trew  mean- 
ing in  all  thingis  - 

To  my  lord  and  Coufing 
My  Lord  Chancellaii  • 


X  he  Earl  of  Mortoun  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

98  Ooufing  Lochlevin  eftir  my  herty  commendatioune  I  reflauit  gour  writ- 
ing fchawing  that  my  lord  of  Angus  had  lleikkin  vp  the  writing  that  I 
lend  to  the  Chaucellair  '  and  red  the  fame  to  the  Kingis  Majoftie  and  his 
counfale  ,  quha  tuke  weiU  with  the  lame  At  the  Chancellair  /  the  Lord 
Ruthven  and  Hereis  being  lad  heir  /  We  appointit  be  commoning  for  the 
deliuery  of  the  Caflell  /  gif  the  counlale  thair  fand  the  lame  gude  /  The 
articles  I  lubfcriuit  with  my  hand  and  deliuerit  thame  to  the  Coraraifrion- 
ers  /  bot  as  git  hes  reflauit  na  anfuer  /  And  therfore  I  pray  gow  to  aflTift 
my  lord  of  Angus  to  crave  ane  anfwer  vnto  me  ffor  feing  it  is  the  Kingis 
Majefties  plcafure  to  haue  his  houfe  /  I  am  maift  willing  to  deliuer  it , 
and  cravis  nathing  bot  a  fufficient  difcharge  of  the  Kingis  Majeftie  and 
counfall  for  my  warrand  for  deliuerie  of  the  faid  Caftell  with  the  Jowellis 
movables  and  mvnitioun  being  thairin  and  that  vpoun  Inuentary  with  a 
little  tyme  to  tranfport  our  awin  geir  that  is  within  the  fame  /  I  truft  all 
gude  men  fall  find  this  reffonable  And  for  my  part  fall  performe  the 
fame  /  I  mynd  to  tak  na  vther  cours     bot  to  feme  the  King  trewly  /  as 


JAC.  VI.]  OF  THE  EAPxLS  OF  MORTON.  103 

I  have  done  from  his  birth  /  It  is  brutit  that  thay  mynd  to  fend  and  charge 
the  Caftell  to  be  deliuerit  vnder  the  pane  of  treflbun  /  gif  this  beis  done 
then  it  is  my  wrak  that  is  Ibcht  and  a  great  hurt  to  the  King  /  gif  his 
Jowellls  moveables  and  mvnitioun  iiild  be  deliuerit  without  Inuentarie  ' 
gif  this  be  in  heid  to  proceid  thus  /  I  pray  30W  laboure  at  gour  vttermaift 
power  at  all  the  Lordes  handes  to  flop  it  /  And  trewlie  I  think  na  gude- 
man  will  aggre  vnto  it  '  leing  how  reflbnablie  I  haue  ofiFerit  my  felf  to 
fatiffie  the  Kingis  pleafure  vtherwyfe  /  I  will  defire  gow  maifl  ernifllie  to 
joyne  with  my  lord  of  Angus  and  fie  vtheris  our  freindis  as  ge  think  meit 
to  help  to  put  this  mater  of  the  Caftell  to  a  poynt  /  For  I  wald  be  at  that 
poynt  my  lelf  to  haue  nathing  ado  now  /  hot  to  leif  quietlie  to  ferue  my 
God  and  the  King  my  maifter  This  defire  and  requeift  I  doubt  not  /  the 
Kingis  Maieftie  and  all  gude  men  fall  think  refTonable  • 

I  truft  ge  haue  hard  thair  wes  fum  flauchter  betuix  fum  of  the  Caftell 
and  thame  of  the  toun  /  quhilk  is  baith  lamentit  be  the  toun  and  ws  /  It 
come  foolillielie  on  /  Thair  mon  be  a  refpeit  grantit  to  the  Capitane  and 
the  Conftable  with  the  reft  of  thair  cumpany  for  a  certane  fpace  of  geris 
now  quhen  the  Caftell  beis  deliuerit  /  quhairthrow  thair  lyffis  be  not  in 
danger  /  This  ge  mon  travell  to  obtene  and  gett  with  my  lord  of  Angus  / 
for  we  fall  fatiffie  the  freindes  of  the  flayne  men  /  and  that  be  the  iicht 
of  the  toun  /  Farther  of  my  mynd  ge  will  vnderftand  be  the  berar  Andro 
Coninghame  To  quhom  it  will  pleis  gow  to  gif  credite  /  Praying  gow  to 
returne  goure  mynd  and  anfuer  vnto  me  with  him  •  And  fwa  I  commit 
gow  to  God  AT  Dalkeith  the  xix'"  of  Marche  1577  • 

5our  affured  freind  and  coufing  • 

MORTOUN  ■ 

To  my  richt  traift  freind  and  coufing 
The  Lard  of  Lochlevin  • 


104  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

JL  he  Earl  of  Mortoun  to  the  Earl  of  Angus  • 

99  JMy  Lord  and  fone  after  my  herty  commendatioune  ■  This  trouble  that 
fell  betuix  the  caftell  and  toun  of  Edinburgh  is  knawin  now  to  haue 
procedit  without  ony  malice  on  ayther  fyde  /  hot  be  fum  goung  dealing 
of  thanie  of  the  toun  that  kepit  the  Weft  Port  /  Twa  honeft  men  of  the 
toun  wes  heir  with  me  direftit  fra  the  reft  /  quha  declares  that  we  had  na 
malice  at  thame  nor  git  they  at  ws  And  thairfore  lamentis  the  vnhappynes 
of  the  deid  as  we  do  /  And  promifit  to  me  that  they  wald  fend  twa  to  the 
King  to  declare  the  fame  to  his  Majeftie  and  the  Counfale  thair  Swa  that 
na  gude  purpois  betuix  the  Kingis  hienes  and  me  fuld  ftay  for  that  caufe  / 
And  I  vnderftand  that  M""  Michaell  Chelholme  and  Johnne  Johnnftoun 
brother  to  the  Laird  of  Elphinftoun  is  diredit  weft  to  the  fame  effe6t  / 
I  will  defire  gow  to  tak  the  paines  and  learne  quhat  they  haue  done  and 
how  the  famyn  wes  taken  and  aduertife  me  agane  the  maner  thairof  • 

The  laft  tyme  my  Lord  Chancellair  /  Ruthven  and  Hereis  wer  heir  / 
we  wer  in  commoning  vpoun  inftruftiones  they  brocht  from  the  Kingis 
Majeftie  and  counfale  /  and  in  a  maner  aggreit  concerning  the  deliuery 
of  the  Caftell  /  for  I  wes  content  to  deliuer  the  Caftell  to  the  Kingis 
Majeftie  or  quhom  he  fuld  appoint  to  reflaue  the  fame  /  his  hienes  and 
his  counlale  gevand  vnto  me  a  fufflcient  difcharge  of  the  Jowellis  mov- 
ables and  mvnitioun  being  within  the  laid  Caftell  for  my  warrand  /  Certane 
articles  vpoun  this  mater  I  haue  returnit  with  thame  fubfcriuit  with  my 
hand  /  quhairvnto  I  traift  my  lord  Thefaurar  will  mak  gow  previe  / 
quhairby  ge  may  the  better  vnderftand  that  mater  /  I  am  reddy  to  fulfill 
on  mjr  part  all  thingis  promifit  to  his  hienes  Seing  he  is  defirous  to  haue 
the  Caftell  I  am  content  to  caus  deliuer  the  lame  /  The  Jowellis  movables 
and  mvnitioun  thairin  being  takin  of  my  hand  be  Inventary  /  and  a  dif- 
charge deliuerit  to  me  of  the  fame  /  with  a  little  tyme  to  tranfport  the 
guidis  pertening  to  our  feltfis  being  thairin  /  ge  lall  crave  this  mater 
erniftlie  to  be  put  to  a  poynt  /  And  tak  Lochlevin  and  fic  vther  freindis 


J 


Wni 


Orig.  Tap.  104f. 


'1 


'/#/ 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  105 

with  gow  as  ge  think  gude  to  the  fame  eifeft  /  The  brute  is  heir  /  that 
thay  mynd  to  gar  charge  the  Caftell  to  be  deliuerit  vnder  the  pane  of 
treafoun  /  gif  that  falbe  done  /  the  King  will  reflaue  great  hurt  thair- 
throw  /  for  gif  I  fuld  deliuer  the  Caftell  vpoun  a  charge  /  the  guidis 
thairin  not  being  Inuentareit  /  It  wer  na  doubt  his  Majefties  great  apper- 
and  hurt  /  and  altogethir  my  wrak  /  for  vther  men  mycht  at  their  pleafur 
poffes  and  vfe  his  Jowellis  and  vther  thingis  /  quhilk  I  haue  with  great 
labouris  recoverit  /  and  to  this  tyme  weill  kepit  /  I  pray  gow  fpair  na 
travell  to  flop  this  at  gour  vttermaift  pouer  /  ffor  nother  reflbun  law  nor 
confcience  can  aggre  with  this  order  • 

I  am  forie  of  the  Chancellares  vnhappy  chance  /  quhilk  na  doubt  is  to 
my  greit  greif  /  We  mon  thank  God  quhatfumeuir  it  pleafis  him  to  fend  / 
And  now  fen  God  hes  vifitit  him  /  ge  mon  tak  the  mair  panes  and  await 
the  harder  vpoun  thir  maters  of  myne  And  leif  gour  paftyme  till  ge  haue 
thame  put  to  a  poynt  /  gif  the  Kingis  Majefties  pleafur  be  that  ge  fall 
remane  with  him  /  tarie  falang  as  is  his  pleafur  /  Marie  in  the  meyntyme 
I  pray  gow  fe  that  gour  freindis  tak  na  hurt  Otherwyfe  gour  courting 
feruis  to  litle  purpois  /  ge  mon  gett  a  refpett  to  my  brother  the  Capitane 
the  Conftable  and  the  reft  that  wer  with  thame  for  this  lait  vnhappy 
flauchter  in  Edinburgh  /  for  it  wilbe  verie  hard  to  thame  to  deliuer  the 
Caftell  /  not  having  a  refpett  /  The  flauchter  being  fa  recent  /  I  pray  gow 
to  aduife  vpoun  thir  maters  wyfelie  with  gour  wyfe  freindes  and  put 
thame  to  a  poynt  /  Lett  me  be  aduertift  fra  gow  of  the  eftate  of  all  maters 
as  thay  ftand  /  with  gour  opinioun  and  the  freindis  thair  quhat  ge  think 
beft  to  be  done  /  And  fa  I  commit  gow  to  God  AT  Dalkeith  the  xix  day 
of  Marche  1577  • 

3  our  affured 

MORTOUN  • 
To  my  lord  and  fonne 
The  erll  of  Angus  • 


106  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

A-greement  between  James  Earl  of  Mortoun  and  the  Earl  of  Rothes  and 
Lords  Ruthven  and  Hereis  • 

100  Concerning  the  deliverance  of  the  Caftell  of  Edinburgh  Jowellis  Artail- 
jearie  mvnitioun  and  movablis  pertening  to  our  fouerane  Lord  and  his 
derreft  moder  and  of  the  Difcharge  to  be  gevin  therof  to  James  erle  of 
Mortoun  lait  Regent  IT  is  aggreit  betuix  his  Lordfchip  on  that  ane  part 
And  the  nobill  and  mychtie  Lordis  Andro  Erie  of  Rothes  Lord  Leflie  &c. 
Williame  Lord  Ruthven  thefaurer  to  our  fouerane  lord  and  Johne  Lord 
Herreis  his  hienes  commiffioneris  in  his  Majefteis  name  vpone  that  vther 
part  That  the  fecuritie  of  the  faid  Erie  of  Mortonis  difcharge  being 
finifchit  and  perfytit  as  the  famyn  is  now  correftit  and  deliuerit  to  the 
I'aidis  commiflioneris  The  faid  Erie  of  Mortoun  falbe  reddy  be  him  felf 
or  vtheris  quaUfeit  perfonis  quhom  he  fall  appoynt  to  concur  with  our 
fouerane  lordis  commiffioneris  that  falbe  vpone  the  vther  part  appoyntit 
for  making  of  the  Inventar  of  the  gudis  movable  and  munitioune  to  be 
deliuerit  And  to  begin  the  xxv  day  of  marche  inftant  at  houris 

befoir  none  And  continew  in  all  deligence  with  convenient  fpeid  till  the 
famyn  be  perfytit  And  the  faid  Caftell  with  all  the  movablis  and  vtheris 
to  be  contenit  in  the  faid  Inventar  To  be  deliuerit  to  the  commiffioneris 
to  be  depute  to  that  effefb  within  xlviij  houris  nixt  efter  the  faid  Inventar 
be  perfytit  Providing  that  at  the  deliuerance  therof  the  fecuritie  of  the 
faid  Erie  of  Mortoun  difchairge  as  the  famyn  is  devilit  als  weill  be  the 
Kingis  Majeftie  as  be  Nobilitie  and  eltaitis  be  deliuerit  vnto  him  Sub- 
fcryvit  be  the  faid  Erie  of  Mdrtoune  and  the  Commiffioneris  foirfaidis 
AT  Dalkeyth  the  xx  day  of  marche  The  geir  of  God  I'^^  V°  thrie  fcoir 
fevintene  geiris  •  Mortoun  • 

Rothes-  Ruthven-  L-Herys- 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  107 

J.  he  Earl  of  Mortoun  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

101  J_raift  freind  efter  my  herty  commendatioun  I  have  fend  this  berar 
Johnne  Douglas  my  fervand  to  confer  with  gow  upoun  fie  materis  as  I 
have  committit  to  him  in  credite  Be  reffoun  of  quhais  fufficiency  I 
will  not  trouble  gow  with  a  lang  letter  Bot  defiris  gow  to  returne  me 
anfwer  be  him  of  the  maters  that  he  hes  to  confer  upoun  with  gow 
And  fwa  I  commit  gow  to  God  AT  Dalkeith  the  xxj  day  of  Marche 
1577- 

3oure  affured  freind 

Mortoun  • 
To  my  traift  freind  and  coufing 
The  Lard  of  Lochlevin  • 

Ijitera  Exemptionis  Jacobi  comitis  de  Mortoun  domini  de  Dalkeith  • 

102  James  be  the  grace  of  God  King  of  Scottis  To  all  and  findrie  oure 
Judges  and  Minifteris  of  oure  lawis  and  all  utheris  oure  liegis  and  fub- 
dittis  quhome  it  eflPeris  quhais  knawlege  tliir  oure  letters  falcum  greting 
Forfamekill  as  oure  richt  traift  coufing  and  counfalour  James  erll  of 
Mortoun  lord  of  Dalkeith  lait  Regent  to  ws  oure  realme  and  liegis  hes 
trewlie  worthellie  and  dewtifullie  adminiftrat  the  faid  Regiment  T;c"  tc 
And  be  his  earneft  cair  gud  travell  takin  thairin  As  als  be  reffoun  of  his 
greit  aige  being  now  paft  threfcoir  ane  geiris  Ic  Thairfoir  Exemis  oure 
faid  richt  traift  coufing  and  counfalour  in  his  awin  proper  perfoun  allan- 
erlie  fra  all  affembleis  conventionis  oiftis  raidis  or  armeis  appointit  to  be 
convenit  in  ony  tyme  heireftir  during  the  fpace  of  thir  oure  letters  tc" 
Attour  We  for  the  guid  trew  and  thankfuU  fervice  done  to  ws  be  oure 
faid  traift  coufing  and  counfalour  1;c"  be  thir  our  letters  reffavis  him  his 
landis  tc"  in  oure  fpeciall  falfgaird  mantenance  and  defence  tc"   Gevin 


108  ORIGINAL  PAPEES  [sec.  xvi. 

under  oure  previe  feill  AT  Striuiling  Caftell  the  twentie  four  day  of 
Merche  The  geir  of  God  I'^  V°  threfcoir  fevintene  geiris  And  of  oure 
Regnne  the  ellevint  geir  • 

Per  Signaturam  Manu  S  •  D  •  N  •  Regis Jlcbfcriptam  ■ 


Aa  anent  the  Eleftion  of  the  Kingis  Secret  Council  ■ 

A  T  the  Cqflell  of  Striueling  the  xxiiij  day  of  Marche  The  yeir  of  God 
jco  yc  ixxmj  yeris  • 

103  -C  orfamekle  as  oure  Souerane  Lord  having  acceptit  the  governament  of 
his  hienes  realme  in  his  awin  perfoun  vpoun  the  voluntary  dimiffioun  of 
James  erll  of  Mortoun  lord  of  Dalkeith  late  Regent  to  his  hienes  his 
realme  and  liegis  His  Majeftie  be  aduife  of  his  nobilitie  and  ellaites  hes 
now  thocht  gude  To  eleft  and  cheis  fex  of  the  temporall  and  thre  of  the 
Ipirituall  eflait  /  to  be  ordinares  of  his  hienes  fecrete  counfale  To  remane 
togidder  for  furthfetting  of  his  Majefties  au6toritie  and  adminiftratioune 
of  Juftice  /  quhill  the  nixt  Parliament  appointit  to  be  haldin  the  tent  day 
of  Julij  nixtocum  Thay  ar  to  fay 

Colene  erll  of  Ergile  lord  Campbell  and  Lome 

Johne  erll  of  Athole  lord  of  Balvany 

Johnne  erll  of  Montrois  lord  Grahame 

George  erll  of  Caithnes 

Patrik  lord  Lyndfay  of  the  Byres 

Johnne  lord  Hereis 

Alexander  Erfldn  of  Gogar 

In  abfence  of  William  maifter  of  Marfchall  The  commendater  of 
Deir  his  brother 

Robert  bifchop  of  Caithnes 

Mark  commendater  of  Newbottle 
Togidder  with  William  lord  Ruthven   his  Majefties   thefaurar  Robert 
commendater  of  Dunfermling  fecretar  Maifter  George  Buchannan  kepar 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MOETON.  109 

of  the  previe  feill  Sir  William  Murray  of  Tullybardin  knycht  comptroUar 
and  Maifter  James  Makgill  of  Rankeloure  nedder  clerk  of  regifter  • 

The  perfonis  vnderwrittin  to  be   vpoun  the   counfale  quhen  they  ar 
prefent  or  quhen  our  fouerane  lord  fendis  for  thame  • 

Archibald  erll  of  Angus  lord  Douglas  and  Abirnethy 

Johnne  erll  of  Mar  lord  Erfkin 

Andro  erll  of  Rothes 

Hew  erll  of  Eglintoun 

Andro  erll  of  ErroU 

William  erll  of  Glencarne 

William  erll  of  Menteith 

Johnne  lord  Maxwell 

James  lord  Ogilvie 

Patrik  lord  Gray  and  in  his  abfence  Mailler  of  Gray  his  lone 

James  lord  Innermeith 

Adam  bifchop  of  Orknay 

Dauid  commendater  of  Dryburgh 

Adam  commendater  of  Cambulkynueth 
And  becaus  oure  fouerane  Lord  may  oftymes  be  circumvenit  and  diflauit 
in  fubfcriuing  in  diuers  fignatouris  of  infeftmentis  donationes  giftes  con- 
dudis  and  remiffiones  /  and  ficlik  vther  lettres  tueching  his  Majeftie  in 
his  cafualitie  or  propertie  IT  is  thairfore  concludit  decernit  and  ordanit 
be  his  hienes  with  auiie  of  the  faidis  nobilitie  and  eftaites  That  na  fie 
giftes  fignatouris  and  remiffiones  refpettis  conduftis  or  vtheris  lettres  fall 
pas  in  tyme  cuming  without  the  aduife  and  confent  of  the  faides  Lordes  of 
fecrete  counfale  And  that  all  fie  lettres  and  fignatouris  be  firft  fubfcriuit 
be  famony  of  the  faid  ordinar  counfale  as  falbe  prefent  for  the  tyme  to 
the  nowmer  of  lex  perfonis  at  the  fewefl  fittand  togidder  in  counfale  The 
Chancellair  alwayes  being  ane  And  gif  ony  fie  lettres  falhappin  to  pas 
without  thair  confentis  and  fubfcriptiones  in  manor  foirfaid  The  famin  to 
be  of  nane  avale  force  nor  effeft.  thairefter  And  ordanis  and  commandis 
the  kepar  of  the  great  feill  previe  feill  and  fignet  That  nane  of  thame 


110  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

anfuer  nor  pas  the  faides  feillis  nor  fignet  to  ony  lettres  hot  fie  as  falbe 
lublcriuit  in  maner  foirfaid  As  thay  will  anfwer  vpoun  thair  office  /  And 
this  order  to  iudure  quhill  the  faid  Parliament  appointit  the  faid  tent  day 
of  Julij  nixt  • 


The  Nobiliteis  Obligatioune  to  the  Erll  of  Mortoune  anent  the  Randering 
of  Edinburgh  Caftell  • 

104  Be  it  KEND  tin  all  men  be  thir  prefent  lettres  WE  the  Nobilitie 
eftaittis  and  vtheris  underfubfcriuand  fforfamekill  as  vpoun  the  voluntary 
dimiffioun  of  James  erll  of  Mortoun  lord  of  Dalkeyth  lait  regent  to  our 
Ibuerane  lord  his  realme  and  liegis  Of  the  power  and  authoritie  of  the 
regiment  of  this  realme  To  be  vfit  and  exerceit  be  his  Majefteis  lelf  in 
tyme  cuming  His  hienes  with  auile  of  his  nobilitie  and  eftaittis  hes  ex- 
onerit  quitclamit  and  difchargeit  him  Of  his  office  and  adminiftratioun  of 
the  regiment  of  this  realme  fen  his  acceptatioun  therof  And  of  all  fowmes 
of  money  cun5eit  and  vncun3eit  All  males  fermis  proffeittis  rentis  revenues 
dewiteis  bayth  of  the  propir  patrimony  and  cafualitie  of  this  realme  and 
dominionis  And  of  his  Majefteis  cun5e  and  proflPeit  thairof  The  thridis  of 
benefices  and  all  vtheris  gudis  geir  and  thingis  quhatfumeuir  alfweill  vn- 
nemmyt  as  nemmyt  pertening  or  that  ony  wayis  mycht  haif  pertenit  to 
his  hienes  fen  the  faid  erllis  intromiffioun  with  the  faid  office  of  regiment 
Intromettitwith  be  him  his  rainifteris  fa6touris  or  feruitouris  in  his  name 
during  the  faid  fpace  Except  alwayis  his  Majefties  Jowellis  and  plenif- 
fingis  of  his  hienes  houffis  and  clething  artaillierie  and  mvnitioun  perten- 
ing to  his  hienes  or  his  deareft  moder  intromettitwith  and  recoverit  be 
the  faid  erll  /  quhilkis  his  Majeftie  declarit  fould  not  be  comprehendit  in 
the  faid  difcharge  Bot  he  to  fl;and  anfuerabill  to  his  hienes  for  the  fame 
as  he  fould  be  requirit  as  in  his  Majefteis  exoneratioun  and  difcharge  at 
mair  lenth  is  contenit  And  now  the  faid  erll  having  at  command  and 
requifitioun  of  his  hienes  realie  and  with  eflFeft  deliuerit  to  his  Majeftie 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EAELS  OF  MORTON.  Ill 

and  Williame  Lord  Ruthuen  his  hienes  thefaurare  and  Patrik  Lord  Linde- 
fay  of  the  Byris  Conjunftlie  his  hienes  commiffionaris  in  his  name  havand 
power  to  that  eflfe6b  his  Caftell  of  Edinburgh  with  all  Jowellis  pleniffingis 
of  his  hienes  houfes  and  clething  artaillierie  and  mvnitioun  pertening  to 
his  Majeftie  or  his  deareft  moder  contenit  in  ane  Inuenture  maid  betuix 
the  faid  ei'll  on  the  ane  part  and  his  hienes  commiffionaris  foirfaidis 
fpecialie  conftitute  to  this  effeft.  on  the  vther  part  lubfcriuit  with  thair 
handis  and  interchangeably  deliuerit  The  ane  to  the  faid  erll  To  be  kepit 
be  him  for  his  fecuritie  and  the  vther  to  his  Majefteis  clerk  of  regifter 
to  be  kepit  in  his  hienes  regifter  to  his  behuif  Thairfoir  his  Majefl;ie 
with  our  auife  lies  exonerit  quitclamit  and  difchargeit  the  faid  erll  his 
airis  executouris  fucceftburis  and  affignayis  Of  the  faid  Caftell  of  Edin- 
burgh All  and  findry  the  faidis  Jowellis  pleniffingis  of  his  Majefteis 
houffis  and  clething  artaillierie  and  mvnitioun  alfweill  pertening  to  his 
hienes  as  his  faid  deareft  moder  intromettitwith  and  recoverit  be  the  laid 
erll  contenit  in  the  faid  Inuenture  And  lies  grantit  and  declarit  the  effeft 
of  the  faid  exceptioun  contenit  in  the  faid  exoneratioun  and  difcharge  ful- 
fiUit  fatiffiit  and  performit  be  the  faid  erll  Of  famekill  as  is  contenit  in  the 
faid  Inuenture  And  that  his  hienes  exoneratioun  and  difcharge  foirfaid 
falbe  als  valiable  and  fufBcient  in  all  refpeftis  as  gif  the  faid  haill  Inuen- 
ture and  euery  pece  and  parcell  therin  contenit  wer  in  the  lame  difcharge 
exprellie  mentionat  Promitting  in  the  fayth  and  word  of  a  prince  be  our 
auife  neuir  to  revoke  the  faid  difcharge  nor  to  cum  in  the  contrair 
thairof  in  ony  tyme  heireftir  And  forder  with  auife  of  his  eftaittis  no- 
bilitie  and  counfale  his  Majeftie  lies  bund  and  obleift  him  felf  and  his 
fucceffijuris  To  freith  relief  and  keip  fkaythles  the  faid  erll  of  Mortoun 
his  airis  executouris  and  fuccelTouris  Of  all  and  quhatfumeuir  contenit  in 
the  faid  exoneratioun  and  difcharge  at  the  handis  of  quhatfumeuir  per- 
foun  or  perfonis  havand  or  that  fall  pretend  rycht  clame  or  interelfe 
thairto  HEIRFOIR  We  be  thir  prefentis  bindis  and  obleiffis  ws  our  airis 
executouris  affignayis  and  fucceffi)uris  conjun6llie  To  the  faid  erll  of 
Mortoun  his  airis  executouris  and  affignayis  That  we  fall  move  and  per- 


112  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

fwade  our  faid  fouerane  lord  Not  onelie  to  caus  his  faid  exoneratioun 
difcharge  and  promeis  and  euery  point  therof  to  be  ratifiit  and  approvit 
be  his  hienes  and  his  eftaittis  in  his  nixt  Parliament  to  be  haldin  betuix 
the  dait  heirof  and  the  Twenty  day  of  Julij  nixtocum  Bot  als  to  be 
ratifiit  and  approvit  of  new  in  his  hienes  firft  Parliament  at  his  hienes 
lauchfuU  and  perfyte  aige  And  als  dewlie  to  fulfill  to  the  faid  erll  his 
airis  executouris  affignayis  and  fuccefTouris  all  and  findry  the  premiffis 
and  euery  point  and  article  thairof  as  is  abone  fpecifiit  vnder  the  payne 
of  fyve  hundreth  thowfand  pundis  money  of  this  realme  And  farther  be 
the  tennour  heirof  We  bind  and  obleils  ws  and  our  airis  executouris  and 
fuccefTouris  To  freith  releif  and  keip  (kaythles  the  faid  erll  of  Mortoun 
his  airis  executouris  and  fuccefTouris  Of  all  and  quhatfumeuir  contenit 
in  the  faid  exoneratioun  and  difcharge  of  the  faid  Caflell  Jowellis  plenif- 
fingis  clething  artaillierie  and  mvnitioun  contenit  in  the  faid  Inuenture 
at  the  handis  of  quhatfumeuir  perfoun  or  perfonis  havand  or  that  fall 
pretend  richt  clame  or  interefTe  thairto  And  for  obferuing  and  fulfilling 
of  the  premifTis  We  ar  content  that  this  our  obligatioun  be  infert  in  the 
bukis  of  our  fouerane  lordis  counfale  and  Parliament  To  haif  the  flrenth 
of  ane  act  and  decreit  thairof  refpeftiue  With  the  authoritie  of  the  faidis 
lordis  of  counfale  and  Parliament  refpeftiue  to  be  interponit  therto  With 
executoriallis  to  be  gevin  thairupoun  To  poind  and  diflren3e  ws  our  airis 
executouris  aflignayis  and  fuccefTouris  for  payment  of  the  faid  fowme 
And  lettres  in  the  four  formes  To  Denunce  ws  or  thame  oure  fouerane 
lordis  rebellis  in  cais  of  fail3e  in  the  premiflis  And  to  that  effeft  hes  maid 
conftitute  and  ordanit  And  be  the  tennour  heirof  makis  conflitutis  and 
ordanis  Maifteris  Dauid  Makgill  Johnne  Scharp  Thomas  Craig  Alex- 
ander Sym  Clement  Littill  Richard  Strang  And  ilkane  of  thame  con- 
junft.lie  and  feueralie  Oure  lauchfuU  vndoutit  procuratouris  Gevand 
grantand  and  committand  to  thame  and  ilkane  of  thame  Oure  verie  full 
and  plane  power  expres  bidding  mandment  and  charge  for  ws  and  in 
oure  names  To  compeir  befoir  the  faidis  lordis  of  counfale  and  Parlia- 
ment refpeftiue  at  ony  tyme  or  place  convenient    And  thair  prefent 


JAC.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MOETON.  113 

thairto  this  our  prefent  obligatioune  And  confont  and  cans  the  fame  be 
regiftrat  in  the  faidis  bukis  of  couufall  and  Parliament  refpedliue  To  haif 
the  ftrenth  of  ane  a6l  and  decreit  thairof  With  executoriallis  to  pas  thair- 
upoun  as  is  abone  fpecifiit  IN  WITNES  of  the  quhilk  thing  We  haue  fub- 
fcriuit  thir  prefentis  with  our  handis  At  Striueling  the  laft  day  of  Marche 
The  geir  of  God  ane  thowfand  fyve  hundrith  thre  fcoir  auchtene  geris  • 

Egbert  Byfchope  of  Cathnes  •  E-  Ergyll  • 

Ad  •  Orchaden  •  Atholl  • 

MORAUIEN  •     ■  MONTROIS  • 

Brechin  •  Glencarn  • 

Newbotil  •  Eglynton  • 

R.  Dunfermling  ■  Cathenes  • 

j  •  dunkeld  •  ruthven  • 

James  Steuart  •  Jhon  L-  Maxwell  • 

L  •  HeIiys  •  Thomas  Lyoun  of  Baldukey  • 

Patrik  meftir  of  Gray  •  Tulibardin  Comptrollar  • 

Drumquhassill  •  Lochinwer  • 

James  Halyburtoun  • 


Ihe  Kingis  Difcharge  gevin  to  the  Erll  of  Mortoun  vpoun  the  ReflTaif  of 
Edinburgh  Caftell  • 

105  JAMES  be  the  grace  of  God  King  of  Scottis  TO  all  and  findrie  quhais 
knawlege  thir  oure  lettres  fall  to  cum  greting  IForfamekle  as  vpoun  the 
voluntary  dimiffioun  of  oure  richt  traift  coufing  James  erle  of  Mortoun 
Lord  of  Dalkeith  lait  regent  to  ws  oure  realme  and  liegis  /  of  the  pouer 
and  authoritie  of  the  regiment  of  oure  realme  To  be  vfit  and  exerceit  be 
oure  lelf  in  tyme  cuming  We  with  auife  of  oure  nobilitie  and  eftaittis  hes 
exonourit  quiteclamit  and  difchargeit  him  of  his  office  and  adminiftra- 
tioun  of  oure  realme  fen  his  acceptatioun  thairof  And  of  all  fowmes  of 
money  cunseit  and  vncun3eit  All  males  fermes  profFeittis  rentis  revenues 

P 


114  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

dewiteis  baith  of  the  proper  patrimonye  and  cafualitie  of  our  realms  and 
dominionis  and  of  oure  cun3e  and  proffeit  thairof  The  thriddis  of  bene- 
fices and  all  vtheris  guidis  geir  and  thingis  quhatfumeuir  Alfweill 
vunemmit  as  neramit  pertening  or  that  ony  wyis  micht  haue  pertenit  to 
ws  fen  his  intromiffioun  with  the  faid  office  of  regiment  intromettitwith 
be  oure  faid  coufing  his  minifteris  faftouris  or  feruitouris  in  his  name 
during  the  (aid  fpace  Exceptit  alwayis  oure  Jowellis  and  plenniffingis  of 
oure  houflis  and  clething  artaillierie  and  mvnitioun  pertening  to  ws  or 
oure  deareft  moder  intromettitwith  and  recouerit  be  oure  faid  coufing 
quhilkis  We  declarit  fould  not  be  coraprehendit  in  oure  faid  Difcharge 
Bot  he  to  fland  anfwerable  to  ws  for  the  fame  as  he  fould  be  requirit  As 
in  our  faid  exoneratioun  and  difcharge  at  mair  lenth  is  contenit  And  now 
oure  faid  coufing  and  regent  having  at  oure  command  and  requifitioun 
reallie  and  with  effeft  deliuerit  to  ws  and  oure  traift  coufingis  and  coun- 
falouris  Williame  Lord  Ruthven  oure  thefaurar  and  Patrik  Lord  Lyndefay 
of  the  Byris  oure  commiffioneris  in  oure  Name  havand  oure  pouer  to  that 
effeft  oure  Caftell  of  Edinburgh  with  oure  Jowellis  plenniffingis  of  oure 
houffis  and  clething  artaillierie  and  mvnitioun  pertening  to  ws  or  oure 
deareft  moder  contenit  in  ane  Inventar  maid  betuix  oure  faid  coufing 
and  late  regent  on  the  ane  part  and  oure  faidis  commiffioneris  fpecialie 
conftitute  to  this  effect  on  the  vther  part  fubfcriuit  with  thair  handis  and 
interchangeabillie  deliuerit  The  ane  to  oure  faid  coufing  and  lait  regent 
to  be  kepit  be  him  for  his  fecuritie  And  the  vther  to  oure  clerk  of  regiftre 
to  be  kepit  in  oure  regiftre  to  oure  behuif  THAIRFORE  with  auife  of 
oure  faid  nobilitie  and  eftaittis  prefent  To  haue  exonerit  quiteclamit  and 
difchargeit  And  be  the  tcnnoure  heirof  exonouris  quiteclames  and  dif- 
chargeis  oure  faid  coufing  and  lait  regent  his  airis  executouris  and 
fucceflburis  and  affignais  Off  oure  faid  Caftell  of  Edinburgh  all  and 
findrie  oure  Jowellis  plenniffingis  of  our  houffis  and  clething  artaillierie 
and  mvnitioun  alfweill  pertening  to  ws  as  oure  faid  dearreft  moder 
intromettitwith  and  recouerit  be  oure  faid  coufing  contenit  in  the  faid 
Inueutar   And  grantis  and  declaris  the  effeft   of  the    faid   exceptioun 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  115 

contenit  in  the  faid  exoneratioun  and  difcharge  fulfiUit  fatiffeit  and 
performit  be  oure  faid  coufing  and  lait  regent  of  our  faidis  Jowellis 
plenniffingis  clething  artaillierie  and  mvnition  contenit  in  the  laid 
Inuentar  And  that  this  oure  exoneratioun  and  difcharge  falbe  als  valiable 
and  fufficient  in  all  refpeftis  as  gif  the  faid  Inuentar  and  euerie  pece  and 
percell  thairin  contenit  war  heiriu  expreflie  mentionat  And  furder  We 
with  auife  of  oure  nobilitie  and  counfale  be  the  tennoure  heirof  bindis 
and  obliffis  ws  and  oure  fucceffouris  To  freith  releif  and  keip  fkaithles 
the  faid  erle  of  Mortoun  his  airis  executouris  and  fucceffouris  Off  all  and 
quhatfumeuer  contenit  in  the  faid  exoneratioun  and  difcharge  of  oure 
faid  Caftell  Jowellis  plenniffingis  clething  artaillierie  and  mvnitioun 
contenit  in  the  faid  Inuentar  At  the  handis  of  quhatfumeuer  perfoun  or 
perfonis  havand  or  that  fall  pretend  richt  clame  or  enterefle  thairto  Pro- 
mitting  in  the  faith  and  word  of  ane  prince  with  auife  of  oure  faid 
nobilitie  and  eflaittis  neuer  to  revoke  this  oure  difcharge  and  obligatioun 
nor  to  cum  in  the  contrair  thairof  in  ony  tyme  heirefter  Quhilk  Difcharge 
We  promeis  alfua  not  only  to  caus  be  dewlie  ratifeit  and  apprevit  be 
oure  eftaittis  in  oure  nixt  Parliament  to  be  haldin  betuix  the  dait  heirof 
and  the  twentie  day  of  Julij  nixtocum  Bot  als  fall  caus  it  be  ratifeit 
and  apprevit  be  our  eflaittis  in  oure  firft  Parliament  of  new  at  oure  lauch- 
fuU  and  perfite  aige  IN  WITNES  quhairof  to  thir  oure  lettres  fubfcriuit 
with  oure  hand  with  auife  of  oure  faid  nobilitie  and  eftaittis  now  con- 
venit  We  ordane  oure  Chancellar  to  append  oure  greit  feill  heirvnto 
Willing  this  prefent  fubfcriuit  with  oure  hand  to  be  a  fufficient  war- 
rand  to  him  Notwithftanding  the  lame  is  not  paft  oure  fignet  and 
privie  feill  At  oure  Caftell  of  Striueling  the  laft  day  of  Marche  The 
geir  of  God  I'^  Y°  threfcoir  auchtene  geiris  And  of  oure  Regnne  the 
ellevint  geir  • 

James  R  • 


116  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

±  he  King  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

106  xvicht  traift  freynd  We  greit  gow  weill  Having  vnderftand  the  troublit 
eftate  of  our  bordouris  Tending  alfweill  to  the  danger  of  the  publid 
peax  with  England  as  to  the  herl'chip  and  oppreffioune  of  divers  cuntreis 
latlie  Weill  pleniffit  be  our  gude  fubieftis  And  finding  the  inobedience 
and  infolence  of  the  thevis  and  diforderit  perfonis  lie  as  it  behuvis 
in  this  feafone  of  the  geir  to  be  fuppreffit  be  force  we  haue  appointit 
the  power  of  oure  gude  fubieftis  inhabiting  the  Inner  partis  of  our 
realme  to  repair  towardis  our  bordouris  agane  the  ferd  day  of 
November  nixt  to  cum  Defiring  gow  effeduufly  thairfoir  that  ge  fub- 
ftanciouflie  accumpanyit  with  gour  kin  freindis  feruandis  and  haill 
force  ge  may  mak  will  addres  gow  to  be  at  Jedburgh  vpoun  the  faid  ferd 
day  of  November  nixt  to  cum  prouidit  for  tuentie  dayis  To  attend  vpoun 
our  feruice  at  the  direftione  of  our  Lieutennent  that  falbe  fend  thither 
according  to  our  proclamationis  to  be  maid  to  that  effect  As  ge  luff  the 
quietnes  and  common  weill  of  this  gour  native  cuntrie  and  will  do  ws 
acceptable  feruice  Thus  We  commit  gow  to  God  AT  oure  Caftell  of  Striui- 
ling  the  xv  day  off  06tober  1578  • 

James  R • 
To  oure  Rycht  traift  freind 
the  Lard  of  Lochleven  • 

The  Earl  of  Morton  to  the  Laird  of  Lochlevin  ■ 

107  Coufing  eftir  our  hartlie  commendatioun  /  We  have  intentit  aftioun  of 
Removing  befoir  the  Lordis  of  Seffioun  aganis  the  Lady  Lugtoun  and  the 
Laird  hir  fone  to  remove  fra  the  manfioun  orchegaird  gairdis  and  aikeris 
of  Lugtoun  refervit  in  the  tak  quhilk  thai  haue  eftir  the  redemptioun  / 
And  for  ftaying  our  proces  the  Laird  of  Lugtoun  hes  producit  ane  auld 


jAc.  VI.]        OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.        117 

tak  fett  be  Robert  Dowglas  of  Locblevin  to  Sir  Patrick  Creichtoun  of 
Cranftounriddell  and  Katharine  Turing  bis  fpous  ther  airis  and  affignais 
of  the  faid  manfioun  and  orchegaird  with  the  pertinentis  ffor  all  the  fpace 
that  the  remanent  landis  of  Lugtoun  fuld  be  unredemit  be  vertew  of  the 
reverfioua  grantit  therupoun  of  befoir  And  for  xix  yeiris  efter  the 
redemptioun  alfwa  for  the  quhilk  thai  ar  oblift  in  the  tak  to  uphold,  the 
faid  manfioun  houffis  and  gardis  and  mak  reparatioun  theron  on  ther 
awin  expenffis  /  quhilk  tak  is  of  the  dait  the  laft  of  November  1515  geris 
Heirintill  it  is  advifit  be  our  men  of  law  that  at  the  geving  of  the  infeft- 
ment  of  the  landis  of  Lugtoun  be  the  Laird  of  Locblevin  gour  fader  to 
Patrick  Creichtoun  of  Lugtoun  that  laft  deceiffit  quhilk  is  lang  efter  the 
dait  of  the  tak  producit  all  uther  wodfettis  and  conditionis  paft  upoun 
thai  landis  of  befoir  hes  bene  annullit  and  renuncit  fwa  that  this  thair 
tak  can  have  na  place  quhilk  wilbe  maid  manifeft  be  inlpe6tioun  of  the 
laft  reverfioun  and  cancellat  evidentis  quhilk  ge  relTavit  at  the  redemp- 
tioun Befide  this  gif  ge  pleis  to  accept  that  condition  of  thair  laid  tak 
quher  thai  ar  oblift  to  uphald  and  repair  the  manfe  and  orchgaird  and 
perfew  for  the  coiftis  (kaith  and  dampnage  ge  have  fuftenit  in  the  decay 
therof  in  ther  defalt  thair  wilbe  •  •  •  to  pay  gow  a  large  Ibwme  of  money 
therfore  quhilk  ge  [haue]  in  gour  optioun  to  do  /  Marie  to  have  this 
procei's  of  •  •  •  ganging  fordwart  ge  fuld  luik  owt  the  reverfioun  and  •  •  • 

evidentes  foirfaidis  with  fik  uther in  gour  handis  as  •  •  •  will  help 

the  mater  and  fend  thame  heir  with  a  fervand  of  gour  awin  to  be  fichtit 
be  our  procuratouris  /  quhilk  quhen  thai  have  fervit  the  turn  falbe  lent 
bak  agane  to  gow  /  And  quhen  We  have  gotten  our  intent  concerning 
the  removing  the  adioun  upon  the  (kaith  of  the  decay  of  the  houfis  falbe 
intentit  And  fwa  We  commit  gow  to  the  prote6tioun  of  God  At  Dalkeith 
the  faxt  of  November  1578  • 

3our  affured  guid  freind 

MORTOUN  • 

To  our  Coufing  the  Laird  of  Locblevin  • 


118  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

J  ene  Lyon  /  relift  of  Robert  Douglas  j^ounger  of  Lochlevin  /  afterwards 
Countess  of  Angus  and  Lady  Spynie  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

108    xvight  honorabil  Sire  /  It  wil  pleis  gou  I  haif  refaueit  gour  letter  quhair- 

by  I  onderfland  of  gour  weilfair  quhilk  as  God  knaus  I  am  maifl  glaid 

to  heir  of  /  It  is  treu  that  I  am  warnit  be  my  uncle  to  refaue  my  filuer  at 

Mertifmes  nixtocom  bot  gif  he  wil  keip  that  appointit  day  I  can  not  be 

certain  to  alTur  gou  Sir  that  ge  may  lipin  for  the  fame  for  I  haif  euer 

fen  my  father  deceifit  bein  onder  warning  /  and  feing  I  knaw  gour  ado 

prefently  I  vald  vifh  I  micht   forder  the  fam  /  In  lyk  manor  Sir  it  fal 

pleis  gou  to  knaw  that  it  is  latin  me  to  onderfland  that  ge  ar  myndful  to 

talk  the  mainis  of  Auchterhous  in  jour  awin  hand  /  gif  fua  be  I  wil  lipin 

Sir  that  ge  wil   mak   me  aduertifment  and  as  it  fal  pleis  gou   Sir  I 

am  content  for  I  knau  gour  mynd  is  not  to  bender  me  of  that  quhilk 

is    my    auin    quhilk    I   am    contentit    to   haif   rather    nor   Auchterhous 

quhilk  is  not  I'ecurrity  to  me  Alwayis  I  wil  luik  for  gour  auin  anfuer 

I'ua  for  the  prefent  haifing  na  forder  bot  to  lat  gou  knaw  gour  bairn  my 

fon  is  in  gud  helth  prayfit   be   God  my   humbil   commendations  being 

prefentit  I  talk  my  leif  committing  gou  in  the  bliffit  keiping  of  Almighty 

God  quha  mot  grant  gou  lang  lyf  and  gud  helth  Be 

gour  maift  humill  and  louing  dochter  to  be  commandit 

Jene  Lyon • 
To  the  right  honorabil  my  louing  father 

the  Lard  of  Lochlewin  • 

Greorge  Douglas  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

109  Ivicht  honorabill  Sir  Efter  maiil  hartlie  commendatioun  I  haif  nocht 
ben  wele  at  eis  quhairthrow  I  mycht  haif  trawellit  my  felf  /  bot  hes  fend 
this  berar  to  fchaw  gou  that  I  haif  prefentlie  ado  /  and  man  haif  filuer 
I'amekill  as  ge  may  prefentlie  fpair  /  owther  ane  thowfand  merkis  or  aucht 


JAC.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  119 

hundreth  lib  The  occafioun  that  I  ara  fa  haillit  is  becaus  I  haif  maid  a 
blok  with  the  Thefaurar  anont  I'um  viftualis  in  girnel  and  vtouth  per- 
tenyng  to  Arbroth  And  he  is  to  dilpefche  James  Murray  to  Ingland  and 
man  haif  hard  filver  this  nixt  Sonday  at  the  farreft  or  ellis  it  will  redound 
to  my  tynfell  Thairfoir  I  pray  gow  haift  the  berar  agayn  with  the  famyn 
and  gif  ge  haif  to  do  within  ten  or  tuelf  dayis  ge  fal  haif  I*^  lib  or  mair  • 
as  ge  pleis  for  I  am  nocht  prefently  abill  upoun  this  fuddan  to  get  fame- 
kill  filver  as  I  writ  for  '  I  am  the  mair  bald  and  haymelie  /  becaus  ge 
defyr  me  to  charge  gou  quhen  neceffite  requirit  Sua  leving  to  trouble  gou 
with  langer  letter  Referris  forther  to  gour  advertifment  with  diligence 
nocht  forgettand  my  hartly  commendationis  to  my  Lady  gour  bedfallow 
Quha  with  gow  God  haif  in  his  keping  At  Striviling  the  xxvij  day  of 
Junij  1579  Be 

3ouris  at  power 

George  Douglas  ■ 
To  the  richt  honorable 

the  Lard  of  Louchlevin  • 

Jving  Henry  IH.  (of  France)  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

110  JMonfeigneur  Lochleuin/Le  Seigneur  D'aubigny  Gentilhomme  ordinaire 
de  ma  Chambre  prefent  porteur  '  Que  J'ayme  et  eftime  pour  fa  valleur  / 
M'a  faia  entendre  quil  dofiroit  AUer  en  EfcoiTe  pour  Aulcuus  fes  affaires 
particulieres  /  Chofe  que  Jay  eue  bien  agreable  Et  luy  ayant  permis  de 
faire  le  dit  voyaige  Je  le  veux  bien  quant  et  quant  accompaigner  de  ce 
mot  de  lettre  pour  vous  prier  que  le  fauourifiez  en  fes  diclz  affaires  aultant 
quil  vous  fera  pofhble  Comma  perfounaige  qui  m'eft  fingulierement  Re- 
command^  Suppliant  le  createur  Moufeigneur  de  Lochleuin  quil  vous  avt 
en  fa  fainde  garde  ■  Efcript  A  Paris  le  dernier  Jour  de  Juing  1579  • 

HENR Y  ■ 
A  Monfeigneur  Lochleuin  ■ 


120  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

X  he  Earl  of  Mar  to  Charles  Rutherfurd  • 

111  Oharles  Ruderfuird  this  is  to  aduerteife  gow  that  our  coufing  the  Laird 
of  Lochlevin  is  departit  to  the  fouth  cuntre  in  Tewideill  ffor  fic  biffines 
.  as  he  hes  ado  Thairfoir  we  command  gow  that  ge  warne  and  chairge 
our  tenentis  within  the  boundis  of  our  barrony  of  Nifbitt  to  be  in 
reddines  to  concur  Ryd  and  travell  with  him  as  he  fall  mak  aduer- 
teifment  to  gow  withoutt  all  excufes  /  evin  as  gif  we  wer  in  the  cuntre 
ourfelf  /  quhilk  falbe  als  acceptable  feruice  as  gif  our  awin  perfoun 
wer  thair  Sic  as  ge  find  contrarious  or  difobedient  in  this  chairge  faile 
nocht  as  ge  will  anfuer  to  ws  To  mak  ws  aduerteifment  of  thair  names  • 
We  haue  writtin  to  Johne  Ruderfuird  in  the  Know  to  concur  and 
affift  with  gow  •  Sa  fair  ge  weill  •  AT  Striuiling  CafteU  the  xij  of 
Auguft  1579  • 

Mar  • 
To  our  fervitoure  Chairles  Ruderfuird 
our  officiar  in  Nilbitt  • 


Xhe  Earl  of  Mar  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

112  Xvicht  honorable  and  traift  coufing  efter  my  hairtie  commendatiounes 
I  have  appoint.it  upoun  the  ferd  day  of  Aprils  nixt  thatt  fum  of  my 
fpeciall  freindis  fall  convene  heir  in  Striveling  to  gif  me  advife  and 
confale  in  lum  materis  I  have  ado  concerning  the  honour  and  weill  of 
me  and  my  houl'e  quhen  fic  occafionis  falles  outt  I  mon  In  fpeciall 
putt  gou  to  chairges  Thairfore  I  will  requeifl;  gow  effeftuoflie  to 
tak  the  panis  to  be  heir  att  me  upoun  the  fecund  or  third  day  that  I 
may  communicatt  fic  thingis  as  I  have  to  do  wnto  gow  Nocht  doubt- 
ing bott  se  will  plefure  me  in  this  /  as  I  falbe  reddie  with  powar  quhen 
ge  pleas  to  chairge  me  /  Sa   quhill  meting  I  Remitt  all  uther  thingis 


jAc.  vi.J  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  121 

And  committis   30W   haii'tie    to   God    AT   Strlviling   Caftell  the  xxj  of 
Marche  1579  • 

3our  aflured  gude  freind  with  powar 

Mar  • 
To  the  Rycht  honorable  and  my  traift 
cufinge  the  Laird  of  Lochlewin  • 

X  atrick  Archbiftiop  of  St.  Andrews  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  ? 

113  x  leis  your  M'  the  Laird  of  Wemes  and  I  hes  ane  tryft  at  Couper  the 
lad  day  of  Marche  befoir  none  The  occafioun  is  upoun  ane  acclamit 
conftabularie  of  the  caftell  of  Sanftandros  be  the  gud  man  of  Lathokar 
quhome  the  Laird  of  Wemes  fortifeis  as  his  freind  The  euident  and 
leafing  quhairupoun  thai  have  retourit  I  have  taikin  to  improwe  befoir 
the  Lordis  of  Seffioun  Lyk  as  the  famin  is  nocht  abill  to  byd  tryall  of  law/ 
The  gentillmen  findis  it  hard  to  be  burdr-anit  with  the  forgeing  of 
evidentis  And  upoun  the  uther  parte  I  cfteme  it  hurt  and  dilhonour  to 
be  abufit  in  ane  office  of  fick  coniequens  quhilk  ther  predeceffouris  hes 
nocht  bruikit  And  quhairof  I  fe  na  autentik  ground  Alwais  freiudis  hes 
fatlitt  the  matter  few  dayis  from  law  to  fe  quhat  may  follow  be  melting 
of  freindis  /  And  becaus  gour  M'  is  ane  fpeciall  nobill  man  of  quhois 
gud  will  and  affiftance  I  haue  heirtofoir  maid  ane  fpeciall  and  alTurit 
accompt  quhen  I  fould  happin  to  haue  ado  in  my  honett  and  leifum 
effeiris  I  wald  defyre  maift  hartlie  ^our  M"^  prefence  at  the  faid  day 
that  I  mycht  have  gour  M'  counfell  and  aduile  thairanent  as  ^our 
Maifterl'chip  alwais  may  have  me  redy  at  all  tymes  to  do  gour  M' 
quhat  honour  ftead  or  plefure  fall  ly  in  my  power  Nocht  doubting  bot 
gour  M'  will  accept  this  my  firft  and  hamelie  charge  in  gud  parte  Com- 
mittis gour  M'  to  the  proteftioun  of  the  Almychtie  God  with  my  hartlie 
commendationes  to  my  Lady  gour  bedfallow  From  Sanftandrois  the 
xxiiij  day  of  Marche  1579  • 

3our  M  /  at  his  power  in  the  Lord 

q  P  •  Sanctandros  • 


122  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

J_  he  Earl  of  Mortoun  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

114  x!ifter  my  heartie  commendatioun  /  This  is  to  lett  30W  vnderftand  I  am 
writtin  for  be  the  kingis  Majeftie  to  be  in  Striueling  the  fourt  of 
Aprile  nixt  /  My  purpois  is  to  travell  with  the  King  and  counfale 
for  the  triall  of  the  lait  brute  that  hes  paft  vpoun  the  furprifing  of 
the  King  •  I  truft  his  hienes  for  his  awin  weill  falbe  willing  heir- 
vnto  /  Thairfore  I  will  hertlie  defire  gow  to  be  in  Striueling  the  faid 
day  That  I  may  haue  gour  aduife  and  concurrence  fafar  in  that  mater 
as  concernes  me  /  gif  ony  fie  thing  be  allegeit  ge  fall  find  me  honeft 
in  thocht  word  and  deid  quheneuir  that  mater  cumis  to  triall  /  And 
thairfore  will  louke  for  gour  counfale  and  concurrens  /  Sa  I  commit 
gow  to  the  proteftioune  of  God  AT  Abirdour  the  xxvij  day  of  marche 
1580  • 

3our  affured  freind 

MORTOCN  • 

To  my  traift  freind  and  coufing 
The  lard  of  Lochleaven  • 


Iving  James  VI.  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

115  Xraift  freind  We  greit  gow  weill  We  haue  refoluit  be  aduife  of  counfale 
to  begin  our  progres  the  xxiij  of  this  inftant  to  be  that  nicht  in  TuUi- 
bardin  And  to  extend  the  fame  fa  far  furth  as  Dynnotter  quhair  we  haue 
fett  our  merche  and  farreft  tryift  for  this  geir  Quhairin  becaus  our  cheif 
intentioun  is  to  be  acquentit  with  the  cuntrie  and  be  fie  Jornayis  as  we 
may  eafilie  deall  with  to  vefie  the  fpeciall  townis  and  places  be  the  way 
We  haue  therfoir  fend  the  prefent  to  lett  gou  be  foirfene  that  ge  ar  of 
the  nowmer  And  that  ge  may  wele  luik  God  willing  for  our  prefence 
with  gow  in  Lochleavin  the  vij  of  Julij  nixt  ther  to  continew  till  dennar 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  123 

on  the  morne  Thus  we  commit  30W  to  God  frome  our  Caftell  of  Striuiling 
the  X  of  Maij  1580  • 

To  oure  traift  freind  the  James  R  • 

Laird  of  Lochleavin  • 


X  he  King  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

116  xvycht  traifl  freind  We  grete  30W  hartlie  weill  Forfamekle  as  it  is  hevely 
menit  to  ws  be  the  young  Lady  Burley  That  Ibhe  is  very  hardly  ufit  be 
yow  in  thingis  quhairof  hir  foirbearis  hes  bein  in  lang  and  peciable  pof- 
feffioun  fpeciallie  of  the  teyndis  fchaves  of  the  Mainys  and  haill  barony 
of  Burley  pendicles  and  pertinentis  therof  For  quhilk  hir  reafonable 
offeris  and  gude  deid  is  refufit  at  your  handis  Bot  feing  We  have  fa  pietijt 
hir  caus  That  we  have  reftorit  hir  to  hir  rentis  and  laving  for  hir  honeft 
Intertenyment  We  will  therfore  pray  yow  effeduuflie  to  ufe  na  novatioun 
toward  hir  Bot  do  that  favour  and  courtefTye  unto  hir  as  to  let  hir  bruik 
and  poflefle  the  faidis  teyndis  and  fuffer  hir  to  Intrometwith  and  difpone 
therupoun  in  tyme  cuming  als  frelie  and  for  pament  of  the  fame  dewtie 
therfore  As  hir  umquhile  fader  and  predeceflburis  had  the  fame  of  befoir 
but  ony  alteratioun  or  moleflatioun  therin  quherthrow  we  fall  heir  na 
juft  occafioun  of  complaint  heirin  in  hir  behalf  heirefter  As  ge  fall  do  ws 
very  thankfuU  plefure  and  fa  We  commit  30W  to  God  AT  Dunfermling 
the  tent  day  of  Auguft  1580  • 


(m^t:) 


V 


124  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

Gift  by  the  King  to  William  Douglas  of  Loclileven  of  the  waird  of  all 
landis  quhilk  pertenit  to  uuiquliile  Robert  erle  of  Buchan  • 

117  Oure  Soverane  Lord  Ordanes  ane  Letter  to  be  maid  under  his  privie 
Seale  in  dew  forme  To  his  lovit  Williame  Dowglas  of  Lochlevin  his  airis 
and  affignais  ane  or  ma  OfiF  the  gift  of  the  waird  of  all  landis  lordfchippis 
baroneis  T;c  1:c  quhilkis  pertenit  of  befoir  to  umquhile  Robert  erle  of 
Buchan  Lord  Ochterhous  1c  and  now  throw  his  deceis  being  or  falhappin 
to  be  in  our  faid  Soverane  Lordis  handis  be  refToun  of  waird  with  all 
males  fermes  profeittis  and  dewtios  of  the  famin  during  the  tyme  of  the 
famin  waird  tc  Togidder  with  the  offices  of  Schirrefffchip  and  Crownar- 
Ichip  of  BanflF  '\c  And  als  of  the  gift  of  the  mariage  of  James  Douglas  fone 
and  air  of  the  faid  umquhile  Robert  erle  of  Buchane  and  fail^eing  of 
him  be  deceis  unmareit  the  mariage  of  ony  utheris  air  or  airis  male  or 
female  of  the  faid  umquhile  erle  tc-  Subfcrywit  be  our  Soverane  Lord 
At  Halyruidhous  the  tuentie  day  of  September  the  ^eir  of  God  I'^  V  and 
Ixxx  geiris  And  of  his  hienes  Reignue  the  fourteint  geir  1580  • 

James  R  • 


xhe  firft  charge  gevin  to  the  erle  of  Mortoune  to  entir  in  waird  in  his 
awin  chalmer  in  Halyrudhous  • 

Apud  Halierudhous  vltimo  Decp.mbris  Anno  Domini  V^  V  lxxx°  ■ 

113  Jb  orfamekle  as  James  erll  of  Mortoun  lord  of  Dalkeith  is  fufpeftit  and 
delaitit  in  prefens  of  the  Kingis  Majeflie  and  lordis  of  fecreit  counfall  To 
haue  committit  treafoune  Quhairfoir  his  Majeftie  with  awile  of  the  faidis 
lordis  Ordanis  ane  maler  or  vther  officiar  of  Armis  To  pas  and  in  his 
hienes  name  and  auftoritie  Command  and  charge  the  faid  James  erll  of 
Mortoune  To  remain  and  keip  waird  in  the  Abbay  of  Halierudhous  in 
the  hous  quhairin  he  prefentlie  remanis  And  on  nawis  to  cum  furth  of 


JAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  125 

the  famin  in  tyme  ciiming  Ay  and  quhill  he  be  fred  be  his  Majeftie  vnder 
the  pain  of  treafoune  /  With  certificatioune  to  him  and  he  fail3e  he  falbe 
reput  haldin  perfewit  and  demanit  as  a  tratour  and  the  proces  and  dome 
of  foirfaltour  lalbe  ordourlie  led  aganis  him  Conforme  to  the  lawis  of  this 
realme  and  a6lis  of  parliament  • 

Suhfcriuit  be  our foueran  lord  and  the  Erllis  of  Ergile  and  Lennox  ■ 

Ihe  Erie  of  Mortonis  charge  to  enter  in  Edinburgh  Caftell  \c^  ■ 

At  Halyruidhous  the  fecond  day  of  Januar  the  yeir  of  God  Y^  V  Lrxx 
yeiris  ■ 

119  r*  orfamekle  as  James  erll  of  Mortoun  lord  of  Dalkeith  /  being  delaitit 
and  accufit  in  prefens  of  the  Kingis  Majeftie  and  lordis  of  his  fecrete 
counfale  Off  certane  poyntes  of  treftbun  and  Lefe  Majeftie  wes  thairupoun 
commandit  to  remane  in  ward  in  his  ludgeing  within  his  hienes  palice  of 
Halyruidhous  /  And  now-  It  is  thocht  meitt  be  his  Majeftie  and  his  faid 
fecrete  counfale  that  the  laid  erll  fall  pas  and  remane  in  waird  within  the 
Caftell  of  Edinburgh  /  And  for  that  cans  relevis  him  of  his  remaning  in 
ward  within  his  ludgeing  in  the  faid  palice  of  Halyruidhous  And  ordanis 
ane  herauld  mafer  purievant  or  vther  officiar  of  armes  To  pas  and  in  his 
Majefties  name  and  auctoritie  command  and  charge  the  faid  James  erll 
of  Mortoun  To  pas  and  enter  his  perfoun  in  ward  within  the  faid  Caftell 
of  Edinburgh  Thair  to  remane  vpoun  his  awin  cxpenfis  Ay  and  quhill  he 
be  fred  and  relevit  thairfra  within  the  fpace  of  ane  hour  uixt  efter  he 
be  chargeit  thairto  vnder  the  pane  of  TrelToune  ffor  quhais  reflett  a 
Letter  and  warrand  is  dire6t  alreddy  to  the  capitane  and  kcparis  of  the 
faid  Caftell  • 

James  R • 
E  •  Ergyll  •  Lenox  • 


126  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

Apud  Halyruidhous Jecundo  January  1580  • 

Paft  in  Counfale  • 

Efmus  comes  de  Lennox 

Colinus  comes  Ergadie  cancellarius 

Willielmus  Dominus  Ruthven  thefaurarius 

Rohertus  feoditarius  de  Orhnay 

Robertus  commendatarius  de  Dunfermlingfecretarivs 

Jacobus  commendatarius  de  Sandcolmis  Inche 

Alexander  Hay  clericus  Regiftri 

M''  Robertus  Crychton  advocatus 

Clericus  Regi/iri- 

1  he  Earl  of  Mar  to  William  Douglas  of  Lochleven  • 

120  rvicht  honorabill  and  treft  coufing  after  my  hairtty  commendatioun  •  The 
prefent  is  to  defyr  gow  effeftuflie  nochtwithftanding  the  ftay  of  the  con- 
ventione  git  to  keip  the  apoyntit  day  tharof  in  this  toune  for  fie  caufis  as 
I  haif  ado  quhilkis  ar  of  gret  Importance  and  can  nocht  tak  guid  effed 
without  the  prefence  of  my  freindis  of  quhilk  number  I  efteme  gow  ane 
of  the  fpeclallis  and  tharfor  I  vill  luik  for  na  excufe  of  gow  at  the  forfaid 
day  /  fa  I  commit  gow  to  God  From  Streviling  Caflell  the  fecund  of 
marche  1580  • 

Be  gour  affurit  freind  and  coufing 

Mar  • 
To  the  Richt  honorabill  and  his  traift  freind 
Williame  Douglas  of  Lochlevin  • 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  127 

A. 6b  of  Caution  for  William  Douglas  of  Lochleven  • 

Apud  Halyrudehous  penultimo  die  menjis  Marcij  Anno  Domini  V^  V° 
Ixxxj"  ■ 

121  JLhe  quhilk  day  James  Coluile  of  Eifter  Wemys  and  George  Douglas  of 
Rungawie  Become  aftit  and  obleift  coniundlie  and  feueralie  as  cautioners 
and  Ibuirties  for  William  Douglas  of  Lochleaven  That  the  faid  William 
fall  pas  and  enter  his  perfoun  in  ward  beyond  the  wattir  of  Cromartie 
betuix  and  the  aucht  day  of  Apryle  nixtocum  And  that  he  fall  remane 
and  keip  ward  benorth  the  faid  wattir  and  on  nawyfe  cum  befowth  the 
famyn  thairefter  Ay  and  quhill  he  be  fred  be  oure  fouerane  Lord  vnder 
the  pane  of  ten  thowfand  pundis  And  als  that  he  be  him  felf  his  fonnes 
men  tennentis  and  ferwandis  fall  behaue  thame  felffis  as  dewtefuU  and 
obedient  fubieftis  to  his  Majeftie  And  on  nawyfe  do  nor  attempt  ony 
thing  to  the  hurt  or  prejudice  of  his  hienes  his  eftait  and  audoritie  in 
the  meyntyme  vnder  the  pane  foirfaid  And  the  faid  William  Douglas 
obleift  him  and  his  aires  To  releif  his  faidis  fouirteis  of  the  premiffis  and 
of  all  pane  and  danger  that  thay  falhappin  to  fuftene  thairthrow  Sic 
Jubfcrihitur  James  Coluile  of  Eifter  Wemys  /  George  Douglas  /  Extrailum 
de  libro  aitorum  Jecreti  conjilii  S  •  D  •  N  •  Regis  per  me  Joannem  Andro 
deputatum  clericum  eiiifdem  Sub  meisjigno  et  Juhfcriptione  manualibus  ■ 

Joannes  Andro  • 


J.  he  King  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

122  Xraift  freind  We  greit  gow  weill  Giff  we  had  bene  prefent  with  our 
Counfale  quhen  your  bill  wes  red  We  fould  have  infiftit  to  haue  had 
fumquhat  of  gour  defire  aggreit  unto  Alwyis  feing  it  is  thocht  gude  be 
the  Lordis  that  ge  firft  enter  in  gour  ward  conforme  to  thair  formar 
ordinance  quhilk  we  of  our  felf  may  not  with  reffoun  alter  ^e  fall  thair- 


128  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

foir  fatiffie  thair  defire  '  And  upoun  knawlege  therof  to  be  returnit  We 
fall  bald  hand  to  haue  gow  fatiffiit  to  gour  reffonabill  contentment  Thus 
for  the  prel'ent  We  commit  gou  to  God  From  Halierudhous  the  lad  dtiy 
of  Marche  1581  • 

James  R • 
To  our  traift  freind  the 
Laird  of  Lochlevin  • 


Liicence  by  the  King  and  Privy  Council  to  William  Douglas  of  Loch- 
levin to  tranfport  his  waird  fra  the  water  of  Cromartye  to  the  water  of 
Dye. 

123  SOUERANE  Lord  vnto  gour  Maieftye  and  Lordis  of  fecreit  counfall 
humlie  menis  and  fchawis  goure  grace  feruitour  William e  Dowglas  of  Loch- 
levin That  quhair  it  plefit  goure  Maieftie  be  advife  of  goure  hienes  fecreit 
counfall  To  ordane  me  to  entir  my  perfoune  in  waird  be  north  the  watter 
of  Cromartye  thair  to  remane  Ay  and  quhill  I  wer  fred  be  goure  grace 
be  avife  foirfaid  of  the  famyn  waird  /  ffor  obeyfance  of  the  quhilk  ordi- 
nance and  charge  thairin  contenit  I  with  dilligence  pofiibill  paft  and 
onterit  my  perloune  in  waird  be  north  the  faid  watter  of  Cromartye 
vpoun  the  fevint  day  of  Aprile  laft  bipaft  within  the  tyme  appointit  in 
goure  hienes  ordinance  with  greit  difficultye  and  hafert  of  my  life  in 
watteris  be  the  paflage  throw  occafioune  of  greit  windis  and  tempeftis  of 
weddir  notourlie  knawin  And  to  teftifye  my  obedience  to  your  grace  and 
LL  /  Quhairin  I  intend  be  Godis  grace  to  continew  to  my  lyfis 
end  I  obtenit  teftimoniall  of  the  famous  and  gentilmen  in  the  countray  of 
my  enterye  within  the  faid  waird  vpoune  the  fevint  day  of  aprile  /  in 
raaner  foirl'aid  As  the  famyn  fublcriuit  be  thame  heirwith  producit  at 
mair  lenth  proportis  And  albeit  that  I  for  obeyfance  of  the  faid  ordi- 
nance enterit  my  perfoune  in  waird  benorth  the  faid  watter  of  Cromartye 
Nocht  being  delatit  for  ouy  cryme  hot  to  obtemper  and  obey  goure 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  129 

Maiefteis  ordinance  according  to  my  detfuU  obedience  to  goure  grace 
Quhilk  waiter  of  Cromartje  is  far  diftant  fra  my  freindis  and  guidwil- 
laris  and  I  thairbye  debarrit  fra  all  freindfchip  and  guidwill  of  thame 
And  conftranit  to  remane  in  the  cuntray  vncouth  to  me  deftitute  of  all 
my  freindis  and  vnabill  to  attend  vpoun  my  lefum  bifl^'nes  to  my  greit 
hurt  and  fkaith  Oneles  goure  grace  and  LL  /  provide  remeid  thairof 
BESEIKING  heirfoir  goure  Maiellye  and  LL/  To  confidder  the  premiffis 
aricht  And  to  tranfport  my  faid  waird  fra  the  faid  watter  of  Cromartye 
to  the  watter  of  Dye  Quhairthrow  that  my  waird  may  be  benorth  the 
watter  of  Dye  As  the  famyn  is  now  benorth  the  faid  watter  of  Cromartye 
And  becaus  during  the  tyme  of  my  faid  waird  I  may  nocht  attend  vpoune 
the  lefum  biflynes  pertenyng  to  me  and  my  bairnes  Nather  be  prefent 
befoir  the  Lordis  of  feffioune  to  infift  in  perfuite  or  defens  of  ony 
aftioune  or  caus  movit  be  me  or  my  bairnes  or  aganis  ws  It  will  pleis 
gour  Maieftye  and  LL  /  To  command  the  Lordis  of  gour  hienes  feffioune 
that  na  proces  be  grantit  aganis  me  or  my  faidis  bairnis  during  the  tyme 
of  my  remanyng  in  waird  And  to  difcharge  thame  of  all  proceiding 
thairin  and  of  thair  oflBces  in  that  pairt  According  to  iuftice  And  gour 
G  /  and  LL  /  anfuer  maift  humlie  befeikis  1  c"  • 

Apud  Dalkeyth  tercio  Maij  Anno  \c  Lrsxj  • 
Fiat  vt  petitur  for  the  firft  part  of  the  defyre  of  this  bill  alanerlie  with 
provifioune  that  the  fouertie  fundin  be  him  of  befoir  flanding  oblift 
for  his  remaning  benorth  the  watter  of  Die  according  to  the  condi' 
tionis  contenit  in  the  formar  aft  without  ony  brek  • 

James  R  • 

E  •  ErGYLL  •  MONTROISS  • 

J.  he  King  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 
REX. 
124    J.  raift  freind  We  greit  gow  weill  Forsamekill  as  We  ar  informit  be  oure 
louittis  fervitouris  Archibald  Broky  in  Downe  and  Thomas  Broky  his 

r 


130  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

fone  in  the  Baddis  That  ge  upoun  the  gift  of  the  waird  gevin  be  ws  to 
gow  of  the  Erledome  of  Buchan  have  caufit  warne  thame  to  Remove 
frome  thair  rowmes  and  poflefiionis  quhairin  thay  have  remanit  kyndlie 
and  native  tennentis  thir  mony  and  divers  geiris  bygane  Committing  na 
cryme  nor  offence  aganis  thair  maifteris  in  tymes  pall  Nather  git  to  gow 
fen  gour  entrie  to  the  erledome  of  Buchan  Paying  alfwa  thair  dewitie 
and  fervice  according  to  thair  affedationis  Thairfoir  feing  the  faid  gift 
wes  nocht  gevin  to  the  wrak  of  the  faidis  puir  tennentis  We  will  gow 
that  ge  upoun  gour  rycht  Set  thame  thair  Rowmes  and  pofleffionis  for 
thair  luaillis  and  dewiteis  quhairin  thay  have  bein  in  pofleflioun  for  pay- 
ment of  thair  dewitie  contenit  in  thair  auld  rentall  /  and  quhilk  thay  payit 
to  umquhile  Robert  Dowglas  laft  Erie  of  Buchane  And  that  ge  Remove 
thame  nocht  fra  thair  kyndlie  poffeffionis  and  rowmes  As  ge  will  We  did 
gow  kyndnes  and  plefure  In  tymes  cuniing  And  that  this  berar  report 
gour  anfuer  in  writ  to  ws  quhat  ge  will  do  heirin  Subfcrivit  with  oure 
hand  At  Dalkeith  the  auchtene  day  of  Maij  and  of  our  Regnne  the  four- 
tene  geir  1581  • 

James  R  • 
To  our  traift  freind 
The  Laird  of  Lochlevin  • 


The  King  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

1 25  Xraift  freind  We  greit  gow  weill  /  Upoun  occafioun  of  our  uther  letter 
direct  to  gow  anent  the  waird  of  our  louit  Abraham  Stewart  of  Monbletoun 
becum  in  gour  courtefie  be  the  Erie  of  Buchanis  waird  We  underftand 
ther  is  fum  variance  and  queftioun  fallin  out  betwix  the  goung  man  and 
his  mother  he  mynding  thairby  to  prejuge  and  difpoflTeffe  her  of  her 
lyfferent  thairof  to  her  utter  wrak  and  herfhip  Quherupoun  We  have 
thocht  gude  to  defiro  gow  be  the  prefent  gif  ge  have  ftill  into  gour  hand 
that  quhilk  we  requyrit  gow  in  his  favouris  of  before  That  in  the  difpo- 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  131 

fition  thairof  to  the  laid  Abraham  ge  lutcrpone  gow  to  his  faid  intentioun 
and  unkyndlie  meanyng  to  his  mother  and  be  fome  gude  and  effeftuell 
provifion  to  let  his  richt  thairof  contene  a  refervation  of  her  lyfferent  / 
as  confcience  and  equitie  appearis  to  crave  That  for  her  tymc  fcho  be 
not  troublit  further  nor  reafoun  can  allow  as  ge  will  do  ws  pleafure  and 
gude  fervice  Thus  we  commit  gow  to  God  At  Dalkeith  the  xxiij  day  of 
Julij  1581  • 

James  E • 
To  our  traift  freind  the 

Laird  of  Lochlevin  •  ; 


Liicence  by  the  King  and  Privy  Council  to  William  Douglas  of  Loch- 
leven  to  repair  hame  • 

126  SOVERANE  LORD  Vnto  gour  Maieftie  and  lordis  of  gour  hienes  fecreit 
counfale  humlie  menis  and  fchawis  gour  G  /  and  LL  /  fervitour  William 
Dowglas  of  Lochlevin  That  quhair  for  obeyfance  of  your  G  /  charge 
gevin  be  advife  of  gour  hienes  fecreit  counfale  Commanding  and  charge- 
ing  me  to  pas  and  entir  my  perfone  in  waird  be  north  the  watter  of 
Crommartie  /  I  with  diligence  poflibill  to  the  great  hafart  of  my  lyf  paft 
and  enterit  my  perfone  in  waird  be  north  the  faid  watter  of  Crommartie 
Quhair  I  remanit  in  waird  ay  and  quhill  it  pleafit  gour  Maieftie  be 
advife  foirfaid  To  tranfporte  my  faid  waird  fra  be  north  the  laid  watter 
of  Crommartie  To  the  watter  of  Die  /  Be  north  the  quhilk  I  haif  re- 
manit continuallie  fenfyne  and  tharby  debarrit  and  fecludit  fra  all  acces 
to  my  wyiff  bairnis  and  famelie  To  my  great  ilifplefure  damnage  and 
fkaith  without  gour  G  /  and  LL  '  provyde  remeid  therto  /  Befeik- 
ing  heirfoir  gour  Maieftie  and  LL  /  To  confidder  the  premiffis  aricht 
and  that  I  may  haiff  my  waird  tranfportit  fra  be  north  the  faid  wat- 
ter of  Die  to  the  watter  of  forth  Swa  that  I  may  remane  benorth  the 
faid  watter  of  forth  quhair  I  pleis  Li  that  fame  eftait  and  vnder  the 


132  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

lyk  cautioun  as  I  remanit  of  befor  Be  north  the  faidis  watterls  of 
Crommartie  and  Die  /  and  that  I  nor  my  cautioneris  Incur  na  danger 
for  my  removing  fra  be  north  the  faid  watter  of  Die  to  the  foirfaid 
watter  of  Forth  and  gour  G  /  and  LL  /  anfuer  maift  humlie  bel'eikis  ac- 
cording to  Juftice  • 

Aptid  Halyruidhous  quinto  Decembris  Anno  'tc"  Ixxxj"  ■ 

Xhe  Kingis  Maieftie  with  auifc  of  the  lordis  of  fecreit  counfall  frethis 
and  relevis  Williame  Dowglas  of  Lochlevin  within  writtin  furth  of  his 
prefent  ward  And  grantis  him  licence  and  libertie  to  repair  hame  to  his 
awin  Dwelling  hous  Or  vtherwayis  in  quhatfumeuir  part  of  this  realme 
in  tyme  cuming  at  his  pleafur  •  And  ordanis  the  a6t  maid  anent  his 
remaining  in  the  faid  ward  to  be  deleit  furth  of  the  bukis  of  fecreit 
counfall  quhairthrow  the  fame  haue  na  farder  force  nor  effeft  in  tyme 
cuming  The  cautionaris  contenit  therin  being  alwayis  anfuerahill  for  ony 
thing  done  in  tyme  bigane  aganis  the  tennour  of  the  famyn  ■ 

James  R  • 

CrAUFURD  •  MONTROISS  • 


J.  he  King  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  - 

127  Xraifl  freind  We  greit  30W  weill  The  greit  and  extreme  neceffitie  quhilk 
our  lovit  James  Stewart  fonne  lawfull  to  umquhile  Johnne  erle  of 
Buchane  fuftenis  at  this  tyme  in  all  thingis  pertening  to  ane  honeft 
mannis  eftate  and  rank  hes  movit  ws  to  pitie  extraordinarelie  his  eftate 
the  mair  quhen  we  confidder  how  and  in  quhat  degrie  he  pertenis  to  that 
houfe  quhairof  ge  now  lujoye  the  leving  be  the  waird  thairof  difponit  to 
gow  and  that  very  confcience  wald  allowe  fome  reafonable  portioun  and 
part  thairof  upon  him  be  the  relief  of  his  neceffitie  /  For  ws  /  albeit  we 
could  wouchfauflFe  to  helpe  him  with  fome  cafualitie  gif  that  his  hap  war 


J  AC.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  133 

to  be  the  firft  aduertifer  git  nather  can  the  hope  thairof  lupplie  his  pre- 
fent  neid  nor  haue  we  uthcrwayl'e  in  hand  that  may  releve  him  as  we 
wald  /  For  that  caufe  We  are  movit  to  have  recours  to  gow  /  quhill  we 
provyde  fomo  helpe  /  and  will  defyre  gow  very  earniftlie  to  let  him  haue 
fome  refonable  pairt  of  that  waird  quhilk  ge  Injoye  to  leve  upon  ather 
induring  the  tyme  thairof  or  quhill  that  fome  occafioun  fall  out  into  our 
handis  that  may  fatiffie  and  ferve  his  turne  /  And  in  the  meane  tyme  to 
let  him  be  fuppleit  with  fome  prefent  fowme  of  money  to  helpe  him  to  his 
honeft  neceffaires  quhairof  it  is  unfemelie  to  fie  him  difappointit  being 
defcendit  of  that  race  quhairin  befydes  the  dewty  of  gude  confcience  ge 
fall  affeuredly  do  ws  richt  acceptable  and  gude  pleafure  Swa  leaving  him 
to  gour  courtefie  and  gude  difcretioun  We  committ  gow  to  God  From 
Dalkeith  this  xij  of  Junij  1582  • 

James  R • 
To  our  traift  freind  the 
Laird  of  Lochlevin  • 


The  King  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

128  Xraift  freind  We  greit  gow  weill  Being  informit  of  the  great  extremitie 
intendit  be  gow  as  donatour  to  the  waird  of  the  erledom  of  Buchane 
aganis  our  lovit  Henry  Mowtray  in  the  removing  of  him  from  the  landis 
of  Fetterlether  and  Letbindie  quhairof  he  allegis  him  baith  auld  and 
kyndlie  poffeffour  and  takkifman  for  termes  to  ryn  /  We  have  thocht 
gude  to  Interpone  ws  this  farre  to  gour  proceading  aganis  him  as  to 
deiire  gow  /  Seing  his  rycht  and  title  forefaid  /  and  that  his  takkis  man 
alwayis  lycht  upon  the  air  quhen  as  he  cummis  to  perfyte  age  That  for 
our  caufe  and  for  the  kyndlie  love  ge  awe  and  bearis  /  baith  to  the  bairne 
and  houfe  ge  will  fuffer  him  peceablie  to  ryn  out  the  termes  reftand  of 
his  tak  and  title  foirfaid  without  any  trouble  or  interruptioun  ather  be 
law  or  befydis  it  /  as  ge  fall  haue  ws  ready  to  confidder  it  als  farre  to 


134  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

your  advantage  and  commoditie  fome  uther  way  /  Swa  Luiking  for  fome 
gude  effeft  heirof  We  commit  gow  to  God  From  Ruthven  this  v  of 
Augull  1582  • 

To  our  traift  freind  the  ^/a/W^'^7?^;^^^ 

Laird  of  Lochleavin  •  '^ 


A  he  King  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

129  Richt  traift  freind  We  greit  gow  weill  Underftanding  the  litill  eflfea 
quhilk  our  former  letter  direft  to  gow  in  favouris  of  our  lovit  Henry 
Mowtray  hes  tane  with  gow  /  farre  within  our  expeftatioun  of  la  raifon- 
able  a  fute  We  are  movit  to  renewe  the  fame  unto  gow  be  the  prefent 
Requyring  gow  affeftuouflie  feing  the  mater  is  fa  meane  and  that  ge  have 
the  haill  be  our  favour  and  benevolence  That  for  our  caufe  ge  will  con- 
fent  to  let  ws  haue  our  pleafour  and  defyr  obeyit  in  that  behalf  The 
difference  that  ftandis  betwix  gow  is  of  fa  litill  value  /  that  we  man  lippin 
ge  will  never  enter  it  in  balance  with  our  requeift  /  and  thairfore  as  ge 
wald  have  us  the  lyke  favourable  in  gour  nixt  fute  fa  let  it  be  delervit  in 
this  /  Seing  that  utherwayfe  we  can  not  think  ws  thankfuUie  delt  with 
But  trufting  ge  wilbe  layth  to  give  ws  any  lie  occafion  We  commit  gow 
to  God  from  Ruthven  this  viij  of  Auguft  1582  • 


rO 


to^is^ 


To  our  traift  freind  the 
Laird  of  Lochleavin  • 


JAC.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  135 

Liicence  by  the  King  and  Privy  Council  to  William  Douglas  of  Lochleven 
and  his  fpoufe  t  c"  to  eat  flefche  during  Lentron  • 

130  W  e  be  the  teunour  heiroff  with  auife  of  the  Lordis  of  our  privie  counfall 
grantis  and  gevis  licence  To  our  lovit  William  Douglas  of  Lochlevin  his 
Ipous  and  perfonis  in  thair  cumpanie  To  eit  flefche  fa  oft  as  thay 
pleis  during  this  forbiddin  tyme  of  Lentrone  viz  fra  the  xvij  day  of  Feb- 
ruar  inftant  unto  the  laft  day  of  Marche  nixtocum  without  ony  cr3'me 
fkaith  perrell  or  danger  therthrow  to  be  incurit  be  thame  in  thair  per- 
fones  landes  or  guidis  Notwithftanding  ony  our  aStis  ftatutis  letters  procla- 
mationes  or  chargis  generall  or  Ipeciall  maid  or  to  be  maid  in  the  contrar 
Anent  the  quhilkis  and  panis  thairin  contenit  We  difpens  for  euir  be  thir 
prefentis  Gevin  under  our  Signet  and  fubfcrivit  with  our  hand  AT  Haly- 
rudhous  the  xiij  day  of  Februar  and  of  our  Regnne  the  faxtene  geir  1582  • 

James  R • 
A  •  Cambuskynneth  •  Culbos  • 

John  Lindfay  of  Covington  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

131  Ivycht  honorable  Sir  efter  my  hartlie  commendatioun  /  It  is  not  vnknawin 
vnto  gow  of  the  gret  truble  and  warding  of  my  awin  perfoun  in  the  caftell 
of  Edinburch  this  certane  tyme  bygaine  /  vpone  ane  fals  and  vntrew 
report  maid  of  me  to  the  Kingis  Majeftie  and  his  counfell  be  M'  Jhone 
Scharp  /  allegand  that  I  /  or  at  the  leift  fuld  have  caufit  burne  certane 
corne  of  his  •  Quhairvpone  I  have  fuftenit  ward  this  fax  oulkis  bygane  ' 
and  can  have  na  releif  nether  git  dayis  affignit  to  me  to  try  my  inno- 
cencie  /  And  in  refpeft  heirof  /  my  Lord  of  Anguis  hes  travellit  withe  the 
faid  M'  Jhone  Scharp  /  and  hes  apoynted  the  mater  betiux  me  and  him  / 
as  ge  may  perfave  be  this  obligatioun  •  The  quhilk  I  will  hartlie  delyr 
gow  to  fubfcrywe  /  becaus  it  is  my  Lordis  mynd  and  counfell  -  that  fua 
fuld  be  •  As  I  beleve  /  his  Lordfhip  will  vrett  to  gow  /  to  the  fame  efiieft  • 


136  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

It  wer  over  tedious  to  vrett  to  gow  the  vncourteous  and  vnreafonable 
dealing  lies  bene  vfit  towardis  me  fen  our  laft  departing  /  quhilk  I  will 
continew  to  our  meting  quhilk  falbe  quhen  plefis  God  /  quha  for  the  pre- 
fent  mot  have  gow  in  his  bliffit  keping  From  Edinburgh  caftell  the  fyft 
of  Junij  1583  • 

Your  affurit  gude  freind  at  power 

Jhone  Lyndsay  of  Covintoun  • 
To  the  rycht  honorable  and  his  fpeciall  gude  freind 
the  Laird  of  Lochlewin  Delyuer  this  • 

J.  he  Earl  of  Angus  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

132  Ooufing  eftir  my  verie  hertly  commendatiounes  Eftir  langfum  travell  in 
this  mater  betuix  the  Laird  of  Coventoun  and  M'  Johnne  Scharp  It  is 
agreit  upon  that  the  Laird  of  Coventoun  fall  fubfcryve  ane  obligatioun 
for  M'  Johns  furetie  And  becaus  it  will  nocht  fcrwe  with  his  fubfcriptioun 
only  except  I  and  certane  uther  freyndis  as  cautioncres  for  him  fubfcryve 
it  also  It  is  thocht  gud  that  aniang  uthers  ge  fuld  be  ane  And  thairfore 
I  hawe  fend  gow  the  obligatioun  to  be  advifit  with  Praying  gow  to  fub- 
fcryve the  fam  and  fend  it  bak  agane  with  diligence  /  for  it  will  furder 
the  gentlemannis  tryell  wery  mekle  And  his  abyding  in  the  caftell  hes 
bene  bayth  trublefum  and  coiftly  to  him  /  this  tyme  bygane  I  hoip  ge  fall 
nocht  be  mekle  trublit  heirefter  with  this  mater  For  the  gentleman  is 
willing  to  tak  up  all  materis  with  M'  Johnne  be  the  aduyfe  of  freyndis 
Sua  for  the  prefent  I  commit  gow  to  God  AT  Edinburgh  the  fext  of 
Junij  1583  • 

3our  aflTurit  guid  freind 

Angus  • 
3e  may  the  better  fubfcriue  the  band  for  I  and  the  Laird  of  Covingtoun 

falbe  gour  releife  • 
To  our  traift  fi-eynd  and  coufing 
the  Laird  of  Lochlewin  • 


JAC.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  137 

Cxeorge  Douglas  to  his  brother  the  Laird  of  Lochleveii  • 

133  Jvycht  honorabill  Sir  and  broder  eftir  my  hartle  commendation  off  teruice 
being  reddy  to  fchip  towartis  the  portis  off  France  I  thowcht  off  my  devty 
I  could  do  no  lefs  fence  be  my  prefence  I  mycht  nocht  wefe  30W  be  thir 
few  lynis  to  lat  30W  wnderftand  the  broderly  affection  I  bair  vnto  gow 
and  lykevys  to  gowr  hows  quhowbeit  that  at  this  prefent  I  may  do  litill 
in  refped  as  materis  flandis  gitt  fliall  I  omitt  ne  guid  officeis  quhair  evir 
the  occation  may  offer  and  my  powar  may  extend  at  my  lew<>  taking  off 
his  Ma/  my  only  fuit  off  benifet  wes  that  ge  nor  gour  hows  fuild  refavc  ne 
wrang  be  the  information  off  gour  enimis  firll  in  refpeft  off  gour  feruice 
don  wnto  his  Ma  /  and  continualy  lence  hes  ramenth  conftaiit  and  obe- 
dient as  be  gowr  ward  go  haue  giuen  ane  guid  prwffe  his  anfuer  was  that 
ne  perfuafion  fuld  move  him  in  the  contrar  and  for  affurance  gave  me  his 
Ma  /  hand  in  prefencp  off  Michell  Elphiftoun  quhom  prefently  he  com- 
mandit  that  in  all  gowr  adois  he  fuld  mak  him  forfein  fua  broder  We  man 
len  on  to  his  Ma  /  promis  ge  haue  hard  be  the  laird  off  Cleifche  quhow  ge 
ar  relevit  off  the  denger  ge  micht  haue  incowrrit  be  gowr  obligations 
maid  to  me  Lord  off  Morton  for  that  was  havaud  him  be  my  Lord 
off  Bowchan  I  haue  refavit  the  thowfand  merkis  that  tves  lyen  in 
Hew  Todi-!  handis  and  now  in  my  abfenre  betwix  this  and  mertymes 
I  wald  ge  towik  lie  order  that  the  othir  thre  thowfandis  merkis  mycht 
be  paied  becaufe  I  haue  meid  vairning  for  the  redemption  off  five 
thowfand  off  Rowingally  thir  iij  thowfandis  being  payett  ge  fhall  haue 
difchairge  off  all  may  be  focht  be  gowr  obligations  faiff  that  that  reftis  in 
the  hows  off  Howntlys  handis  and  alls  ge  will  fe  fik  order  tane  off  that 
that  may  apperten  me  to  meld  wyth  be  office  off  towtry  as  ge  think  maift 
propir  for  all  thir  affeftis  I  haue  left  ampU  procowration  to  my  fcrwand 
Jon  Dowglas  to  mell  intermet  and  giue  difchairges  as  nefefarly  flialbe 
requyrit  provyding  alvayis  that  ne  thing  be  done  by  advyce  and  confent 
off  my  bed  falow  As  for  nevis  I  can  vreit  nen  the  laird  of  Cleifche  will  lat 

s 


138  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

gow  mair  amply  vnderftand  my  mining  in  all  materis  at  gowr  mittingis 
I  fliall  do  guid  well  to  haift  me  hem  wyth  lick  diligence  as  my  affairis  may 
permitt  My  lord  off  Lenox  hes  promift  fair  to  be  ne  enemy  euer  to  owr 
hows  tyra  will  try  Sua  broder  levan  prelently  forder  to  trowbill  50W  com- 
mittis  gow  in  Godis  protexion  From  Sandandrus  the  xxviij  off  Junij 
3owr  broder  at  powar  to  do  gow  feruice 

George  Douglas  • 
To  the  rycht  honorabill  and  bis  broder 
the  Laird  off  Lochleving  • 


JT  roclamatioun  that  nane  move  or  provoke  trouble  unquietnes  or  fedi- 
tioun  amangis  his  Majefteis  I'ubjedlis  • 

Ai  Perth  the  penult  day  of  Julij  the  yeir  of  God  Y"  V  Ixxxiij  yeiris  ■ 

134  J_he  Kingis  Majeftie  vnderftanding  of  the  praftizes  and  buffie  trauellis  of 
fome  of  his  vnnaturall  and  diforderit  fubiedis  quhilkis  be  mifconftruing 
and  mifreporting  be  word  and  wrait  of  his  hienes  awne  gude  mynd  and 
proceidingis  /  fludyis  continuallie  to  interteny  fa6tionis  and  vnquietnes 
within  this  realme  /  The  rather  to  flay  the  ordinar  cours  of  Juftice  and 
to  efchew  the  pvnifchment  of  thair  awin  evill  deferuingis  to  obuiat  and 
refill  the  effedis  of  quhilkis  wickit  fpeichcs  and  trauellis  And  to  refolue 
and  fatiffie  all  his  loving  and  gude  fubie6tis  lb  that  peradventure  '  flandis 
git  doubtfuU  of  the  trewthe  of  his  hienes  meaning  and  doingis  His 
Majeftie  be  aduife  of  the  lordis  of  his  previe  counfale  /  hes  thocht  expe- 
dient to  notifie  and  publilhe  to  the  warld  Specially  to  all  his  awin  loving 
and  gude  fubieftis  /  the  trewth  of  his  verie  mynd  and  lyking  twetching 
hie  eftate  this  geir  bygane  and  of  his  prefent  conditiouu  Declairing 
heirby  that  fafone  as  he  fand  him  lelf  cum  to  the  levintene  geir  of  his 
age  /  and  remembrit  the  troblit  eftate  of  his  realme  throw  the  frequent 
troubles  and  alterationis  occurrit  in  his  goung  aige  in  tyme  bj^aft 
(alwayis  to  his  Ikaithe  and  preiudice)  Bot  fpecialie  be  that  quhilk  fell  out 


JAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MOETON.  139 

the  last  gear  /  fa  far  to  his  offence  and  to  the  miflykiug  of  his  mynd 
Albeit  for  puUift  quietnes  faik  /  he  moderatlie  bure  with  that  fait  and  all 
that  fuccedit  theron  /  he  had  it  alwajes  in  thocht  fa  fone  as  God  fould 
offer  proper  tyme  and  occafioun  to  tak  vnto  himfelf  his  awin  place  and 
ftate  to  fhaw  him  a  king  indifferent  to  all  his  nobilite  and  gude  fubiedis 
And  not  to  be  led  or  caried  away  be  ony  fpeciall  furnames  and  rates  or 
be  particuler  men  in  ony  degric  to  the  preiudice  of  that  commoun  acces 
quhilk  all  gude  fubieftis  acht  to  haue  to  their  fouerane  Lord  and  King  And 
thairfoir  of  his  awin  propir  motiue  vpoun  the  xxvj  of  Junij  laft  tuik  pur- 
pois  to  pas  from  Falkland  to  the  Citie  of  San6tandrois  quher  repofing  in 
fuirtie  to  the  conveining  of  a  gude  nowmer  of  the  principallis  of  his 
nobilitie  /  notifiit  vnto  thame  at  their  camming  /  the  eSeSt  of  his  proceid- 
ingis  and  intentioun  /  permitting  and  licencing  vtheris  not  writtin  for  to 
pas  hame  quhill  his  Majeflie  be  advife  of  fie  chofin  perfonis  of  counfale 
as  he  ele6bit  to  tary  with  him  fould  deliberat  further  in  all  thingis  neid- 
full  Concerning  the  fuirtie  of  his  perfoun  and  conferuatioun  of  the  publift 
quietnes  of  the  cuntrey  quherintill  his  hienes  hes  occupiit  hira  felf  cheiflie 
fenlyne  /  Intending  with  Goddis  grace  to  governe  his  realme  and  fub- 
ie£tis  heirefter  in  peax  and  iuftice  /  and  in  the  profeffioun  of  Goddis  trow 
religioun  publiftlie  preitchit  and  be  law  eftablifliit  in  the  fame  vnfeiking 
the  hurt  or  rwyne  of  quhatfumeuir  his  fubje6tis  In  refpeft  of  ony  ther  lait 
bygane  offence ,  that  fall  tymouflie  acknawledge  the  fame  with  penitent 
hartis  and  crave  his  Majefteis  forgivenes  therfore  /  quhilk  he  is  willing  to 
grant  wnto  thame  /  And  be  thir  prefentis  promiffis  fa  to  do  /  They  na- 
wayis  prouoking  him  be  ony  ther  new  vnlawfuU  and  vnquyet  doingis  to 
remember  on  ther  former  tranfgreffionis    And  vn calling  to  mynd  ony 
faftionis  that  hes  bene  in  his  hienes  minoritie  /  quhilkis  his  Majeltie  hes 
and  will  haue  buriit  in  obliuioun  /  As  he  willis  the  lyk  to  be  amangis  his 
haill  fubie6tis  euerie  ane  to  vther  without  ony  querrell  or  queftioun  for 
ony  thing  that  hes  happinit  or  fallin  out  amangis  thame  in  tyme  bygane , 
without  calling  vp  or  querrelling  vtheris  for  this  or  that  fadioun    As  his 
Majeftie  hes  gevin  gude  pruif  of  his  clemency  and  fauour  to  fome  alreddy 


140  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

And  that  letters  be  dire6l  for  publicatioun  heirof  at  the  mercat  croces  of 
the  held  burrowes  of  this  realme  and  vtheris  placis  neidfull  /  That  nane 
pretend  ignorance  of  the  fame  Commanding  and  chargeing  all  and  findrie 
his  hicnes  lieges  /  To  contene  thame  felffis  in  quietnes  vnder  Goddis  feir 
and  his  Majefties  lawfull  obedience  /  And  that  nane  of  thame  tak  vpoun 
hand  to  move  or  prouoke  trouble  vnquietnes  or  feditioun  amangis  his 
fubieftis  /  be  word  or  deid  or  to  ftiawe  thame  the  authoris  and  inftru- 
mentis  of  alterationis  and  novelteis  /  Tending  to  the  difturbing  of  his 
eftate  As  they  will  anfuer  vpoun  their  alleageance  at  their  hicheft  charge 
and  perrell  /  And  vnder  pane  of  incurring  his  hienes  indignatioun  and 
difpleafure  gif  they  fall  attempt  ony  thing  in  the  contrare  • 


Order  to  the  Keepers  of  the  Caftle  of  Invernefs  to  receive  John  Leflie 
of  Buchquhane  and  others  in  waird  • 

REX- 

135  Capitane  conftabill  and  keiparis  off  our  caftell  of  Innernefs  We  grete 
30W  Weill  IT  is  oure  will  and  We  command  gow  that  incontinent  eftir  the 
ficht  heirof  ge  relaue  Johnne  Leflie  off  Buchquhane  Andrew  Monro  of 
Newmoir  and  William  Dowglas  of  Lochlewin  in  ward  within  our  faid 
caftell  /  And  appoint  fax  perfonis  to  ilk  ane  off  thame  ffor  their  keiparis 
Thairin  to  remane  all  vpoun  their  expenflis  during  oure  will  and  quhill 
thei  be  fred  be  ws  with  auife  of  oure  counfalle  As  ge  will  auluer  to  ws  keip- 
and  thir  prefentis  for  gour  warrand  /  Sublcriuitt  with  oure  hand  AT  Falk- 
land the  xxvij  day  of  Auguft  and  of  oure  regnne  the  fewintene  geir  1583  ■ 

Chriftian  Douglas  to  her  mother  the  Lady  Lochleven  • 

136  It  will  pleis  gour  L  /  to  wit  that  I  have  fpokin  with  my  Lord  anent  the 
purpois  gour  L  /  knawis  And  he  hes  affurit  me  that  thair  is  nathing  menit 


JAC.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  141 

be  him  hot  to  performe  the  oflferis  that  wes  maid  to  the  hous  of  Traquhair 
I  dcfyrit  his  L  /  to  put  the  fame  in  wrett  utherwyfe  I  culd  nocht  defyr 
na  honeft  gentle  man  to  trawell  in  that  purpois  except  I  wer  fwir  of  his 
L  /  mynd  /  His  anfwer  wes  to  me  that  it  wes  nocht  neidfuU  to  him  to  put 
thame  in  wreit  He  defyrit  me  to  fchaw  ^our  L  /  that  the  Kingis  grace 
being  in  San6l  Johneftoun  laft  with  the  aduyfe  of  M"^  William  Oliphant 
the  Lard  of  Balthyok  and  the  gud  man  of  Melginche  that  his  offeris  wes 
prefent  to  Sir  Robert  Melwyn  and  he  fchew  the  fame  offeris  to  Williame 
Stewart  of  Traquhair  quha  thocht  thame  refonable  And  wald  on  na  wyle 
refufe  the  fame  Bot  at  that  prefent  he  wald  gif  na  anfuer  Saying  that  he 
wald  aduyfe  with  uther  freindis  /  My  Lord  alTuris  me  that  athor  Sir  Robert 
Melwyn  or  thane  M'  Williame  Oliphant  hcs  the  fame  offeris  quhilk  he  is 
myndit  to  performe  gif  the  hous  of  Traquhair  will  accept  the  fame  He 
fayis  that  ther  is  nathing  that  M'  William  Oliphant  will  defyre  him  to  do 
in  that  purpois  bot  he  will  (land  content  thairwith  My  Lord  allegis  ane 
promeis  of  Sir  Robert  Melwyn  quhilk  I  am  lure  he  will  keip  quhilk 
promeis  I  fall  fchaw  gour  L  /  at  meitting  or  than  with  the  nixt  that  cumis 
betwene  Having  na  forther  occafioun  at  this  tyme  Committis  gour  L  /  to 
God  From  Duplin  the  fourt  of  November  1583  Be 

3our  dochter  at  command 

Cristane  Douglas  • 
To  the  Rycht  honorable  and  hir  weilbelovit  Mother 
The  Lady  Lochlevin  • 

(jift  of  the  efcheit  of  William  Douglas  of  Lochleven  to  the  Lady  Loch- 
leven  • 

137  1^^  ^^  Kend  till  all  men  be  thir  prefent  letters  We  Patrik  be  the 
mercie  of  God  Archbifchope  of  Sandandros  and  Lord  of  the  Regalitie 
thairof  To  have  gevin  grantit  and  difponit  to  our  lowit  Agnes  Leflie  Lady 
of  Lochlewine  hir  airis  and  affignais  ane  or  ma  The  efcheit  of  all  and 


142  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

haill  the  guidis  and  geir  tackis  a6bis  rowmis  poffeffiounis  Jowellis  gold 
aud  filver  cun5eit  and  oncunseit  cornes  T;c  of  the  landis  of  Bannettill  and 
Baggedie  lyand  within  the  fcherefdom  of  Fyff  1c  Quhilkis  pertenit  befoir 
to  William  Douglas  of  Lochlewine  and  now  pertening  to  m  s  and  becumit 
in  our  handis  be  raiffoun  of  efcheit  throw  being  of  the  faid  William 
ordourlie  denuncit  our  Soverane  Lordis  Rebell  and  putt  to  his  hienes 
home  upon  the  day  of  the  geir  of  God  I*^  V°  fourfcoir 

thrie  geires  for  diflbbeing  our  fowerane  Lordis  charge  gevin  vnto  him  and 
nocht  entering  himfelf  in  waird  in  the  caftell  of  Invernefs  l:c  T:c  In 
witnes  of  the  quhilk  to  thir  prcfentis  fubfcrywit  with  our  hand  our  feill  is 
affixit  AT  the  day  of  the  geir  of  God 

jro  yc  fourfcoir  three  ^eiris  before  thir  witneffes  M'  Jhon  Arthour 
advocat  Walter  Cokbum  and  James  Arthour  our  fervitouris  with  utheris 
divers  • 

Patrik  bifchop  of  San&andros  • 


Obligation  by  William  Douglas  of  Lochleven  to  Thomas  Ogilvy  • 

138  1  William  Douglas  of  Lochlevin  be  this  prelent  Oblifs  me  my  airis 
executouris  and  affignais  to  pay  and  redeliuer  to  Thomas  Ogiluy  brother 
to  the  Laird  of  Innerquharitie  and  burges  of  Dundy  the  foume  of  levin 
hundreth  fyftie  pundis  fcottis  mony  betuix  the  dait  heirof  and  Midfomer 
nixt  quhilk  fowm  I  reflauit  fra  the  faid  Thomas  in  french  mony  in  the 
Rocbelle  To  wit  nyne  hundreth  frankis  /  and  the  faid  Thomas  to  reflave 
for  ilk  croun  /  fyfty  fchiUingis  fcottis  mony  quhilk  will  extend  to  the 
ibwme  abone  writtin  In  witnes  quherof  I  hawe  fubfcrivit  this  pre  font 
obligatioun  with  my  hand  AT  the  Rochelle  the  23  day  of  Maij  the  geir  of 
God  I^  V°  fourfcoir  fyve  geiris  Befoir  thir  witneffis  James  Blyth  burges 
of  Dundy  and  Henrie  Douglas  my  feruand  • 

ViLLiAME  Douglas  of  Lochleuin  • 


JAC.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  143 

X  he  Laird  of  Loclileven  to  his  Lady  • 

139  Jjeft  belowit  efter  maift  hairtlie  commendatioun  This  prefent  fall  adver- 
ties  gou  that  at  the  wretting  heirof  I  am  in  guid  health  prayfit  be  God 
And  defyris  the  lyk  of  yow  And  all  my  bairnis  freindis  and  feruandis 
that  ar  on  iyve  As  towart  the  eftait  of  this  ciintrey  The  King  of  France 
hes  renuncit  in  the  Parliament  of  Paris  all  appoyntraents  and  pacifica- 
tioun  maid  at  ony  tyme  in  favouris  of  the  Religioun  reformit  in  this 
cuntrey  And  hes  commandit  be  his  edift  that  all  Miniflers  avoyd  thame 
felffis  out  of  this  cuntrey  within  ane  moneth  wndir  the  paine  of  death  / 
And  the  nobill  and  gentill  men  within  fex  monethis  to  the  effedl  thay 
may  fell  thair  landis  and  guidis  /  and  thairefter  pas  out  of  the  cuntrey 
God  knawis  gif  that  falbe  kepit  to  thame  gif  thay  will  depend  thairon 
for  this  laft  waire  maid  againil  thame  of  the  Legie  be  the  King  of 
France  Is  thocht  als  great  ane  falfet  as  the  MaflTacre  of  Paris  Inrefpett 
that  how  fone  bayth  thair  armeis  wer  liftit  thai  agreit  all  in  ane  contrair 
to  the  Kingis  edift  diuerfe  tymes  fet  furth  be  oppin  proclamatioun  in  the 
contrair  that  he  menit  na  thing  hot  to  keip  the  peace  /  Swa  he  /  and  thay 
of  the  Papis  Legie  thinkis  to  exterminat  the  word  of  God  out  of  this 
cuntrey  and  all  partis  of  Europe  gif  God  permit  thame  /  quhilk  I  traift 
in  his  guidnes  he  will  nocht  hot  will  difappoynt  all  thair  interpryfis  / 
althocht  to  the  warld  thay  mak  thame  nevir  fwa  apperand  In  refpeft  the 
great  treflToun  Is  aganis  his  kirk  /  quhilk  he  will  preferve  as  the  Appill 
of  his  Ee  /  and  confound  all  his  ennemeis  This  with  my  hartlie  commen- 
datioun to  all  my  bairnis  freindis  and  fervandis  Committis  you  and  thame 
to  the  protedioun  of  the  Alraychtye  AT  the  Rochelle  the  nynt  day  of 
Auguft  1585  . 

I  wret  to  30W  the  anfuer  of  Gilbert  Lambis  letter  with  him  feljGP  and 
lykwayis  the  anfuer  of  Andersonis  letter  and  the  anfuer  of  the  Manis 
of  Kingorne   /  bot   I   reffavit   na   uther   lettre   fra  nane  of  Leith  /  I 


144 


ORIGINAL  PAPERS 


[sec.  XVI. 


reflavit  your  laft  letter  out  of  ane  fchip  of  Pittinveme  As  to  the 
anfuer  therof  I  wreit  with  Gilbert  Lamb  concerning  my  brother  fonis 
effairis  And  as  toward  that  that  concernis  myfelff  or  my  hous  I 
refer  the  fame  till  I  heare  off  the  deliverance  of  my  guid  dochter 
And  thairefter  fall  do  the  bell  /  with  Goddis  grace  /  I  dout  nocht  hot 
3e  haue  agreit  with  fum  man  to  furneis  me  /  I  wreitt  to  gow  with 
James  Wrquhart  fervant  to  the  Priour  of  Plufgardene  /  that  Incaice  he 
come  heir  befoir  Thomas  Ogilvy  to  feud  with  him  gif  It  wer  bot  ane 
hundreth  crownis  for  I  am  neir  ane  end  of  the  filver  that  I  had  alreddy  / 
ther  cum  ane  man  off  Dunde  to  this  tcun  that  declarit  my  gud  dochter 
fuld  be  lichter  of  ane  lad  bot  be  reffoun  I  refavit  na  wretting  fra  gou  nor 
fra  na  uther  theroff  ]  am  In  doubt  giff  the  fam  be  off  veratie  Giff  the 
famin  be  lat  us  thank  God  off  that  bentfeit  amangis  the  reft  always  his 
name  be  blefit  The  peft  is  weray  grait  in  this  toun  prefentlie  God  fend 
better  quhen  he  plefis  • 

^our?  only 


To  his  beft  belouit 
the  Lady  Lochlevin  • 


The  King  to  the  Lady  of  Lochleven  • 

140  Traift  freind  We  greit  gow  weill  /  having  neceffarlie  ado  with  palgionis 
to  oure  awne  propir  vfe  at  oure  oift  and  armey  fliortelie  to  pas  God 
willing  to  the  weft  marche  of  our  realme  for  repreffing  of  the  infolent 
rebelliouu  and  difordour  that  falang  hes  coutinewit  thair  to  our  grite 


lAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EAELS  OF  MORTON.  145 

contempt  /  and  the  fchortnes  of  the  tyme  not  ferving  that  new  palgeonis 
may  be  maid  reddy  to  oure  felff  we  haue  thocht  gude  to  burdyne  gow 
That  we  may  haue  the  vfe  of  gouris  during  this  veiage  And  in  that 
relpeft  is  contentit  to  fpair  the  perfonall  feruice  of  the  men  tennentis 
and  feruandis  of  the  Laird  gour  hufband  duelland  on  his  propir  landis 
Except  fik  horffis  and  men  as  fall  cary  the  palgeonis  and  twenty  ma 
Careage  horffis  for  oure  awne  vfe  /  Defiring  gow  therfoir  effeftuuflie  That 
ge  faill  nocht  to  haue  the  faid  palgeoun  fufficientlie  orderit  with  cordis 
pynnis  and  all  vther  furnitour  belangand  thairto  Togidder  with  the  faid 
vther  twenty  gude  and  hable  Cariage  horffis  and  thair  graithe  for  reffiav- 
ing  and  beiring  of  Cadgeattis  or  barrellis  and  with  euerie  horfe  a  fufB- 
cient  able  Careage  man  with  knapfcall  and  Lance  ftaff  prouidit  alfua 
with  viftuallis  for  thame  felffis  during  the  tyme  of  our  proclamatioun 
quhais  feruice  in  that  ordour  fall  ftand  and  be  fufficient  for  the  Laird 
gour  hufbandis  haill  tennentis  and  feruandis  quhom  We  licence  and 
perniitt  gow  to  ftent  to  the  effect  foirfaid  /  ffor  quhilk  this  our  Letter 
falbe  a  fufficient  warrand  as  gif  thay  had  feruit  in  propir  perfonis  /  Thus 
We  committ  gow  to  God  AT  Sterling  the  xxij  day  of  Odober  1585  • 

James  R • 
To  our  traift  freind  the 
Lady  of  Lochlevin  • 
To  be  in  Stirling  the  xxix  or  penult  day  of  October  inftant  • 

.Licence  by  the  King  and  Privy  Council  to  James  Commendator  of 
Melros  and  others  to  abide  at  hame  fra  all  oiftis  tc"  • 
REX- 
141  We  and  the  Lordis  of  our  Secreit  Counfale  being  informit  of  the  greit 
feiknes  and  inhabelitie  of  our  louittis  James  Commendatar  of  Melros 
Henrie  Chaip  in  Mawhill  Alexander  Steidmane  in  Kinros  Patrik  How- 
burne  in  Tulleboill  Robert  Douglas  in  Drumgarland  Robert  Douglas 
in  Annecroche  Robert  Craufurde   in  Powmylne  Henrie   Craufurde   his 

t 


146  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

fone  Henrie  Douglas  in  Mukert  mylne  Johnne  Douglas  in  Kenneftoun 
Gavane  Douglas  in  Bowbedy  Laurence  Dempftertoun  in  Kinrois  M'  Peter 
Quhyte  in  Portmok  Thomas  Craufurde  in  Clalchlokie  Gabriell  Merfer  in 
Cleifhe  George  Kinloich  ther  Johne  Schaw  in  Lathangy  and  quha  ar  all 
wexit  with  the  feiknefs  of  the  gute  gravell  and  uther  infirmiteis  /  Swa 
that  thai  ar  not  hable  to  trawell  nor  cume  to  our  oift  and  armie  appointit 
to  convene  the  penult  of  06lober  inftant  or  on  the  thrid  of  November 
nixt  to  cume  Thairfore  and  for  diuerfe  caufis  and  confideratiounis  moving 
ws  to  haif  licencet  and  be  the  tennour  of  thir  prefentis  with  avife  of  the 
Lordis  of  our  Secreit  Counfale  licences  and  gevis  frie  liberte  to  all  the 
faidis  perl'onis  to  abide  and  remaine  at  hame  fra  our  faidis  oift  and  armie 
notwithftanding  quhatfumcvir  proclamationis  aftis  or  ordinances  maid  or 
to  be  maid  or  dired  in  the  contrare  Anent  the  quhilkis  and  all  penalteis 
that  may  follow  therupoun  We  be  thir  prefentis  difpenfis  with  thame 
theranent  for  ever  Attour  We  be  the  tennour  of  thir  prefentis  difchargeis 
our  Thefaurer  Advocat  Leutennentis  Crowneris  Juftice  Generall  and  his 
deputtis  and  all  utheris  our  officiaris  and  Minifteris  of  our  lawis  Of  all 
calling  accufing  atteiching  arreifting  wnlawing  or  poinding  of  the  faidis 
perlonis  or  ony  of  thame  for  the  famyn  and  of  ther  offices  in  that  part  for 
euer  Subfcriuit  with  our  hand  and  gevin  under  our  fignet  AT  Striuiling 
the  xxix  day  of  Odober  1585  and  of  our  Regnne  the  nyntene  geir  • 

James  R  • 
Thyrlstane       M"  of  Gray  • 


Liicence  by  the  King  to  Lady  Lochleven  to  eat  flefche  in  Lentroun  • 
REX- 
142    W^E  be  the  tennour  heirof  gevis  and  grantis  licence  to  Agnes  Dowglas 
Ladie  Lochlevin  and  perfonis  with  hir  in  cumpany  To  eit  flefche 

during  this  forbiddin  tyme  of  Lentroun  And  vpoun  woddinfdayis  frydayis 
and  fetterdayis  during  hir  lyfetyme  ffor  the  quhilkis  Icho  fall  incure  na 
danger  nor  pane  Notwithftanding  quhatfumevir  our  proclamatiounis  maid 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  147 

or  to  be  maid  in  the  contrar  Anentis  the  quhilkis  We  difpens  be  thir  pre- 
fentis  Subfcriuit  with  our  hand  AT  Halyruidhous  the  xv  of  februar  1585  • 

Thyrlstane  •  ff  ^^^    1 

±  he  Laird  of  Lochleven  to  John  Lawrie  burgefs  of  Edinburgh  • 

143  J_raift  freynd  eftir  maift  hartlle  commendation  this  prefend  is  to  defyre 
gow  that  ge  wilbe  fa  gud  as  to  len  M'  James  off  Carmichell  the  Turn  of 
tuyntie  foure  pundis  flerlin  and  In  caice  ge  be  nocht  content  of  the  fuirtie 
that  he  may  mack  gow  I  wilbe  cautioun  and  dettour  for  him  to  gow  for 
the  forfaid  fum  ge  relawand  his  obligatioun  and  wrett  apoun  the  refait 
of  the  famin  quhilk  doand  ge  will  do  me  ane  plefour  this  committis  to 
God  At  Londoun  the  fourt  day  of  Aprile  1586  • 

3our  frynd  at  his  pouar 

LOCHLEUIN  • 
To  his  treft  freind 
John  Lawrie  burgefs  of  Edinburgh  • 

John  Bofwall  of  Balmuto  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

144  ixycht  honorabill  Sir  and  eme  /  efter  maift  hertlie  recommendatloun  It 
may  pleis  gow  to  witt  that  I  reffaivit  gour  letter  upoun  Monunday  at  evin 
and  hes  confidderit  the  famyn  My  freindis  and  I  findis  that  the  fubfcriv- 
ing  of  the  blank  as  it  is  formit  and  namelie  the  conclufioun  thairof  makis 
ane  equalitie  baithe  of  rycht  and  poffeffioun  betuix  the  Lard  of  Wefter 
Wemeis  and  me  to  the  Loche  /  the  quhilk  nather  my  freindis  nor  I  ar 
myndit  to  aggre  unto  fa  lang  as  I  leive  /  and  that  in  refpeft  that  the  Lard 
of  Wemeis  rycht  and  polTeflioun  that  he  pretendis  is  na  thing  lyk  unto 
myne  /  the  quhilk  at  lenthe  falbe  knawin  be  Goddis  grace  nocht  to  his 


148  OEIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

contentment  /  nor  git  to  thairis  that  will  fortefye  him  into  that  wrangous 
aftioun  /  I  declai'it  in  the  end  of  my  laft  letter  the  fartheft  that  I  culd  do 
anent  the  fubfcriving  of  ane  blank  /  hot  for  this  gif  I  wer  myndit  to  fub- 
Icrive  it  for  ony  freind  that  I  halve  I  fuld  do  it  for  gou  •  Defyring  gow 
Sir  maiil  eflFedluouflie  nocht  to  think  of  me  bot  that  I  will  and  fall  do 
mair  for  gow  nor  the  Lard  of  Wefter  Wemeis  will  or  dar  do  to  witt  I 
will  and  dar  refer  my  lyfe  and  landis  and  all  the  reft  that  I  halve  to  gow 
quhen  occafioun  fall  ferve  and  fall  hafard  the  famyn  in  defence  of  gow 
and  gour  houfe  quherof  ge  fall  halve  experience  quhen  it  fall  pleis  gow 
to  command  as  knawis  the  Almychtie  God  quha  mot  preferve  gow  Sir 
for  now  and  ever  AT  Balmwtow  the  penult  of  Auguft  1586  • 
^our  affurit  and  obedient  eme  at  command 

Jhone  Bossuall  of  Balmouto  • 
To  the  Rycht  honorabill  and  his  maift 
fpeciale  the  Laird  of  Lochlevin  • 


_L  he  Mafter  of  Glammis  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

145  Ivycht  honorabill  Sir  eftir  my  maift  hartlie  commendationes  I  haif 
reffavit  gour  letter  and  as  towart  the  certantie  of  gour  filuer  quhilk  ge 
defyrit  to  knaw  /  as  I  fpak  to  gow  in  Edinburgh  I  haid  the  fame  ther  to 
deliver  to  gow  and  in  refpecb  of  the  Refufall  I  caufit  deliver  the  fame  to 
Knokdolien  /  And  now  I  am  upoun  the  firft  of  the  nixt  moneth  the  lyke 
fowme  to  reflave  quhairoff  I  haif  cautioneris  in  Edinburgh  quhilk  I  luik 
for  and  fall  caus  deliver  the  fame  to  gow  as  I  haif  Ichawin  the  berar 
quhome  with  I  haif  mair  amply  conferrit  therin  And  fwa  Remitting  the 
reft  therto  I  commit  gow  to  God  this  xxj  of  Oftober  1586  Be 
3°^^  affurit  freind  to  his  wtter  pouar 

Tho  •  M'  Glammys  • 
To  the  Rycht  honorabill  and  my  weray  guid 
freind  the  Laird  of  Lochlevin  'ic  • 


;ac.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  149 

J.  he  King  to  the  Earl  of  Buchan  • 

14(3  ivycht  traift  coufing  We  greit  gow  hartly  weill  /  At  the  lait  conventioun 
of  famony  of  our  eftates  as  affembled  we  declah'it  the  prefent  conditioun 
of  the  Quene  our  deareft  moder/  for  quhome  it  becumis  ws  in  honour  and 
dewetie  to  do  all  in  ws  poffible  /  not  doubting  of  the  redy  gude  will  and 
promptitude  of  our  haill  eftatis  and  loving  lubieftis  to  that  efl'edt  /  And 
feing  the  mater  was  able  to  draw  to  a  capitulatioun  The  noblemen  and 
prelattis  prefent  for  the  time  ofterit  frelie  to  gif  ws  for  their  awne  partis 
to  the  lame  effeft.  '  everie  Erie  thre  hundreth  pundis  /  everie  Lord  twa 
hundreth  pundis  /  the  meaneft  of  the  Prelattis  prefent  fourtie  pundis  /  And 
everie  vther  prelatt  accordinglie  relpeding  the  value  of  ther  benefices  / 
Nocht  dowting  hot  all  thair  peiris  in  Scotland  wald  do  the  lyke  in  relpect 
of  the  caufe  wilhing  thame  to  follow  the  exemple  of  the  ("aidis  noblemert 
and  prelattis  prefent  for  the  tyme  /  And  albeit  gour  felff  was  not  then  pre- 
fent git  luiking  for  na  lefs  gude  will  at  gour  handis  /  nor  ge  had  bene  per- 
Ibnallie  heir  /  we  haue  burdenit  gow  with  the  lyke  fowme  as  vtheris  of 
gour  rank  offerit  vnto  ws  Defyring  gow  eflFeiSleoullie  that  ge  will  not  faill 
to  prepair  the  fame  fowme  mentionat  in  the  roll  /  quhilk  the  beirar  heirof 
will  fliaw  gow  and  caus  delyver  the  fame  to  M'  Williame  Lellie  quhome 
we  haue  appointit  to  reflTaue  it  within  lex  dayis  eftir  his  firfl  cuming  to 
gow  Sa  as  the  purpois  for  quhilk  the  fame  is  deftinat  be  not  hinderit  or 
harmit  for  the  inlaik  therof  /  Sen  vpoun  the  confequence  of  that  quhilk 
heirvpoun  is  lyklie  to  follow  dependis  the  quyeting  or  vnquyeting  of  the 
haill  eftate  As  ge  will  declair  gour  affeftionat  mynde  to  the  furtherance 
of  that  mater  and  do  ws  verie  acceptable  pleafur  /  Lattand  us  vnderfland 
be  gour  letter  with  the  beirar  that  we  may  afleuredlie  lippin  for  the 
fame  /  And  fwa  We  commit  gow  to  God  From  Halirudhous  the  xij  day  of 
Januare  1586  •  yp 

To  oure  Richt  traift  coufing  the  erll  of  ^ i/i/pyja     fX> 

Buchane  and  his  tutoris  •  /  ^^-^ 


150  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

Liicence  to  James  Commendator  of  Melros  to  pas  to  France  and  Flanders  • 
REX- 
147  W  E  be  the  tennour  heirof  with  auife  of  the  Lordis  of  oure  fecrete  coun- 
I'all  Geve  and  grant  oure  licence  to  oure  louitt  James  commendatar  of 
oure  abbay  of  Melros  To  depairt  and  pas  furth  of  our  Realme  to  the 
pairtis  of  France  Flandaris  and  vthiris  begond  fey  /  thair  to  remane  for 
doing  of  his  lefum  effearis  for  the  fpace  of  geiris  nixttocum  eftir 

the  date  heirof  /  For  the  quhilk  We  will  and  grant  he  fall  nawayes  be 
oallit  nor  accufeit  /  Nor  incur  na  fkaith  nor  dangear  thairthrow  in  his 
perlbne  landis  guidis  nor  geir  Nochtwithftanding  quhatfumeuir  oure  adis 
llatutis  ordinanceis  proclamationis  or  conftitutionis  maid  or  to  be  maid 
in  the  contrare  Quhairanent  and  all  panes  contenit  thairintill  We  difpens 
be  thir  prefentis  Difchargeing  heirfoir  oure  Juftice  Juftice  dark  Aduo- 
cattis  and  all  vthiris  oure  Jugeis  ofHciaris  and  minifteris  of  our  lawis 
prefent  and  tocum  and  thair  deputis  Off  all  calling  accufeing  troubling 
or  onywayes  proceding  aganis  the  faid  Commendatar  /  Or  intrometing 
with  him  his  benefice  landis  guidis  or  geir  for  the  premiffis  and  of  thair 
offices  in  that  part  be  thir  prefentis  •  Prouyding  alwayes  that  the  faid 
James  commendatar  of  Melros  during  his  ablence  furth  of  oure  realme  / 
behave  him  felff  as  ane  deutifull  and  obedient  fubieft  to  ws  /  and  do  nor 
attempt  na  thing  tending  to  the  hurte  or  preiudice  of  ws  oure  eftate  or 
troun  Or  to  the  religioun  prefentlie  profeffit  within  oure  realme  /  Vthir- 
wayes  this  oure  licence  to  be  null  and  of  nane  availl  ftrenth  force  nor 
effe£t  •  Gevin  vndir  oure  fignet  and  fublbryuit  with  oure  hand  AT 

the  day  of  And  of  oure  regnne  the 

twentie  geir  1586  - 


Tho  ■  Thefaurarius        Thyrlstane  ■ 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  151 

Acquittance  to  William  Douglas  of  Lochleven  of  the  few  maills  of  Melros  • 

148  We  James  Commendatar  of  Melros  grantis  ws  be  the  tennour  heiroff 
to  haue  reffaued  fra  the  handis  of  the  rycht  honorable  Villiam  Douglas 
of  Lochleuin  our  father  full  and  compleitt  payment  of  all  maner  of  maillis 
and  wther  dewities  auchtand  be  him  to  ws  be  wertew  of  ony  landis  and 
dewities  addettit  be  him  to  the  Abbacie  of  Melros  And  be  the  tennour 
heirof  We  hauld  ws  weill  contentit  fatiffeit  and  payit  of  the  famin  and  of 
all  geiris  and  termis  maillis  and  dewiteis  len  our  eutres  to  the  laid 
Abbacie  to  this  prelent  day  and  daitt  And  thairfoir  quitclamis  and  dii- 
chargis  the  faid  Villiam  Douglas  of  Lochleuin  his  airis  executouris  and 
affignayis  of  the  famyn  for  ws  and  our  fuccefTouris  and  all  utheris  quhome 
it  efFeiris  In  Witnes  of  the  quhilk  thing  We  have  fubfcrivit  this  prelent 
acquittance  with  our  hand  AT  Edinburgh  the  xxj  day  of  Julij  The  geir  of 
God  I*^  V°  Ixxxvij  geiris  Befoir  thir  witneffis  M'  William  Ilenderlbn 
commiflar  of  Melros  Johne  Douglas  in  Kenneftoun  and  Villiam  Douglas 
called  Kyllis  Villiam  with  utheris  diuers  • 

James  Commendatar  of  Melros  • 

JciXtraft  of  claule  and  article  in  the  Ratificatioun  of  the  Pacificatioun 
reftitutioun  and  abolitioun  grantit  to  our  Soverane  Lordis  liegis  at 
divers  Parliamentis  befoir  • 

149  In  the  Aft  of  the  Parliament  haldin  at  Edinburgh  the  tuentie  nyne  day 
of  Julij  the  geir  of  God  I*^  V"  fourfcoir  fevin  geiris  Intitulat  Ratificatioun 
of  the  Pacificatioun  reftitutioun  and  abolitioun  grantit  to  cure  Souerane 
Lordis  liegis  at  divers  Parliamentis  befoir  /  this  claus  and  article  is  con- 
tenit  OURE  SOVERANE  LORD  of  his  naturall  difpofitioun  being  at 
all  tymes  maift  cairfuU  to  vnit  the  haill  hairtis  of  his  I'ubieftis  That  his 
nobilitie  eftaitis  and  commoun  people  at  all  tymes  micht  be  the  mair  bent 


152  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvr. 

ill  his  feruice  for  the  avancement  of  the  realme  Hes  in  guid  effe6t  de- 
clairit  his  intentioun  nawyfe  to  enriche  his  crown  with  the  damnage  of 
his  fubiedis  Nor  that  ony  of  thame  aganis  vtheris  for  ony  variance  fallin 
out  in  his  hienes  minoritie  and  les  age  I'uld  haue  ony  maner  of  flryff 
heirefter  Quhairfoir  his  hienes  and  his  thre  eftaittis  in  his  parliament 
haldin  at  Linlythgw  in  the  great  hall  of  the  palice  thairof  the  tent  day  of 
deceniber  The  geir  of  God  I""  V°  Ixxxv  geiris  for  great  and  wechtie  con- 
fiderationis  tending  to  the  generall  peax  and  quietnes  within  this  realme 
Retreitit  refcindit  and  reducit  quhatfumeuer  proceffis  and  domes  of  foir- 
faltour  fentences  criminall  and  penall  led  and  gevin  aganis  quhatfumevir 
perfonis  for  the  allegit  offenffis  contenit  in  the  faidis  proceffis  and  fen- 
tences and  for  quhatfumeuer  vtheris  caulRs  and  allegit  crymes  done  or 
that  micht  be  allegit  to  have  bene  committit  fen  his  Maiefties  coronatioun 
Or  that  ar  contenit  in  the  faidis  fentences  of  foirfaltour  led  fen  his 
Maiefties  coronatioun  at  quhat  tyme  foeuer  the  faidis  crymes  ar  allegit 
to  be  committit  befoir  with  all  that  followit-  or  may  follow  thairvpoun  / 
Be  the  quhilk  reftitutioun  the  faidis  perfonis  forfaltit  denuncit  rebellis 
and  put  to  the  borne  or  that  wer  ony  vtherwys  trublit  fa  monie  of  thame 
that  wer  depairtit  this  lyff  wer  be  our  faid  Souerane  and  his  faidis  thre 
eftaitis  fullelie  reponit  and  reftoirit  in  Integrum  to  thair  landis  heretages 
rowmes  pofTeffionis  penfionis  offices  and  to  thair  honour  dignitie  and 
fame  Siclyk  and  in  the  famyn  manner  as  gif  the  faidis  fentences  had 
neuer  bene  gevin  And  forder  our  faid  Souerane  Lord  with  avife  of  his 
faidis  thre  eftaittis  of  parliament  be  ane  generall  abolitione  difchargeit 
all  aftionis  criminall  and  penall  quhilk  micht  be  competent  to  his  hienes 
felff  for  his  awin  proper  entres  as  als  that  mycht  refult  betuix  his  fub- 
iedis  of  quhatfumeuir  qualitie  vpoun  ony  commoun  caus  of  mifcontent- 
ment  of  the  eftait  offerit  in  his  hienes  minoritie  and  les  aige  as  in  the 
laidis  generall  adis  of  reftitutioun  pacificatioun  and  abolitioun  at  mair 
lenth  is  contenit  Quhilkis  a6lis  and  conftitutionis  of  parliament  and  euerie 
ane  of  thame  Oure  faid  Souerane  Lord  and  his  thrie  eftaittis  of  this  pre- 
fcnt  parliament  have  of  new  advifedlie  fene  and  confiderit  in  euery  point 


jic.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  153 

and  circumftance  thairof  and  findis  and  declairis  the  famin  to  have  bene 
and  to  be  maid  for  the  weill  of  our  Souerane  Lord  the  preferuatioun  of 
his  eftait  and  for  maift  iuft  necefTar  and  profitable  cauffis  to  the  haill 
realme  and  for  the  quietnes  of  all  his  hienes  lieges  And  thairfoir  his 
hienes  and  thre  eftaittis  of  this  prefent  parliament  Hes  ratifiet  apprevit 
and  aiFermit  Lyk  as  our  faid  Souerane  Lord  with  avife  of  his  faidis  thrie 
eftaittis  be  thir  prefentis  for  him  felff  and  his  fucceflburis  Ratifies  afferrais 
and  perpetuallie  apprevis  the  fame  a6t  of  reftitutioun  pacificatioun  and 
abolitioun  of  the  dait  abonefpecifiit  in  all  pointis  headis  articles  clauflis 
and  circumllances  thairof  without  ony  manner  of  exceptioun  ather  of 
perfonis  or  crymes  (except  as  falbe  exceptit  in  this  prefent  act)  And 
forder  be  the  auftoritie  of  this  prefent  parliament  Our  faid  Souerane 
Lord  with  advife  of  his  faidis  thre  eftaitis  efter  his  perfite  aige  as  laid  is 
of  new  reducis  refcindis  caffis  and  annullis  all  and  findrie  the  faidis 
domes  of  forfaltour  fentences  criminall  and  ])enall  all  infeftmentis  and 
difpofitionis  of  landis  heretages  rentis  offices  and  benefices  proceiding 
thairvpoun  and  that  micht  or  may  be  comprehendit  vnder  the  faid 
generall  reftitutioun  pacificatioun  and  abolitioun  maid  at  Lynlithgw  the 
tyme  foirfaid  or  that  may  be  i:omprehendit  in  the  firft  pacificatioun  con- 
cludit  at  Perth  the  xxiij  da)  of  Februar  The  geir  of  God  I""  V^  Ixxij 
,:^eiris  Ratifiit  and  apprevit  in  the  parliament  haldin  therefter  at  Haly- 
ruidhous  the  laft  day  of  Aprile  The  geir  of  God  F'^  Y°  Ixxiij  geiris 
Quhilkis  and  euery  particle  Oure  faid  Souerane  Lord  and  his  thre  eftaitis 
haldis  as  expreffit  heirin  and  ordanis  the  fame  to  haif  full  efi'eft  and  force 
Sen  the  returne  of  vmquhile  the  Quene  his  Maiefties  derreft  moder  in 
this  realme  vpoun  the  nyntene  day  of  Auguft  The  geir  of  God  I™  V'' 
thriefcoir  ane  geiris  to  be  at  lenth  infert  in  this  prefent  aft  gif  neid  be 

AND  mairower  our  faid  Souerane  Lord  to  put  all  his  liegis  in  full  afliir- 
ance  with  aduife  of  his  faidis  thrie  eftaittis  of  parliament  have  retrcitit 
and  refcindit  and  be  the  tenuour  heirof  retreitis  and  refcindis  all  and 
fmdrie  proceflis  of  foirfaltour  led  aganis  quhatfumeuir  perfonis  fra  the 

u 


154  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

day  of  the  arryving  of  oure  Souerane  Lordis  vmquhile  derreft  moder 
within  this  realme  quhilk  wes  vpoun  the  nyntene  day  of  Auguft  The  geir 
of  God  I"^  Y°  thriefcoir  ana  geiris  to  the  day  of  his  hienes  coronatioun 
and  declairis  the  fame  to  be  of  nane  availl  force  nor  elfoct  with  all  that 
foUowit  or  may  follow  thair vpoun  except  the  fpeceale  proceffis  and  fen- 
tences  of  foirfaltour  efter  fpecifiit  quhilk  fall  remane  and  abide  in  thair 
awin  force  Notwithftanding  the  premiffis  Thay  ar  to  fay  James  fumtyme 
erle  Bothuill  James  Ormeftoun  fumtyme  of  that  ilk  and  all  vtheris  git 
onlyve  quha  hes  bene  foirfaltit  for  airt  and  pairt  of  the  murthour  of  his 
hienes  vmquhile  derreft  fader  JExtra6ium  de  libris  aSioruvi  Parliamenti 
per  me  Alexandrum  Hay  de  Eijler  Kennatt  clericum  rotuhrum  regijlri 
ac  concilii  S  •  D  •  N  •  Regis Jub  mcisjigno  etfuhfcriptione  manualibiis  • 

Alexander  Hay  • 


X  he  King  to  the  Laird  of  Lochleven  • 

150  Xraift  freind  We  greit  gou  weill  The  trouble  and  wickednes  of  the 
thevis  and  brokin  men  inhabiting  oure  bordouris  conftranis  ws  ftiU  retene 
certane  plegeis  and  utheris  maift  difordourit  in  the  Incuntrey  amangis 
the  noblemen  barronis  and  utheris  of  beft  habilitie  Seing  our  awne  houffis 
ar  not  able  to  keip  fie  a  multitude  as  neceflarlie  for  this  gude  occafioun 
mon  be  detenit  Quhairfoir  We  Require  and  commands  gow  That  ge  refTaue 
in  gour  cuftodie  and  keping  Arche  EUott  of  the  Hill  quhome  prefentlie 
We  direft  unto  gow  /  and  retene  him  in  gour  cuftodie  and  keping  un- 
latting  him  pas  hame  upoun  band  obligatioun  or  ony  maner  of  conditioun 
quhill  he  be  fred  and  relevit  Alwayes  ge  neid  not  to  keip  him  ftrait 
becaus  fouirtie  is  fundin  that  he  fall  not  efchape  Thus  We  committ  gow 
to  God  Frome  Halierudhous  the  xxv  day  of  06tober  1587  • 


To  our  traift  freind  the 
Lard  of  Lochlevin  • 


JAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  155 

W  arrant  to  retain  Archie  Eliot  of  the  Hill  in  clois  firmance  • 

151  jxicht  traift  freind  We  greit  gow  hairtlie  weill  /  Being  moved  to  tak  in 
plegeis  for  the  gude  reule  of  the  difordourit  peple  inhabiting  the  bor- 
douris  we  dire6tit  thame  to  remane  and  be  kepit  with  certane  noble  men 
and  baron  is  in  the  incuntrey  and  amangis  the  reft  Archie  Eliot  of  the 
Hill  to  30W  And  now  finding  fum  new  attemptatis  of  mifreule  and  inobe- 
dience  we  haue  thocht  meit  be  this  our  Letter  effeftuuflie  to  require  and 
command  gow  That  ge  retene  and  kepe  the  faid  plege  in  clois  firmance 
quhill  ge  reflaue  oure  command  in  the  contrair  Or  incais  he  be  depairtit 
fra  gow  vpoun  quhatfumeuir  pretens  or  occafioun  That  ge  certifie  ws  be 
write  of  the  very  trewth  in  that  behalfi^/  be  quhat  warrand  and  quhat 
furetie  ge  haue  for  his  reentrie  As  ge  will  aniuer  to  ws  and  do  ws  thank- 
full  and  gude  plefure  Thus  we  comniitt  gow  to  God  AT  Haliruidhous  the 
fourt  day  of  februare  1587  • 


To  oure  richt  traift;  freind  the 
Laird  of  Lochlevih  • 


W  arrant  to  put  Archie  EUott  of  the  Hill  to  fredome  and  to  keip  Clemet 
Eliot  his  brothers  fon  in  his  place  • 

152  J.raift  freind  we  greit  gow  weill  /  ge  fall  putt  Archie  EUott  of  the  Hill  to 
libertie  and  fredome  /  and  reftaue  in  his  place  Clemett  Elott  his  Lrutheris 
fone  /  quhome  ge  fall  keip  and  detene  in  ftire  firmance  /  Suffering  him 
nawayes  to  pas  hame  vpoun  band  obligacioun  or  otherwayes  quhill  he  be 


156  ORIGINAL  PAPEES  [sec.  xvi. 

fred  and  relevit  be  ws  theranent  thir  prefentis  fall  ferve  vnto  gow  for  a 
warrand  Thus  we  committ  gow  to  God  Frome  Haliruidhous  the 
day  of februare  1587  • 

To  our  traift  freind  the  ^ l/7/l'yi^^^/'^^'^''^ 

Laird  of  Lochlevin  •  ^ 


Obligation  by  Dame  Jean  Lyoun  Countefs  of  Angus  • 

153  We  Dame  Jeanne  Lyouu  Counteffe  of  Angus  grantis  ws  to  have  deteynit 
in  our  handes  the  lettres  underwrittin  viz.  ane  nyntein  geir  tak  of  the 
teinds  of  Eliftoun  of  the  dait  the  19  of  Odober  a  thoufand  fyve  hundrethe 
threefcoir  leventein  geiris  Ane  nyntein  geir  tak  of  the  teinds  of  Aberdour 
of  the  dait  a  thoufand  fyve  hundrethe  threfcoir  and  fyftein  geirs  the 
penult  of  Marche  /  The  reverfioun  givin  be  Sir  Robert  Melvill  of  the 
lands  of  Graingeniuir  and  Woodfeild  The  reverfioun  of  Langtoun  givin 
be  James  and  Mungo  Mure  in  Langtoun  And  be  thir  prefents  teftifies 
the  faid  lettres  not  be  comprehended  in  the  difchairge  of  the  Evidents  and 
lettres  of  the  Erledome  of  Morton  and  Dalkeith  giuin  to  ws  be  the  Erie 
of  Mortoun  /  For  the  quhilk  lettres  only  above  fpecifiit  We  fall  be  an- 
fwerable  as  law  will  to  ony  pretending  title  to  the  fame/  In  witnes  quherof 
We  have  fubfcryvit  this  prefent  with  our  hand  AT  Edinbrughe  tire 
tuentie  day  of  Merche  a  thoufand  fyve  hundrethe  fourfcoir  and  audit 
geirs  Befor  thir  witnes  George  Douglas  of  Pairkheid  M'  Nicol  Dagleifche 
Minifter  M'  Dauid  Houme  our  ferviteur  with  uther  dyvers  • 

Jene  Countes  of  Angus  . 
Geo  •  DuGLASS  Witnes  •  Mr  Dauid  Houmk  Witnes  • 


JAC.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  157 

Difcharge  to  William  Earl  of  Murtouii  as  air  of  tailzie  to  umquhile 
Archibald  erll  of  Angus  • 

REX- 

154  We  JAMES  be  the  grace  of  God  King  of  Scottis  Remembering  the 
trew  and  thankfuU  fervice  done  to  ws  bo  oure  richt  treft  cwfing  umquhill 
Archibald  erll  of  Angus  quha  laft  deceiflit  As  alio  be  oure  richt  treft 
cwfing  Williame  now  erle  of  Mortoun  Be  the  tennour  heirof  Renunces 
and  fimpllciter  Dilcharges  All  and  quhatfumevir  aftioun  competent  to  ws 
as  air  to  umquhill  Dame  Margaret  Dowglas  Countes  of  Lennox  oure 
guiddame  umquhill  James  Maitter  of  Angus  hir  broder  umquhill  Archi- 
bald erll  of  Angus  oure  grandfire  Or  ony  utheris  our  predeceftburis 
aganis  the  faid  Williame  now  erll  of  Mortoun  as  heir  of  tailzie  to  the  faid 
umquhill  Archibald  erll  of  Angus  quha  laft  deceiffit  for  his  Intromiffioun 
with  the  males  fermes  canes  cuftomes  cafualliteis  grefowmes  and  utheris 
dewteis  and  proffeittis  quhatfumevir  Of  all  and  fyudrie  the  erldome  of 
Angus  Lordtchippis  of  Dowglas  Abernethie  and  utheris  landis  and 
baroneis  quhatfumevir  Quhairunto  We  as  air  to  ony  of  oure  predeceflburis 
hes  or  may  pretend  richt  or  enteres  And  that  for  all  ^eiris  and  termes 
bygane  fen  the  deceis  of  umquhill  James  maifter  of  Angus  or  umquhill 
Archibald  erll  of  Angus  oure  grandfire  'i  c*  Subfcrivit  with  oure  hand 
and  gevin  under  our  fignet  AT  the  day  of 

The  3eir  of  God  I"^  V"  fourelcoir  aucht  geiris  • 

J, 

155  Xvycht  tralft  coufing  and  counfallour  We  greit  gow  hartlie  weill  Mynd- 
ing  to  haue  heir  a  frequent  and  folempne  conventioun  of  our  nobilitie 
baronis  and  vtheris  our  efi;atis  vpoun  the  xxiiij  day  of  Aprile  inftant 


158  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

alfweill  lor  refolutioun  to  be  tane  be  thair  advife  anent  the  mater  of  our 
marriage  as  for  the  quieting  of  this  eftate  and  diuerting  of  the  appearand 
daugeris  threatuit  thairto  baith  be  external!  and  domeftique  pradifes 
It  is  thairfore  our  will  and  we  defire  gow  richt  affedueuflie  /  that  all 
excufis  let  apart  ge  faile  not  to  addres  gow  to  be  with  ws  the  faid  day 
and  place  /  preparit  to  affift  ws  with  gour  beft  counfale  and  advife  anent 
the  premiffis  /  as  ge  will  teftefie  vnto  ws  gour  dewtifuU  affeftioun  towardih 
ws  and  this  haill  ftate  and  do  ws  therin  rycht  acceptable  feruice  Thus 
We  commit  gow  to  God  /  from  Halyruidhous  the  firft  day  of  Apryle 
1589  •  y^ 

To  our  richt  traift  coufing  and  counfallour  /  ^^^""^ 

The  erle  of  Mortoun  •  v._--^ 

X  roclamatioun  to  charge  his  Majefteis  liegis  within  the  fcherifdome  of 
FyfFe  to  affift  in  apprehending  the  Earl  of  Huntly  • 

15tt    James  be  the  grace  of  God  King  of  Scottis  to  our  louittis 

meffingeris  and 
Icheriffis  in  that  parte  conjundlie  and  feueralie  Ipecialie  conftitute 
greting  Forfamekle  as  it  is  vndirftand  to  ws  and  lordis  of  oure  lecreit 
counl'all  That  George  erll  of  Huntley  and  utheris  his  compliceis  quhilkis 
laitlie  conuocat  thauie  felffis  togidder  in  armes  for  troubling  of  oure  per- 
lone  and  eftate  ar  now  returnit  bak  to  oure  burgh  of  Perth  /  mynding 
thair  to  remane  quhill  thay  may  haue  bettir  occafioun  to  profequute  thair 
formair  wicked  intentioun  to  the  bringing  on  of  mony  inconuenientis  gif 
tymous  and  lubftantious  remeid  be  not  prouidit  /  Quhairfoir  We  haue 
gevin  and  grantit  and  be  thir  oure  letters  with  aduife  of  the  faidis  lordis 
of  oure  ifecrete  counfall  gevis  and  grantis  oure  full  pouer  and  commiffioun 
expres  bidding  and  charge  to  oure  richt  traift  coufing  and  counfellour 
Williame  erll  of  Mortoun  Lord  Dalkeith  and  Andro  erle  off  Rothes  lord 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  159 

Leflie  conjunaiie  and  feverallie  To  conuocat  oure  liegis  inhabitantis 
within  the  boundis  of  oure  fcherefdome  of  Fyffe  alfweill  to  burgh  as  to 
land  regalitie  as  ryaltie  betuix  faxtie  and  faxtene  ^ciris  /  and  utheris 
fenfible  perfonis  in  weirlykemaner  And  to  pas  inclois  and  inviroua  oure 
laid  burofh  on  all  partis  and  all  vtheris  thingis  to  do  and  vie  that  for 
apprehenlioun  of  the  faid  erll  and  utheris  his  compliceis  is  requilite  to  be 
done  /  With  pouer  alfwa  to  this  effeft  to  alTege  houlfis  raife  fyre  and  vie 
all  kynd  of  force  and  weirlyk  ingyne  that  can  be  had  for  wynning  thairof 
and  executioun  of  this  prefent  commiffioun  in  all  pointis  Decerning  be 
thir  prefentis  that  quhatfumeuir  llauchter  mutilatioun  or  vthir  incon- 
venient falhappin  to  be  committit  be  oure  faid  commiflionar  or  the  per- 
fonis affifting  him  to  the  executioun  of  the  premiffis  fall  not  be  imputt  as 
cryme  or  offence  to  thame  /  nor  thay  fall  not  be  callit  nor  accufed  thaii- 
foir  criminalie  nor  ciuilie  nor  incur  na  dangeir  for  the  famin  in  thair 
perfonis  landis  or  guidis  Exonering  thame  be  thir  prefentis  of  all  pane 
and  dangeir  that  thai  may  incur  thairthrow  for  euir  OURE  WILL  IS 
heirfoir  and  we  charge  50W  ftraitlie  and  commandis  That  incontinent  thir 
oure  lettres  fene  ge  pas  and  in  oure  name  and  audoritie  Command  and 
charge  all  and  findrie  our  liegis  betuix  faxtie  and  faxtene  geiris  and 
vtheris  fenfible  perfonis  duelland  within  the  boundis  of  oure  faid  fchiref- 
dome  Be  oppin  proclamatioun  at  the  mercatt  croceis  of  the  fame  and 
vtheris  placeis  neidfull  That  thay  and  ilkane  of  thame  weill  bodin  in  feir 
of  weir  repair  to  oure  faid  commiffionar  with  all  poffible  diligence  eftir 
the  publicatioun  heirof  pas  fordwart  /  affill  concur  and  fortifie  him  in  the 
executioun  of  this  prefent  commiffioun  in  all  pointis  vling  his  direftioun 
without  attempting  ony  thing  in  the  contrarie  vnder  the  pane  of  tinfall 
of  lyffe  landis  and  guidis  The  quhilk  to  do  We  commit  to  gow  conjunftlie 
and  feueralie  our  full  pouer  be  thir  our  lettres  delivering  thame  be  gow 
deulie  execute  and  Indorfate  agane  to  the  beirare  Gevin  vndir  our 
fignet  and  Subfcryuit  with  our  hand  AT  Edinburgh  the  viij  day  of 
Aprile  And  of  oure  regnne  the  xxij  geir  1589  . 

James  R • 


160  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

JVlr  Andrew  de  Mazieres  [Minifter  at  Thoire  in  Xaintonge]  to  the  Earl 
of  Morton  • 

1")7  Monfieur  Jay  receu  le  7  de  ce  moys  les  lettres  qu'il  vous  pleuft 
m'efcrire  de  Domdy  par  la  ledure  defquelles  j'euz  nouvelle  occafion  de 
remercier  Dieu  tant  de  la  profperite  de  voftre  ellat  en  particulier 
qu'il  efleue  de  bien  en  mieux  I'honorant  de  fes  benefices  que  pour  la  grace 
qu'il  continue  a  I'endroit  de  voftre  Roy  lequel  il  afi^eftioune  de  plus  en 
plus  a  fon  I'eruifTe  I'accourageant  a  repurger  fun  royaume  des  abomi- 
nables  idolatries  et  des  impofteurs  et  fedudeurs  qui  par  faux  donner  a 
entendre  ayant  perdu  ung  nombre  in&ny  dames  ont  attire  a  leur  pouuoyr 
les  plus  beaux  doniaines  de  la  terre  et  a  prefent  voyantz  leur  ledu&ion 
defcouverte  par  la  clarte  de  la  paroUe  de  dieu  fefforcent  de  I'efteindre 
pour  pouuoyr  relenir  leur  prinl'e  aux  defpens  du  falut  et  repos  de  tout  le 
monde  •  Mais  ilz  feront  en  fin  delbonfitz  et  ruinez  •  Loue  I'oit  done  Dieu 
Monfieur  qui  vous  a  fauory  d'ung  don  fi  exquis  que  de  vous  doner  dung 
tel  prince  Je  le  prie  de  fere  la  grace  aux  princes  et  feigneurs  do  ce 
royaume  de  recongnoiltre  ung  tel  bien  comme  il  appartient  et  leur  don- 
ner courage  d'affifter  a  leur  Roy  a  la  pourfuyte  d'ung  tel  oeuure  leur 
donnant  ung  peuple  et  fubjedls  dociles  et  volontaires  •  Au  refte  puys  mes 
dernieres  lettres  que  je  donnaj  a  Monfieur  de  Domda  la  ville  de  Chartres 
I'efl;  remife  a  la  fubjeftion  de  noltre  Roy  .  Le  Due  de  d'Efpernon  a  pre- 
lens  Montereau  faut  j'onne  pres  Paris  et  arrefte  quarente  granJz  bateaus 
quj  delbendoyeut  au  long  de  la  riuiere  pour  la  uitailler  •  On  eJiime  que  ceux 
de  dedans  feront  contraintz  eux  rendre  par  faute  de  viures  Monfieur  de 
la  None  (bus  le  due  de  Longuevile  a  deffaift  douze  enfeignes  de  Lanfe- 
quenetz  quj  eftoyent  venuz  pour  la  ligue  Le  Pape  en  fon  Confifl;oyre 
aduerty  de  lunion  du  Roy  avec  le  Roy  de  Nauarre  ont  efleu  deux  Car- 
dinaux  pour  la  rompre  et  maintenir  le  Roy  au  propos  dont  il  a  faid 
declaration  comme  vous  auez  peu  veoyr  en  I'impreflion  que  je  vous  en  ay 
Enuoyee  Je  croy  qu'ilz  font  bien  marriz  des  heureux  fuccez  qu'il  a  pleu  a 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  161 

Dieu  donner  au  Roy  a  ces  commencementz  et  de  s'estre  tant  defcouvertz 
centre  luy  car  partout  ou  le  clerge  a  heu  pouuoyr  Hz  ont  faift  rebeller  le 
peuple  contre  le  Roy  comme  encore  ilz  Teftudient  a  ce  feur  Ce  qu'ils  ont 
obtenu  a  Poytiers  ou  il  y  a  ung  moyne  nomme  Protafius  qui  eft  Capitaine 
et  menne  les  homines  a  la  guerre  •  Ceux  de  Bourdeux  voyant  que  les 
Indaites  continueyent  obftinement  a  mesdire  du  Roy  a  inciter  le  peuple 
contre  icellui  voyre  Dieu  par  leur  deprecacions  les  ont  chaflez  et  def- 
party  aux  Mendiens  leur  revenu  et  par  ce  moyen  ont  contenu  le  peuple 
en  Fobeiflance  du  Roy  /  Le  Roy  de  Navarre  a  envoye  pardefla  Monfieur 
de  Phay  garde  de  fes  fceaus  aux  fins  dauoir  de  largent  pour  fouftenir  les 
grands  frais  qu'il  luy  conuient  feur  Mais  les  homnies  font  (i  froids  a  donner 
que  je  n'eftime  pas  qu'il  puifTe  avoir  ce  qu'il  pretent  veu  mefme  qu'il  eft 
charge  dune  commiffion  fort  odieufe  fcavoir  de  remetre  les  ofiiciers  du 
Roy  papiftes  en  leur  eftats  et  en  defpofer  ceux  que  le  Roy  de  Navarre 
avoyt  miz  en  leur  place  Et  de  mettre  la  mefTe  par  toutes  les  villes  de  la 
religion  Ce  que  eft  fort  odieufe  aux  gens  de  bien  et  trouve  fort  eftrange 
eftre  advenu  au  Roy  de  Navarre  /  veu  qu'au  moys  de  decembre  dernier 
paffe  en  I'afTemblee  des  deputez  des  Eglifes  de  France  en  ce  lieu  renou- 
vellant  I'union  cy  devant  faifte  a  Montauban  avec  icelles  II  jura  et  pro- 
tefta  de  la  maintenir  religieufement  et  n'accorder  ny  feur  rien  concernant 
les  Eglifes  que  par  laduiz  et  conlentement  dicelles  •  Nous  ne  pouvons 
efperer  une  heureufe  iflue  diceux  qui  fondent  le  baftiment  de  leur  gran- 
deur fur  des  pierres  d'impiete  de  perjure  et  injuftice  comme  font  ceux 
qui  authorifent  les  moynes  preftres  et  officiers  papiftes  /  J'ay  efcrit  au  Roy 
d'Ecoffe  fur  la  declaration  du  Roy  mais  fi  j'eufte  fceu  cela  je  ne  le  lui  euffe 
teu  pour  le  defir  que  jay  que  le  Roy  de  Navarre  maintienne  Dieu  de  fon 
cofte  fans  la  faveur  peculiere  duquel  il  ne  peut  attendre  qu'une  ruine  Je 
fcai  bien  qu'on  targera  ce  faid  indigne  de  quelque  beau  pretexte  mais  il 
ny  a  raifon  humaine  qui  puiflTe  feur  valoir  devant  Dieu  Tufage  de  ce  qu'il 
reprouve  •  II  prononce  malediftion  contre  ceux  qui  mettent  le  raal  pour 
le  bien  et  les  tenebres  pour  lumiere  et  qui  fcauent  feur  le  bien  et  ne  le 
font  pas  /  la  gloyre  de  Dieu  doyt  eftre  plus  chere  et  pretieufe  aux  fidelles 


162  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

que  celle  des  Roys  •  Dieu  ayme  mieux  robeiffance  que  les  facrifices  com- 
bien  plufque  les  raifous  vaines  des  hommes  H  honorera  ceux  quj  I'ho- 
norent  mais  ceux  qui  ne  font  cas  de  fon  honneur  feront  deftionnorez  Ceft 
a6te  aflTeure  le  papifte  qui  eftoit  efpouvante  par  les  exploits  que  Dieu  lui 
avoyt  donne  de  feur  contre  icelluy  et  le  rend  audacieux  pour  fenhardir  a 
luy  courir  fus  car  il  le  voyt  deffia  reduit  a  ce  point  de  luy  accorder  ce 
qu'il  eut  faicl  difficult  de  demander  a  ceux  de  la  religion  quand  bien  les 
liguez  eufTent  gaigne  fur  iceux  une  bataille  Le  defplaifir  que  jen  ay  me 
feroit  eftendre  plus  avant  ces  difcours  fi  je  ne  craignoy  de  vous  ennuyer 
en  la  le6ture  de  mes  Regretz  O  combien  efl,  beureufe  voftre  Roy  qui 
refifle  au  Diable  Le  Diable  et  fes  fuppofts  f'enfuyeront  et  quitteront  fon 
Royaume  •  Je  veoy  au  contraire  ce  miferable  Royaume  eftre  faift  la  re- 
traite  des  Diables  et  dragons  plus  que  Jamais  par  la  lafchete  de  nos  deux 
Roys  Quj  les  craignez  Dieu  leur  veille  feur  mifericorde  et  les  doner  de  la 
foy  qui  eft  felon  fa  crainte  et  connoiffance  de  verite  et  combien  que  la 
deffenfe  de  fa  jufte  caufe  ne  foyt  point  pourfuyure  d'ung  tel  pied  quelle 
merite  qu'il  marche  neanmoins  deuant  larmee  des  liens  et  confonde  celle 
des  liguez  et  vous  doint 

Monfieur 
fa  grace  et  paix  faluant  voz  bonnes  graces  de  mes  tres  humbles  recom- 
mendacions  a  la  Rochelle  ce  20  de  Juing  1589  • 

Voftre  tres  humble  et  obeiflant  feruiteur  a  Jamais 
A  Monsieur  A  •  Mazieres  • 

Monsieur  le  Comte  de  Morthon 
en  Efcoffe  • 


]_  he  warrand  for  deliuerie  of  Johne  Logane  • 

REX- 

158    AYilliame  erll  of  Mortoun  lord  Dalkeith  te"  We  greit  30W  wele  IT  is 
oure  will  and  We  command  gow  That  incontinent  eftir  the  ficht  heiroff 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EAELS  OP  MORTON.  163 

36  deliuer  Johnne  Logane  broder  germaine  to  George  Logane  portionar 
of  Bonytoune  /  To  oure  weilbelouit  feruitour  James  Coluile  of  Eiftir 
Wemys  to  be  keipit  and  vfit  be  him  conforme  to  oure  direftioun  gevin 
thairanent  /  As  ge  will  anfuer  to  ws  thairvpoune  Keipand  thir  prefentis 
for  gour  warrand  Subfcriuit  with  oure  hand  AT  Falkland  the  nynt  day 
off  Augufl.  the  geir  of  God  I'^  V"  fourfcoir  nyne  geiris  • 


^(vni^^^^^^ 


x.  he  King  to  the  Earl  of  Mortoun 


159  liicht  traift  Coufing  and  counfellour  We  greit  gow  hertlie  weill  /  Vpoun 
knawlege  of  the  lait  dangeris  quherin  the  Quene  oure  deareft  Ipous  hes 
bene  /  and  fum  impedimentis  objedit  for  hir  prefent  returnyng  this 
feafon  /  We  haue  takin  purpos  to  pas  oure  felff  God  willing  in  perfoun  to 
Norroway  quher  flie  now  remanis  /  having  left  a  Declaratioun  of  oure  will 
as  thingis  i'albe  governit  in  oure  ablence  and  thairin  hes  fpecialie  bur- 
dynnit  gow  to  attend  fum  tymes  on  oure  Counfell  at  Edinburgh  affifting 
oure  deareft  nepheu  the  Duke  of  Lennox  according  to  oure  direftioune  / 
quhervnto  fen  ge  wilbe  maid  privie  /  We  will  forbeare  prefentlie  to  vfe 
ma  wordos  Bot  defiring  gow  effeftuuflie  to  hald  hand  that  the  faroe  oure 
direftioun  may  be  fulfillit  as  may  beft  fland  with  oure  honour  and  quietnes 
of  the  cuntrie  Conforme  to  the  truft  quhilk  we  haue  repofit  in  gow  /  As 
ge  may  ftill  lippin  for  the  continewance  of  oure  guid  will  and  fauour  We 
commit  gow  in  the  proteftioun  of  Almichtie  God  AT  Leith  the  xxij  day 
of  Oaober  1589  • 


To  oure  richt  traift  coufing  and  counfellour 
the  erll  of  Mortoun  • 


Oo_ 


^^^^n£s0:? 


164  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

(jreorge  Douglas  of  Parkhead  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  • 

160  JMaye  It  pleis  gour  Lo  /  Seing  his  Majeftie  hes  concludit  for  dyvers  gret 
refpefts  to  remaine  this  winter  in  theis  partis  /  And  being  forcit  to  live 
upon  the  King  of  Denmarks  charges  is  defyrous  to  be  fa  quyet  as  can  be  ■ 
5our  Lo  /  fon  Archibald  hes  tain  occafioun  thareupon  to  purches  licience 
with  favorable  letters  of  recommendatioun  of  his  hienes  To  travell  athort 
the  wardle  for  a  geir  or  twa  And  he  hes  dealt  with  me  in  fie  earnift 
nianere  to  heir  him  cumpanie  /  that  after  I  had  ufeit  all  manere  of  motives 
that  I  could  devyfe  to  diffuade  him  fra  the  fame  (as  the  haill  freinds  wha 
are  heir  can,  heir  recorde)  git  finding  it  a  thing  impoffible  to  caufe  him 
change  opinion  I  have  in  lenth  rather  chofein  to  be  partaker  of  his  for- 
tune then  to  fuffer  him  to  undertake  fa  venterous  ane  voyage  altogither 
unaccompanied  /  Swa  as  on  the  ane  fyde  I  wald  willi  gour  Lo  /  to  have 
my  pairte  excufed  Sa  may  gour  Lo  /  on  the  other  fyde  be  la  far  affured 
of  my  diligent  attendance  and  loving  caire  over  him  /  that  I  fall  omitte 
nathing  (by  the  grace  of  God)  that  in  me  lyeth  quhilk  may  ether  tend 
to  his  profiit  /  honour  or  weillfare  /  And  thus  leaving  the  farther  declara- 
tion of  theis  matters  to  his  awne  reporte  I  commit  gour  gud  Lo  /  to  the 
bleffed  protection  of  God  nocht  forgetting  my  mofl  humble  commenda- 
tiounis  of  feruice  to  gour  Lo  /  and  my  Lady  gour  bedfellovve  From  Vpflo 
in  Noroweay  this  laft  of  November  1589  • 

3our  Lo  /  mefl  humble  and  affectioned  to  do  gow  fervice 

Geo  •  DuGLASs  • 
To  the  Right  honorable  my  verie  gud  Lord 
my  Lord  the  Erie  of  Mortoun  • 

Xhe  King  to  the  Earl  of  Mortoun  • 

IGI  Rycht  traift  coufing  and  counfellour  We  greit  gow  hartlie  weill  The 
Commiffioneris  and  gentlemen  of  Denmark  /  being  now  departit  /  We 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  165 

thocht  convenient  to  proceid  with  all  expeditioun  poffible  /  to  the  confi- 
deratioun  of  the  Inconvenientis  ftanding  in  our  eftait  and  effairis  /  and 
how  the  faniyne  may  be  remeidit  /  for  our  awin  weill  and  honour  /  and  to 
confort  and  eafe  of  our  gude  fubieftis  /  quherunto  finding  gour  gude 
advyfe  neceflar  we  defyre  30W  effeftiouflie  that  ge  will  not  faill  to  be  heir 
at  Halyruidhous  vpon  the  tent  day  of  Junij  nixt  to  the  effeft  forfaid  / 
quhair  gour  tarie  falbe  fchort  /  And  fa  reding  to  gour  cuming  As  ge 
wifche  the  gude  fuccefs  of  this  werk  and  will  do  ws  acceptable  pleafur  / 
committis  gow  in  the  protedioun  of  God  AT  Halyruidhous  the  xxix  day 
of  Maij  1590  • 


To  our  Richt  traift  Coufing  and  counfellour  ^/(^t/yyiJ'^  £S- 

the  erll  of  Mortoun  • 


'a/mcf^ 


Order  for  Proclamation  of  the  Marriage  of  the  Earl  of  Errol  and  Lady 
Elizabeth  Douglas  and  Certificate  thereof  • 

162  JMinifteris  Forfamekill  as  We  parteis  onderfubfcryuairis  are  aggreit  that 
the  bandis  of  our  mariage  be  proclamit  at  placis  requifit  /  to  that  effeft  / 
and  in  takin  as  of  bayth  our  confentis  therto  We  hawe  fubfcryvit  this 
prefent  With  our  handis  At  the  Newhous  the  fecund  of  Juin  1590  • 

Errol  • 
Mortoun  •  Elizabeth  Douglas  • 

To  al  and  findrie  quhome  it  efferis  fpeciallie  the  brithring  of  the  mini- 
fterie  pace  and  grace  from  God  the  father  and  from  his  fone  the  Lord 
Jefus  T;c"  Forl'amekil  as  it  wil  pleas  gow  undirftand  /  the  bannis  of 
mariage  betuixt  the  rycht  nobil  and  honorabill  parteis  To  wit  Franceis 
earle  of  Errol  Lord  Hay  T:c-  and  Eligabeth  Douglas  dauchtir  to  ane 
nobil  Lord  my  Lord  Earl  Mortoun  ar  thre  feveral  fondayis  proclamed 
lauchfullle  At  the  kirk  of  Slanis  /  na  impediment  being  obje6ted  in  the 


166  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

contrarie  quherthrow  ge  or  ony  of  30W  may  proceid  to  the  celebratioun 
off  the  band  of  mariage  Teftifeit  and  fubfcryueit  as  is  undirwretin  At 
Slanis  the  21  day  of  Junij  1590  • 

Alexander  Bruce  Minifter  at  Slanis  • 


r  rancis  Earl  of  Errol  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  ? 

163  JMy  Lord  efter  my  heartlyeft  commendaciouns  I  am  informit  that  git 
my  ennemies  ceffis  nocht  to  fpeik  of  me  /  and  to  renew  thingis  I  haid 
fatilfeit  alradie  And  albeid  I  can  nocht  empefche  nor  ftayie  invyfuU 
menis  fpeking  git  vill  I  nocht  negleft  to  acquent  freyndis  with  my  inno- 
cencie  and  honeft  meining  bayth  to  King  and  Kirk  •  As  concerning  his 
Majefties  obedience  quhatfumevir  I  hawe  owrfene  therin  /  and  relTauit 
pardon  therof  /  was  vpon  na  lang  precogitat  purpos  hot  fuddanlie  redackit 
therto  for  efchewing  of  fume  rigurus  forme  dewyfit  aganis  me  be  fie  as 
but  caus  become  my  onfreyndis  /  And  qwhayfoeuir  vald  faye  that  than 
I  menit  ony  fubuerfion  of  religion  thay  ar  ather  my  ennemies  direftlie 
or  knawis  nocht  veill  the  proces  of  that  turne  /  feing  that  all  that  tyme 
I  offerit  my  felff  to  the  tryall  bayth  off  his  Majeilie  with  his  confeill  /  and 
of  the  Kirk  /  onlye  refufit  but  tryall  to  be  evill  vfit  •  Off  this  my  Lord 
I  think  to  wreitt  the  les  that  I  hoip  gour  L  /  rememberis  of  all  /  only 
defyris  gif  ony  occafion  beis  gour  L  /  pleis  hald  hand  that  fals  reportis 
find  nocht  place  aganis  me  in  my  abfens  '  feing  nather  haid  I  in  the  lait 
trubill  ony  intention  aganis  religion  nor  aganis  his  Majefties  obedience 
hot  forcit  '  nayther  git  hawe  I  ony  intention  fra  this  furth  in  ony  fort  to 
difturbe  the  quyetnes  of  the  cuntrie  /  All  forther  I  remitt  to  the  nixt 
occafion  fwa  prefentlie  committis  gour  L  /  in  Gods  almychtie  proteftion  / 
At  Aberdene  the  xiij  of  Junij  1590  • 

5our  L  /  rycht  affurit  freynd  at  power 

Errol • 


JAC.  VI.]  OF  THE  EAELS  OF  MORTON.  167 

Mr  John  Knox  Minifter  at  Melros  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  • 

164  JNly  Lord  efter  commendatioun  of  fervice  /  Pleis  gour  Lordfliip  /  wit  the 
laird  of  Ceffuird  gounger  hes  bene  at  conference  with  M'  Johne  Cawden 
and  me  anent  the  ftate  of  gour  tenants  of  Langnewtoun  And  does  mekle 
marvell  that  gour  Lordfliip  hes  not  a  farther  regaird  to  thame  /  At  lenth 
he  cam  to  this  poynt  that  he  requyred  ws  to  commone  with  gour  Lord- 
fliip in  this  mater  and  in  his  name  to  fay  that  it  wer  moft  meitt  gif  gour 
Lordlhip  mycht  he  perfwadit  therto  /  to  fee  gif  ge  mycht  content  Andro 
Ker  for  his  kyndnes  of  Langnewtoun  teynd  ffor  faid  he  thocht  Andro 
Ker  hes  not  demerited  weill  at  my  hand  as  alfo  that  I  do  not  allow  of  fick 
inordinat  faffions  as  he  vfes  /  git  he  is  a  Ker  and  he  is  come  of  our  hous 
and  I  wald  be  layth  to  fee  him  wrack  /  quhat  anfuer  I  maid  heirto  M' 
Jhone  Cowden  will  tell  gour  Lordfliip  /  3our  Lordfliip  knawes  that  Teviot- 
daill  kyndnes  will  not  be  forgett  without  fome  contentment  for  it  /  And 
it  wer  not  worft  to  haue  fome  regaird  to  gour  pure  ones  quho  will  ever 
get  the  fowr  of  this  labour  /  As  alfo  I  will  defyre  gour  Lordfliip  to 
acquyte  gour  felf  of  the  brute  that  goes  in  the  cuntrey  of  gow  for  this 
gour  lingering  /  ^ea,  thair  ar  fome  that  fayes  gour  Lordfliip  walbe  con- 
tent to  haue  all  the  tenentis  of  Langnewtoun  wrackit  that  ge  mycht  tak 
it  in  manis  to  gour  felf  Quhairin  thocht  I  be  not  perfwadit  git  I  think  it 
gour  Lordfliips  honour  to  prove  thir  fpeakers  liers  And  fo  commending 
gour  Lordfliip  and  gour  eflParis  to  the  prote6tioun  of  God  commendis  gow 
hartlie  to  him  •  From  Melrois  this  xxiij  of  Julij  1590  •  Be  gour  Lordfliip 
at  fervice  • 

M  Jhone  Knox  Minifl;er  at  Melrois  ■ 
To  the  richt  honorabill  Lord 
My  Lord  Erie  of  Mortoun  • 


168  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

X*  rancis  Earl  of  Errol  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  • 

165  JMy  Lord  and  father  /  efter  my  maift  hertlie  commend atioune  this  is  to 
aduertlfe  gour  Lordflaip  that  I  refauit  ane  letter  giftrein  fra  the  M'  Lew- 
ingfloune  /  anent  the  purpofe  quhilk  I  fpak  to  your  Lordfliip  of  the  hying 
off  his  land  lyk  as  gour  Lordfliip  may  perfaue  be  the  maifteris  awin 
lettere  fend  to  me  quhilk  ge  pleafe  heirwith  refaue  defyring  that  gow 
will  refolue  thairanent  I'albone  as  ge  can  /  becaus  goue  will  knaw  thairby 
baith  quhat  he  may  haife  for  it  and  quhat  quantetie  the  land  is  off/  and 
the  terme  of  payment  quhairwith  gif  gour  Lordfl:iip  cannot  deall  at  the 
prefent  I  will  defyr  that  ge  will  grant  him  that  fawor  as  to  admitt  thame 
tennentis  that  will  deall  with  him  for  it  quhill  will  adwantag  him  and 
naways  endomag  gour  Lordfliip  /  likways  I  will  remitt  farthar  heirin  to 
gour  Lordfliips  refolutiones  and  anfuer  quhilk  I  luik  for  fafoone  as  ge 
may  conuenientlie  fend  it  and  fa  committis  gour  Lordfliip  to  God  At 
Logyalmond  this  fonday  lait  • 

3our  maifl;  lowing  fone  at  all  pouar  to  Command 

Errol  • 
To  my  maift  fpeciall  gud  Lord  and  father 
My  Lord  Earll  of  Mortoune  • 

Francis  Earl  of  Errol  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  • 

1 66  JMy  Lord  and  father  /  efter  my  maift  hertlie  commendatioune  I  refauit 
gour  Lordfhips  letter  of  the  xxix  of  Oftober  vpon  fonday  the  firft  of  this 
inftant  quhairby  I  vnderftand  that  gour  Lordfliip  is  willing  till  excamb 
gour  landis  in  Stirlingfliyre  with  the  M'  Lewingftouns  landis  in  Tweddell 
quhairof  I  fall  aduertilTe  the  M'  /  and  as  I  refaue  anfuer  of  the  M'  gour 
Lordfliip  fall  knaw  with  diligence  his  mynd  /  always  it  is  meit  in  my 
opinione  that  gour  Lordfliip  confidder  the  waliditie  bayth  of  gour  awin 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  169 

landis  and  his  and  quhilk  of  gow  hes  the  heft  landis  /  till  the  vther  to  gif 
fatiffaftioune  /  or  gif  the  difference  /  be  not  gryt  /  till  leit  it  be  confident 
quietlie  be  fum  indifferent  men  that  knawis  bayth  gif  they  may  be  haid  / 
As  for  the  lyfrentis  that  gour  Lordfliip  writtis  the  M™  tenentis  in  Twadell 
hes  quhairof  gouris  hes  not  the  lyke  /  that  may  be  conliderit  befoir  the 
turne  be  endit  betuix  gow  /  for  fen  it  is  fa  far  agaitwart  /  I  wald  it  wer 
at  fum  point  /  for  albeit  I  haid  the  bell  adwyfe  in  the  warld  /  I  fuld  newir 
adwyfe  gour  Lordlhip  ather  againft  gour  honor  or  profeit  /  fa  far  as  I 
may  knaw  /  and  in  this  turne  I  fall  do  quhat  I  can  to  gett  gour  Lordfliip 
contentit  with  gour  part  hovvfoever  it  be  it  is  uecefiar  gour  Lordfliip 
fend  ane  of  gour  awin  ferwandis  to  me  heir  about  Thurifday  cvm  aucht 
days  /  with  the  rentallis  bayth  of  gour  awin  landis  /  and  the  M'  Lewing- 
ftouns  /  as  alfo  inftruftit  in  all  quefl;iouns  that  may  aryle  of  any  of  gour 
pairtis  /  fa  far  as  gour  Lordfliip  may  /  and  I  fall  do  gudwill  my  felf  to 
braik  the  back  of  all  quefliouns  gif  the  difference  be  not  werie  gryt  / 1 
am  till  ryd  vpon  Frydday  to  meit  with  the  Erll  of  Huntlie  at  Montroife  or 
Brechein  anent  fie  thingis  as  ar  betuix  me  and  his  bruther  /  and  as  I 
returne  gour  Lordfliip  falbe  aduertiflit  quhat  I  do  with  him  /  Sa  to  new 
occafioune  I  committ  gour  Lordfliip  to  God  At  Logyalmond  the  third 
day  of  November  1590  • 

3our  U  /  maifl;  lowing  fone  at  all  pouar  to  Command 

Errol  • 
To  my  maifl  fpeciall  gude  Lord  and  father 
My  Lord  erll  off  Mortoune  • 


J.  he  Mafl;er  of  Glammis  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  ■ 

167  JMy  Lord  Eftir  my  maifl,  hartly  commendationis  I  refauit  gour  L  /  letter 
and  fall  deliver  the  filver  to  my  L  /  Erroll  afoir  Mertimes  and  rel'aue  his 
difcharge  theroff  and  fall  bring  the  fame  with  me  at  my  cummyng  to 
Edinburgh  quhilk  falbe  God  willing  in  the  nixt  owyk  Becaus  my  L  /  Erroll 

y 


170  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

wilbe  heir  the  morne  at  nycht  I  neid  nocht  to  fend  to  hira  for  my  L , 
Huntly  hes  defyrit  that  he  may  meit  with  him  in  his  paffing  towart  Edin- 
burgh and  to  this  eifeft  that  they  may  meit  on  ftyday  nixt  in  Montroes 
quhilk  my  L  /  ErroU  intendis  to  do  /  This  I  onderftand  be  my  L  /  Erroll 
himfelff  and  fo  for  the  prefent  nocht  hawing  ony  forther  occafion  I  com- 
mit gour  L  /  to  God  From  Glammis  the  ferd  of  Nouember  1590  Be 
3our  L  /  fon  alwayes  to  command 

Tho  •  M'  Glammiss  • 


r  rancis  Earl  of  Errol  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  . 

168  JMy  Lord  and  father  /  efter  my  werrie  hertlie  commendatiouns  being 
myndfuU  till  haif  fpokin  with  the  Erll  of  Huntlie  heir  in  lie  turnis  of  my 
awin  as  I  wreit  of  to  gour  Lordfliip  affoir  /  be  reafoune  of  quhais  ftay  / 
finding  my  felff  this  far  agaitwart  I  haif  tane  occafioune  to  ryd  north  to 
be  at  ane  point  with  him  aither  fordwart  or  backwart  and  myndis  be 
Goddis  grace  /  to  returne  with  all  diligence  poffibill  and  immediatlie  / 
thairefter  fall  fie  gour  Lordfliip  /  fa  that  the  turne  betuix  gow  and  the 
M'  Lewingfloune  mon  ather  be  dealt  furth  be  fum  vther  men  that  can 
lyk  gou  beyth  /  or  ellis  mon  continew  quhill  I  returne  /  quhilk  in  my 
opinioune  is  nocht  neceffary  /  always  that  I  remitt  to  gour  Lordfliips  awin 
refolutiounes  /  Sa  for  the  prefent  to  new  occafioune  /  I  committ  gour 
Lordfliip  to  God  At  Brechin  /  the  fewint  day  of  Nouember  1590  • 
3our  11  /  maift  lowing  lone  at  all  pouer  to  Command 

Erhol  ■ 
To  my  maifl  fpeciall  gude  Lord  and  father 
My  Lord  erll  of  Mortoune  • 


JAC.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  171 

Liicence  by  the  King  to  M°Intoflie  to  pas  hame  to  his  fader  tc  • 

REX. 
169     We  be  the  tennour  heirof  Grantis  and  gevis  licence  to  M^Intofhe 

foue  lauchfuU  to  Lauchlane  M'lntoflie  of  Dunnauchtane  prefentlie  re- 
maning as  plege  with  our  traift  Coufing  and  Counfalour  WiUiam  erll  of 
Mortoun  To  depairt  and  pas  hame  to  his  fader  or  utherwife  to  frequent 
and  repair  in  quhatfumevir  pairt  of  oure  cuntrey  quhair  he  pleis  1;c 
Gevin  under  our   Signet  and  fubfcrivit  with  our  hand    AT  the 

day  of  And  of  our  regnne  the  xxiiij  geir  1590  • 

James  R • 


±  he  King  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  • 

170  xvicht  traift  coufing  and  counfellour  We  greit  gow  hertlie  weill  The  fame 
gude  God  that  hes  preferuit  ws  frome  all  perrellis  fen  our  conceptiouii 
vnto  this  hour  ftill  difclofis  and  bringis  to  further  licht  the  mifchevous 
praftizes  ettillit  be  Sathan  and  his  minifteris  aganis  our  awin  eftait  and 
perfoun  /  and  the  vnnaturall  wrang  and  malice  that  wes  wrocht  aganis 
our  richt  traift  coufing  and  counfellour  the  vmquhile  erll  of  Angus  of 
gude  memorie  that  laft  deceiflit  /  Quhilk  mater  requiring  now  to  be  put 
to  the  vttermaift  triall  /  We  mon  effeftuouflie  requyre  gow  That  ge  faill 
not  all  gour  Vther  buffines  fett  apart  to  be  in  Edinburgh  vpoun  the  xj  day 
of  Aprile  inftant  That  be  gour  prefence  and  furtherance  /  this  adlioun 
may  tak  fie  a  formall  end  be  iuftice  vpoun  the  xij  day  of  the  fame  moneth 
as  Goddis  law  and  the  lawis  of  our  realme  allowis  of  And  fwa  lippyning 
that  ge  will  not  faill  to  keip  this  dyett  preceiflie  As  ge  luiffit  the  erand  and 
thame  quhome  it  concernis  Committis  gow  to  Almychtie  God  AT  Dalkeith 
the  fourt  of  Aprile  1591  • 

James  R • 
To  oure  richt  traift  coufing  and  counfellour 
The  erll  of  Mortoun  • 


17.2  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

X  he  Earl  of  Angus  to  the  Earl  of  Mortoun  • 

171  JMy  Lord  efter  my  hartlie  commendatioun  I  haue  refauit  ane  letter  from 
his  Majeftie  defyring  me  to  haue  bein  in  Edinburgh  the  xj  of  this  inftant 
To  haue  fen  Juftice  vfit  aganis  fic  perfones  as  hes  ettellit  mifchewous 
pratekceis  aganis  his  Majefties  awin  eftait  and  perfoune  as  alfo  aganis 
myne  and  gouris  11  /  wmquhill  laft  predicefToure  that  died  of  guid  memorle 
Heirfoir  I  maiil  eirneftlie  mon  Requeft  gour  11  /  to  wreit  to  the  reft  of 
our  frendis  that  gour  11  /  may  keipe  the  faid  day  to  further  his  Majeftie  / 
in  the  miniftratione  of  Juftice  /  Seing  his  Majefties  intentione  tendis 
bayth  to  the  weillfair  of  the  contrey  and  fpeciallie  to  the  veillfair  and 
ftanding  of  our  houfe/  Treulie  thare  fold  haue  na  wardlie  tourne  ftayit  me 
frome  the  keiping  of  the  faid  day  hot  it  hes  pleftt  God  to  vifit  me  with  ane 
extreme  fyfher  that  I  may  [nather]  Reid  nor  gange  as  is  notablie  knauen 
wnto  the  contrey  Thus  luking  gour  11  /  will  not  faill  to  keip  the  faid  day 
Becaus  of  my  prefent  difeafe  and  the  fortherance  of  the  miniftration  of 
Juftice  Specialie  be  ws  quhich  tendis  maift  to  our  honour  Seing  God  hes 
moueit  his  Majeftie  to  fie  Juftice  adminiftrat  quhais  intentione  being  fa 
guid  We  can  not  refuifs  for  our  awen  partis  Thairfoir  gour  11  /  mane 
tak  burden  wpon  gour  11  /  at  this  tyme  for  me  /  becaus  of  my  prefent 
difeafs  Remiting  the  reft  to  gour  11  /  wifdome  and  confideratioune  of  our 
dewties  /  Committis  gour  11  /  to  the  proteftione  of  the  Almychtie  From 
Glenbervy  the  viij  of  this  inftant  [April]  1591  • 

3our  11  /  aflurit  coufing  at  his  power  ■ 

Angus  • 
I  pray  gour  11  /  to  Remember  my  commendatioune  to  gour  bedfallowe  ■ 
Als  I  Requeft  gour  11  /  to  aflift  this  cans  fua  that  we  relaue  nor  delerwe 

na  fclandder  of  God  nor  the  warld  '^c"- 
To  my  weray  fpeciall  guid  Lord  and  coufinge 
My  Lord  of  Mortoun  • 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  173 

Liudovick  Duke  of  Lennox  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  • 

172  iViy  Lord  efter  my  hairtlie  commendatione .  fene  I  haif  ever  found  gour 
Lo  /  to  be  ane  maift  fpeclale  and  favorable  freind  towardis  me  In  all  my 
adois  mane  now  burdene  gour  Lo  /  that  my  prefent  mariage  with  Maiftres 
Lilias  Ruthvene  be  gour  Lo  /  follftatione  at  his  Majefties  hand  may  be 
Interprett  according  to  my  honeft  mening  without  prefuming  ony  difo- 
bediance  to  his  Majeflie  quhilk  never  fall  enter  in  my  mynd  for  ony 
warldlie  refpeft  bot  fall  ay  continew  as  maifl  fpeciallie  obleift  thairto  his 
Majefties  humbill  fubjefb  and  fervand  And  as  to  the  performance  of 
mariages  I  dowt  not  bot  his  Majeftie  as  lykwys  all  trew  chriftians  ac- 
knawledgis  thame  concludit  be  God  In  the  hevines  and  cannot  be  efchewed 
as  I  am  fuir  myne  hes  bene  frome  the  beginning  haifing  my  hairt  movit 
with  lick  extreme  alFeftione  did  M'illinglie  be  my  aithe  and  faithfuil 
promis  bind  my  felf  thairto  that  nathair  with  faif  confcience  nor  honour 
culd  I  efchew  the  fame  Sua  hoiping  gour  Lo  /  guid  word  and  credit  to- 
wardis his  Majeftie  wilbe  Imployit  fua  far  as  gour  Lo  /  may  in  this  my 
godlie  and  honeft  caus  will  committ  gour  Lo  /  to  God  Frome  Dunkell  the 
xiij  of  Apr y  11  1591  • 

3our  Lo  /  louinge  affixrit  freind 
To  my  verie  guid  and  fpeciall  Lord  Lenox  • 

My  Lord  erle  of  Mortoun  • 


liudovick  Duke  of  Lennox  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  • 

173  My  Lord  I  man  earneftly  requefte  gour  Lo  /  as  in  my  laft  letter  that 
in  cafe  the  King  hes  conceuit  ony  mynd  aganis  my  laft  proceiding 
heir  it  will  pleis  gou  to  concur  with  my  other  freindis  att  courte  for 
pacifeing  of  his  Majeftie  /  I  man  confes  that  altho  my  fa6l  be  not 
odious  in  the  felff  /  yet  I  haue  offendit  in  contrauening  his  Majefteis 


174  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

intentioun  and  confequently  I  fubmit  me  to  his  gracious  will  hoiping 
with  Gods  grace  never  to  difpleis  him  againe  /  to  follow  his  commands 
in  all  pointis  according  to  my  bund  dewtie  /  Your  Lo  /  gude  oflBces 
beftowit  on  me  heiranent  fall  not  be  lofit  yf  I  fall  ever  haue  the  powar 
to  requyte  the  fame  And  fo  ending  wyth  my  very  hartlie  commen- 
dation I  leave  30ur  Lo  /  in  the  proteftion  of  God  /  From  Dunkell  xix  of 
Aprile  1591  • 

3our  L  /  maift  louing  freind 

Lenox  • 
To  my  Lord 
My  Lord  Erie  of  Mortoun  • 


luiaird  of  Drumlanrig  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  • 

174  It  will  pleis  gour  Lordfliip  that  the  laird  of  Cloifljurne  /  beand  fchireflP 
deput  of  Drumfres  in  the  abfens  of  my  Lord  Sanquhar  /  he  come  vnder 
(ilence  and  cloud  of  nicht  in  the  moneth  of  Merche  laft  /  to  gour  Lord- 
fliips  landis  and  regalitie  of  Mortoun  /  and  brak  ane  fallowis  houfe  at 
the  braidfyde  tuke  him  felff  and  his  geir  but  ony  or  dour  /  brocht  him 
furth  of  gour  Lordfliips  regalitie  /  without  ony  tryall  of  his  giltinefs 
or  innocens  /  Intromettit  with  his  efcheit  /  and  than  put  him  to  ane 
affyis  /  quhilk  wes  ane  greit  noveltie  That  the  fchireff  and  his  deputtis 
fuld  intromet  with  ony  man  or  his  geir  within  gour  Lordfliips  re- 
galitie /  fFor  nather  the  Lord  Sanquhar  his  predeceffouris  fchireflBs  of 
the  fliire  nor  na  vther  neuir  did  the  like  nor  neuir  wald  haif  prefumeit 
to  haif  done  the  famin  /  quhairof  I  being  aduerteifl;  I  diredlit  ane 
feruand  in  gour  Lordfliips  naim  and  myne  and  defyreit  the  laid 
fallow  to  be  continewit  quhill  cognitioun  wer  tane  /  quhither  his  tryall 
appertenit  to  gour  Lordfliip  and  baillies  of  gour  Lordfliips  regalitie 
or  to  the  fchireff  quhilk  wes  altogethir  refufit  '  quhairfoir  I  pafl;  my 
felf  and  vpon  gour  Lordfliips   privilege  of  gour  Lordfliips   regalitie  / 


JAC.  VI.]        OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.        175 

as  gour  Lordfliips  baillie  ftandand  vndifchargeit  be  gour  Lordfliip  /  I 
tuke  this  fallow  of  his  hand  without  ony  trublance  or  impediment  /  and 
the  nixt  day  thereftir  I  convenit  the  gentiU  men  of  the  cuntrie  /  and  in 
gour  Lordfliips  naim  with  gour  Lordfliips  oiBcer  I  fenfit  ane  courte  of 
gour  Lordfliips  baronie  of  Mortoun  and  als  I  cauflt  gour  Lordfliips  faid 
officer  fummond  all  the  baronie  /  to  that  efFeft  And  this  fallow  being 
convi6t  I  cauflt  Jufl;ifie  hira  /  And  albeit  I  haif  na  titill  of  gour  Lordfliips 
baillierie  git  In  refpeft  I  remain  in  pofleffioun  of  the  faid  baillierie  vndil- 
chargeit  be  gour  Lordfliip  I  thocht  I  had  rather  liaiflp  done  this  and  anfuer 
to  gour  Lordfliip  nor  till  haif  fufferrit  the  laird  of  Cloifljurn  or  ony  vther 
I  micht  flop  vfurpe  ane  au6lorite  within  gour  Lordfliips  regalitie  la  fer 
preiudiciall  to  gour  Lordfliips  privilege  and  honour  and  myne  awin 
baith  /  I  and  my  predeceflburis  having  in  abfens  of  gour  Lordfliip  and 
predeceflburis  ftill  mantenit  the  libertie  of  the  faid  regalitie  /  quhair- 
vpoun  the  laird  of  CloiflDurne  rafit  lettres  To  charge  me  to  prefent  the 
faid  fallow  and  to  compeir  perfonalie  befoir  his  Majeftie  quhilk  wes  con- 
tinewit  to  the  faxt  of  May  infl;ant  /  quhilk  day  I  wes  of  mynd  to  haitf 
kepit  I  And  in  refpeft.  of  fik  neidfuU  eifairis  as  I  haif  ado  I  may  nocht 
keip  the  famin  /  Quhairfoir  I  will  requeift  gour  Lordfliip  In  cais  gour  Lo 
be  prefent  vpon  couufall  To  fe  my  ablens  excufit  quhill  ane  vther  day 
that  I  fall  be  prefent  ffor  I  dout  nocht  hot  gour  Lordfliip  will  be  gour 
Lordfliips  libertie  fe  this  mater  excufit  Seing  that  for  the  keping  of  gour 
Lordfliips  privilege  I  did  it  /  Sa  referring  to  gour  Lordfliips  anfuer  and 
quhat  gour  Lordfliip  pleiffis  to  command  me  I  will  obey  Eftir  my  hartlie 
commendationis  I  commit  gour  Lordfliip  to  the  proteftioun  of  the  Al- 
michtie  Off  Drumlangrig  the  ferd  of  Maij  1591  • 

3our  Lordfliip  to  be  commandit  at  his  power 

Drumlangrig  • 
It  will  pleis  gour  Lordfliip  to  credite  the  berar  quha  can  gif  neid  be 
declair  gour  Lordfliip  the  haill  cais  • 

To  his  verie  gude  Lord 
My  Lord  erle  of  Mortoun  • 


176  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

Agnes  Countes  of  Morton  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  • 

175  It  vul  pleis  gour  L  /  that  I  hawe  bein  this  mununday  in  Dundej  and  hes 
bocht  ane  tvne  of  vyne  fewin  fcoir  fextein  pundis  the  tvne  and  hes  gevin 
my  obligatioun  to  pay  it  the  xv  day  of  Auguft  /  I  haiwe  caufit  convein 
the  tennentis  of  Auchterhous  /  and  hes  caufit  the  gwidman  of  Kenneif- 
toune  deill  vith  thame  to  fei  quhat  pi'yce  thai  vill  giwe  for  ther  fermes  / 
thai  vill  offer  bot  four  markis  for  meill  and  beir  for  na  prigging  that 
J  hone  Douglas  and  I  can  mak  and  mony  of  thame  I  can  get  na  thing 
fra  tham  /  fik  as  Finlafoun  /  Dauid  Kinner  in  the  Bonitoune  /  Petre  in 
the  Bowhous  and  vther  diuers  /  gif  ge  be  content  vith  this  pryce  adverteis 
me  vith  dilligence  vith  this  berair  and  I  fall  caus  tham  provyid  the  filuer  / 
Forder  gour  L  /  vill  lend  to  Jhone  Hutfone  to  caus  him  bring  owt  of  the 
barony  of  Kynrofs  four  kairtis  vith  fufficient  horfes  and  men  to  draw 
the  vyne  /  thai  fuld  cum  to  the  pow  of  Lendoris  and  that  thai  faill  nocht 
to  be  at  the  appointit  plaice  and  Jhone  Hutfone  vith  tham  this  tvyfday 
at  twa  efter  none  /  As  for  newis  gour  L  /  fall  vit  this  morning  in  the  daw- 
ing  thar  is  ane  fiftei  heiland  menn  of  Athoill  all  fwt  menn  cam  to  ane 
feild  in  the  manis  of  Fowllis  and  twik  away  ane  pwind  of  nowt  thaj  var 
ane  lang  Ipaice  away  or  vord  cam  to  the  plaice  /  howfone  vord  cam  to 
the  plaice  thair  Ifchewit  furth  my  Lord  Grayis  twa  brethar  vith  fum  of 
my  Lord  Humis  ferwandis  /  the  nummer  of  the  haill  that  paffit  fwrth 
var  bot  threttein  perfonis  /  or  thai  overtwik  tham  the  pwind  vas  at  the 
vatter  of  Ila  /  ther  the  horfe  men  maid  the  onnfett  on  the  fwttmeu  and 
hes  releiwit  the  pwind  and  hes  flane  thre  Athoill  menn  that  ar  alreddy 
ded  and  vther  twa  that  ar  fupponit  to  be  ded  or  the  morne  fua  ther  ar 
fywe  on  that  fyid  flainn  /  ther  ar  hwrt  both  vill  nocht  be  the  vorfe  my 
Lord  Grayis  twa  brethar  /  Gilbert  and  Andro  vith  his  ftewart  that  vill 
nocht  leiw  the  arrow  is  ftickand  in  his  rig  bak  and  can  nocht  be  gottin 
owt  as  git  /  of  my  Lord  Humis  feruand  ther  ar  hwrt  Jhone  Bailge  Villiam 
Dauidfone  and  vill  nocht  be  the  vorfe  • 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  177 

My  Lord  Hwme  knew  nocht  of  thai*  owtryding  quharat  his  L  /  is 
heichly  offendit  for  he  vald  haid  riddin  vith  thame  I  fall  be  at  hame  vith 
Goddis  graice  on  vedinfday  at  ewin  I  pray  gow  fell  nocht  nor  this  berair 
be  abak  agane  at  me  on  tvyfday  at  ewein  /  gif  ge  haiwe  refawit  ony 
newis  or  vord  abak  fra  the  Kingis  Ma  /  aduerteis  me  vith  this  berair  /  I 
pray  gow  to  caus  heft  the  kairtis  for  the  vyne  fua  committis  gow  to  ge 
eternall  God  Fra  Auchterhous  the  laft  of  Maij  1591  • 
Be  gour  L  /  to  be  commandit 

Agnes  Countes  of  Mortoun  • 


JL  he  Earl  of  Angus  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  • 

176  JMy  Lord  efter  all  hairtlie  commendatiounis  I  haiff  fum  particular  adoes 
preientlie  in  Glenberwie  Anent  the  Ceremonies  of  my  fatheris  buriall 
and  fum  uther  efFairis  qwhilk  wer  lang  to  wrait  Qwhairfoir  I  will  reqweift 
gour  L/  maift  effeftuouflie  to  obtein  me  ane  licenfe  of  his  Majeftie  for  thrie 
or  fowr  dayes  or  awcht  dayis  giff  it  may  be  grantit  that  I  may  taik  ordour 
withe  my  adoes  mentionat  So  in  referring  to  the  beraris  declaratioun  com- 
mittis gow  to  the  prote6tioun  off  God  From  Dundie  the  10  of  July  1591  • 

3our  Lo  /  at  all  pouer 
To  the  Richt  honorabill  and  very  good  Lord  Angus  • 

My  Lord  the  Erlle  of  Mortoun  • 


oir  Duncan  Campbell  of  Glenorchy  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  • 

177  JViy  Lorde  eftir  my  maift  hartlie  commendationis  I  have  receavit  gour  L  / 
letter  and  underftandis  thairbie  that  gour  L  /  is  informit  be  goure  ten- 
nentis  of  Keillour  that  thair  is  ftollin  fra  thame  certane  gudis  and  that 
thai  wer  followit  north  to  Corriemukloch  and  defiring  me  to  try  and 
ferche  the  fame  /  ^oure  L  /  falbe  affurit  that  not  onlie   may  goure  L  / 


178  OEIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

employ  me  in  this  mater  /  bot  alfua  in  gretar  /  quhairin  goure  L  /  fall  find 
my  effeftionat  and  bent  will  and  mynd  to  plefure  goure  L  /  to  the  utir- 
meft  /  And  gif  I  may  owther  be  moyane  or  force  try  the  gudis  or  the 
part  quhair  thai  ar  goure  L  /  falhaif  ane  gude  proofe  of  my  trauellis  and 
diligence  for  goure  L  /  requeift  /  Tuicheing  gour  L  /  poftfcript  (that  gour 
L  /  is  the  mair  bauld  to  write  to  me  becaus  it  is  meanit  the  gudis  ar 
cumin  within  my  cuntrey)  I  affuir  goure  L  /  that  neither  tennent  or  uther 
perfone  depending  upone  me  durft  be  bauld  to  intromit  with  ony  manis 
geir  wranguflie  or  recept  the  fame  privelie  or  oppinlie  And  fpeciallie  the 
gudis  pertening  to  ony  of  goure  L  /  tennentis  /  feing  I  am  baith  detbund 
in  gude  will  and  freindfchip  to  gour  L  /  as  I  falbe  about  to  continew 
thairin  at  all  my  power  And  remitting  the  fame  to  forder  occafioun  I 
commit  gour  L  /  hartlie  in  the  tuitioun  of  the  Almichtie  Frome  Finlarg 
the  thrid  day  of  September  1591  • 

3oure  L  /  verray  afl'uritlie  at  power 

Duncan  Campbell  of  Glenvrquhay  • 
To  My  Lorde 
My  Lord  Erie  of  Mortoun  • 


Sir  Duncan  Campbell  of  Glenorchy  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  • 

178  jVly  Lorde  eftir  my  maift  hartlie  commendationis  I  have  receavit  gour 
L/  letter  and  hes  confiderit  the  contentis  thairof  togidder  with  the  repoirt 
of  the  beraris  goure  L  /  fervitouris  that  certane  of  the  Larde  of  Marchel- 
tonis  men  duelland  in  thir  boundis  hes  recept  thair  geir  /  ^oure  L  /  knawis 
my  mynd  I  heir  to  gour  L  /  and  gouris  be  my  laft  letter  And  as  git  with- 
out ony  alteratioun  of  mynd  I  continew  thairin  bayth  for  goure  L  /  honour 
and  furtherance  of  goure  tennentis  Bot  becaus  I  haue  obtenit  na  certaintie 
or  triall  of  the  awaytakaris  of  goure  L  /  feruandis  geir  / 1  culd  not  for  the 
prefent  gif  refolvit  anfuer  to  gour  L  /  men  bot  gour  L  /  falbe  aflhrit  I  fall 
not  forget  to  ufe  all  diligence  and  triall  I  may  /  to  obtene  knawlege  /  git 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  179 

thair  is  ane  thing  quhilk  tendis  partlie  to  my  diffavour  and  utherwyis  to 
the  greit  hurt  of  the  Inhabitantis  of  this  cuntray  /  That  lawland  lardis 
hauand  landis  within  thir  boundis  for  fniall  proffit  fettis  the  famin  to 
unlauchfull  perfonis  baith  oppreflburis  of  the  hegis  within  the  cuntray 
and  outwith  the  fame  being  fornaris  commone  theiffis  receptaris  of  thift 
and  na  wyis  refponfall  to  his  Majefteis  lawis  And  quheneuir  thai  or  ony 
of  thairis  committis  fik  offences  I  as  Magiftrat  of  this  cuntray  beris  the 
burdene  /  albeit  gour  L  /  knawis  that  everie  man  aucht  to  be  anfuerabill 
for  his  tennentis  according  to  the  generall  band  /  In  the  meintyme  I  fall 
negleft.  na  tyme  nor  refpetvb  na  band  baith  to  furthure  gour  L  /  men  and 
to  obtene  triall  to  gour  L  /  contentment  of  thair  geir  /  And  remitting  the 
reft  to  forther  occafioun  I  commit  gour  L/  in  the  tuitioun  of  the  Almichtie 
Frome  Finlarg  the  xvj  day  of  September  1591  • 

3oure  L  /  verray  affuritlie  att  all  power 

Duncan  Campbell  of  Glenurquhy  • 
To  My  Lorde 
My  Lorde  Erie  of  Mortoun  • 


JJeclaratioun  by  the  King  and  Privy  Council  anent  the  title  of  Earl  of 
Morton  given  to  John  Lord  Maxwell  • 

Apud  Drumfreis  duodecimo  die  menjis  Julij  Anno  Domini  Y^  V°  Nona- 
gejimo  fecundo  . 

179  The  KINGIS  MAJESTIE  with  advife  of  the  Lordis  of  his  Secrete 
Counfale  Decernis  and  Declairis  be  thir  prefentis  That  albeit  Johnne 
Lord  Maxwell  be  nominat  and  ftyllit  Erie  of  Mortoun  in  the  lait  aft  and 
ordinance  of  Secrete  Counfale  be  the  quhilk  he  wes  conflitute  Wardane 
of  the  Weft  Marche  of  this  Realme  and  in  fmdrie  utheris  aftis  and  ordi- 
nanceis  laitlie  maid  concerning  the  advancement  of  his  hienes  authoritie 
and  fervice  git  the  fame  nominatioun  and  ftyle  Sail  nawayes  hurte  nor 
prejuge  the  Richtis  and  titlis  quhilkis  Williame  Douglas  erll  of  Mortoun 


180  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

hes  and  pretendis  to  have  as  air  of  taillie  to  the  erldome  of  Mortoun  nor 
git  Impair  him  in  honnour  ftyll  dignitie  preheminenceis  and  privilegeis 
quhilkis  he  hes  and  broikis  or  may  have  brouke  and  pofles  thairby  nather 
in  the  Intromitting  and  vptaking  of  the  mailles  fermes  and  dewiteis  apper- 
tening  thairto  hot  that  he  fall  brouke  and  pofTes  the  faid  erldome  Intro- 
mett  with  the  fame  mailles  and  dewiteis  and  enjoy  quhatfumevir  liberteis 
honnouris  privilegeis  preeminenceis  digniteis  and  place  in  parliamentis 
generall  conventiounis  Secreit  Counfale  and  utherwayes  quhilkis  he 
broukeit  and  poffefl  befoir  the  Nominatioun  and  ftyle  gevin  to  the  faid 
Johnne  Lord  Maxwell  expreffit  in  the  foirfaidis  adis  and  ordinanceis 
Alffrelie  as  he  ufit  and  enjoyit  at  ony  tyme  bigane  preceding  the  date 
heirof  Nochtwithftanding  the  fame  actis  and  as  giff  thay  had  nevir  bene 
maid  nor  grantit  And  forder  that  the  lait  Declaratioun  and  a6t  maid  be 
his  Majeftie  in  favouris  of  the  faid  Johnne  Lord  Maxwell  nor  na  claus 
expreffit  thairin  fall  on  nawayes  hurte  nor  prejuge  the  faid  Williame 
Erll  of  Mortoun  nor  his  faidis  Eichtis  and  titles  to  the  laid  Erldome 
privilegeis  of  Regalitie  utheris  privilegeis  offices  cafualiteis  and  digniteis 
quhilkis  he  broukis  and  poffeffis  or  may  clame  brouke  and  poffes  thairby 
Be  IT  alwayes  uuderftand  that  thir  prefentis  fall  nawayes  hinder  nor 
prejudge  the  foirfaidis  perfonis  of  ony  aftioun  quhilkis  tha}'  have  or  may 
have  toucheing  the  decifioun  of  aythir  of  thair  rychtis  and  titles  pre- 
tendit  be  thame  to  the  faid  erldome  befoir  the  Jugeis  competent  thairto 
as  accordis  of  the  law  • 


1  he  King  to  the  Earl  of  Mortoun  • 

180  Jtvicht  traift  coufing  and  counfallour  We  greit  30 w  hartlye  wele  /  heiring 
of  the  cuming  ower  and  repair  heir  in  thir  pairtes  of  our  declairit  tra- 
touris  /  for  executioun  of  the  reft  of  thair  treafonable  interpryfes  aganis 
our  perfoun  and  eftate  We  haue  heirby  taiken  occafioun  in  verray  ernift 
maner  to  defyre  gour  addres  toward  ws  with  all  poffible  fpeid    accum- 


JAC.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  181 

panyit  with  fie  force  and  freindes  in  fubftantious  maner  as  ge  ma\r  haue 
vpoun  the  inftant  /  And  in  the  mean  tyme  that  ge  caus  diligent  tryell 
ferche  and  inquifitioun  be  maid  /  gif  any  of  they  our  tratouris  be  prefentlie 
within  thir  pairtes  /  and  the  fame  be  fignifeit  to  ws  and  gou  /  with  all 
fpeid  and  diligence  As  ge  will  do  ws  verray  fpeciall  and  notable  plefure 
and  feruice  Thus  repofing  in  gour  readines  and  gudwill  heiranent  We 
commit  gow  to  God  From  Falkland  the  xxiiij  of  July  1592  • 

James  R  • 
To  our  Richt  traift  coufing  and  couniallour 
The  erll  of  Mortoun  • 


M'  William  Scott  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  ? 

181  JMy  verie  gude  Lord  efter  my  commendationis  of  fervice  Pleis  my  bro- 
ther in  law  M'  Thomas  Hammiltoun  goungar  of  Preiftiffeild  being 
prefentit  be  his  Majeftie  to  the  place  of  Seffioun  quhilk  waikis  throw 
deceis  of  M'  Dauid  Chalmer  /  for  obferving  of  the  cutlumat  order  he  is 
preiffit  to  purchafe  the  ftyle  of  fum  kii'k  leving  and  be  aduyfe  of  freindis 
he  hes  delt  with  M"  Dauid  Makgill  advocat  and  hes  obtenit  his  gude  will 
of  the  Proueftrie  of  Dalkeith  quhilk  being  ane  mater  of  verie  fmall 
proffitt  nocht  exceding  xl  merkis  of  geirlie  dewtie  /  the  gentilman  having 
gretar  refpe6b  to  the  ftyle  than  ony  commoditie  hes  agreit  with  the 
advocat  and  wantis  onlie  the  confent  of  gour  L  /  patrone  of  the  laid 
benefice  quhilk  he  defiris  eirniftlie  and  wald  have  cum  to  gour  Lo  /  to 
that  effect  if  the  neceffitie  of  his  prefens  in  feffioun  did  not  ftay  him  , 
Thairfoir  feing  the  mater  is  of  fmall  confequence  I  will  eirniftlie  requeift 
gour  L  /  to  grant  this  favor  to  this  gentill  man  and  to  fubfcryve  his  gift 
feing  it  navyife  prejugis  gow  of  ony  proffitt  /  and  that  he  is  habill  be  gude 
offices  to  acquyte  that  plefure  to  gour  L  /  contentment  In  quhais  name  I 
will  promeis  to  gour  L./  that  in  all  gour  reflbnabill  adois  and  caufis  he 
I'albe  gour  L  /  gude  freind  and  fwa  trufting  in  gour  L  /  favor  pleis  fub- 


182  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

fcryve  this  gift  and  fend  me  the  famin  with  this  berar  I  commend  gour 
L  /  to  the  fpeciall  proteflioun  of  the  Eternall  From  Edinburgh  the  aucht 
of  Oaober  1592  • 

3our  L  /  awin  man 

M'  WiLLiAME  Scot  • 


i  he  Earl  of  Angus  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  • 

182  JVly  Lord  and  couffin  efter  all  hartlie  commendatiouns  I  underftand  my 
Leving  is  arreftit  by  ordour  of  lawe  and  becaufe  now  in  the  tyme  of  my 
truble  it  is  propereft  gour  Lo  /  fuld  tak  ane  doing  for  me  I  will  requeft 
gour  L  /  to  becum  cautioune  for  my  leving  that  it  falbe  anfuerable  to  the 
Kingis  Majellie  and  all  haifand  entres  thairto  conforme  to  the  lawes  of 
the  cuntray  and  for  gour  Lo  /  warand  I  bind  and  obliffis  me  heirby  to 
warrand  and  releif  gour  Lo  /  fra  all  perrell  and  ikayth  that  fall  happin 
to  fall  furth  theirthrow  be  this  my  band  maid  unto  gour  Lo  /  therupoun 
I'ubfcrywit  with  my  hand  At  the  Caftell  of  Edinburgh  the  fecund  of 
Februar  1592  ■ 

5our  Lo  /  coufin  at  pouer 

Angus  • 
To  my  verray  guid  Lord  and  Couffin 
the  Erll  of  Mortone  • 


J_  he  King  to  the  Earl  of  Mortoun  • 

183  Xvycht  traift  Coufing  and  Counfallour  We  greit  gow  weill  /  Seing  we  ar 
of  deliberatioun  to  corfe  the  water  upon  fryday  at  morne  /  We  have 
thocht  meit  to  defyre  gow  be  thir  prefentis  to  be  heir  the  faid  day  weill 
accompanyet  with  the  beft  affeftit  of  gour  freindis  in  feir  of  weir  to 
accompany  ws  to  the   Queinef  ferrye  be  aucht  houris  in  the  morning  / 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  183 

Whilk  we  doubt  not  bot  ge  will  do  as  our  hole  treft  is  in  30W  and  We 
fhall  ever  remain  reddy  to  requyt  gour  gudwill  at  all  occafioun  Sua 
committis  gow  to  the  protedioun  of  the  Almichtye  From  Falkland  the 
xviij  of  September  1593  • 

To  our  Richt  traift  Coufing  and  Counfallour  (c(/yyi^  S^D 

the  Erie  of  Mortoun  •  ,  /  --*-^^^ 


Oommiffioun  to  ferche  feek  and  tak  David  Barclay  of  Strowie  • 

184  James  be  the  grace  of  God  King  of  Scottis  To  all  and  findrie  our 
liegis  and  fubditis  quhome  it  eflFeiris  to  quhais  knaulege  thir  our  letters 
fall  cum  greting  Forfamekle  as  it  is  wnderftand  to  ws  and  Lordis  of  oure 
Secreit  Counfale  that  upoun  the  xxiij  day  of  September  1591  Dauid 
Barclay  of  Strowie  wes  ordourlie  denunceit  rebell  and  put  to  oure  home 
be  vertew  of  oure  utheris  letteris  rafed  at  the  inftance  of  Adam  Young 
in  Middilrig  as  fader  with  the  brether  and  remanent  kin  and  freindis  of 
umquhile  Henry  Young  and  umquhile  Williame  Young  his  fonis  ffor  liis 
not  compeirance  'XC  To  have  underlyne  the  lawis  for  the  fchamefuU  and 
unworthie  flauchter  of  the  faidis  umquhile  Henry  and  Williame  Youngis 
committit  be  the  faid  David  upoun  the  aucht  day  of  September  the  geir 
of  God  1^  V°  Ixxxxj  geiris  As  oure  faidis  utheris  letteris  'Xc  beiris  At  the 
proces  quhairof  the  faid  David  maift  proudlie  and  contempnandlie  re- 
manis  as  git  unrelaxt  takand  na  regaird  of  the  faid  horning  Bot  paHis 
up  and  doun  the  cuntrey  hantand  kirkis  mercattis  and  all  utheris  publift 
placeis  of  our  realme  and  focietie  of  men  as  giff  thay  wer  our  free  fub- 
jeftis  In  hie  and  proud  contemptioun  of  our  au6loritie  and  lawis  /  and 
encouragement  of  utheris  to  committ  the  lyke  fchamefuU  and  cruell 
flauchteris  heirefter  without  remeid  be  providit  Quhairfoir  We  have 
grantit  full  power  and  commiffioun  expres  bidding  and  charge  to  our 
lovittis  the  Proved   and  bailgeis  of  Edinburgh  and  Perth  SherefBs  of 


184  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

Perth  and  Kynroffchire  Archibald  Douglas  George  Douglas  John  Crau- 
furd  conjunaiie  and  feveralie  To  convocat  our  liegis  in  armes  And  to 
pas  ferche  feik  and  tak  the  faid  David  quhairevir  he  may  be  apprehendit 
and  to  bring  and  prefent  him  befoir  our  Juftice  and  his  deputis  to  be 
punift  for  his  demereitis  conforms  to  the  lawis  of  our  realme  'tc  tc 
Gevin  under  our  fignet  and  fubfcryvit  with  our  hand  At  Halierudhous 
the  xij  day  of  06tober  and  of  our  Reignne  the  xxvij  geir  1593  • 

James  R • 

Tho  .  M"  Glammis  . 

Ro  •  Thefaurarius  • 

A-dvice  of  the  CommifRoners  of  the  Kirk  to  the  King  • 

At  Edinburgh  the  .vvij  day  of  OStoher  1593  • 

185  Xhe  Commiflioners  of  the  Kirk  /  barones  and  burgeffis  being  conuenit 
from  diuers  partis  of  this  realme  forfeing  the  prefent  danger  quhairinto 
the  kirk  of  God  within  this  realme  the  Kingis  Majefties  eftate  and  per- 
Ibne  and  the  haill  commown  weill  ftandis  into  thocht  guid  to  giwe  thair 
advyfe  to  his  Majeftie  in  maner  following 

1.  Item  imprimis  becaus  the  Commiffioneris  ar  informit  that  the  ex- 
communicate lordis  are  to  be  put  to  ane  aflyfe  and  confidering  quhat  is 
the  maner  of  this  realme  in  fick  materis  Howbeit  thai  will  nocht  defyre 
his  Majeftie  that  they  fall  nocht  be  putt  to  ane  tryell  at  all  /  3it  humelie 
craifis  that  thair  tryell  be  nocht  haiftie  nor  at  the  day  appoiutit  Bot  that 
it  may  be  delayit  vnto  the  tyme  that  all  the  profeflbris  of  the  gofpeU  be 
ryplie  advyfit  quhat  is  meit  to  be  done  in  that  matter  And  that  becaus 
the  haill  profefToris  of  the  gofpell  ar  myndit  to  be  thair  parteis  and  ac- 
cuferis  in  ther  foul  treafounis  As  alfo  in  refpeft  thai  ar  alreddie  convift 
partlie  throw  breking  of  waird  for  crj'nies  of  trealbun  and  partlie  throw 
being  fugitiwe  from  the  lawis  firft  in  S'  Androis  quhilk  place  they  wer 
fummondit  to  and  Ipeciallie  from  the  fupreame  feat  of  parliament  • 


J  AC.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  185 

2.  Item  We  traift  that  according  to  the  lavvis  and  lovable  cuftome  of 
the  cuntrei  thir  excommunicate  and  treffonable  apoftatis  feing  thai  ar 
accufit  of  the  hieft  treafoun  that  ever  wes  hard  tell  of  in  this  land  may  be 
committit  in  maift  fure  ward  /  wit,  i  in  the  burghis  of  Edinburgh  i  Dundie  / 
Striuiling  /  T:c"  /  or  as  it  falbe  thocht  meitt  till  ordour  be  takin  with  all  the 
papiftis  of  Scotland  /  of  quhilk  factioun  thai  ar  the  head  and  till  the  eftaitis 
advyfe  farder  quhat  maner  of  tryell  falbe  vfit  aganis  thame  • 

3.  Item  We  traift  that  quhen  the  eftaitis  efter  dew  and  mature  deliber- 
atioun  fall  putt  the  foirfaid  tratouris  to  ane  aflyfe  That  the  aflyfleris  be 
nocht  nominate  at  the  optiown  of  the  parteis  to  be  accufed  bot  to  be 
nominate  by  the  partie  accuferis  to  witt  the  haill  profeflburis  of  the  gofpell 
And  that  according  to  the  lovable  cuftom  of  this  realme  • 

Item  it  is  craifit  of  his  Majeftie  that  the  foirfaidis  tratouris  are  ex- 
communicat  and  by  the  juft  fentence  of  the  kirk  cut  of  from  the  focietie 
of  Chryftis  bodie  that  thai  be  nocht  admittit  to  hawe  onie  perfoun  in 
Judgement  nor  benefite  of  the  law  till  thai  be  Joynit  vnto  Chryft  and 
reconcilit  vnto  his  kirk  And  according  to  the  lawis  of  the  cuntrie  and  his 
Majefties  awin  promeis  • 

4.  Item  incace  his  Majeftie  will  nocht  alter  the  day  (as  we  dout  nocht 
bot  he  will)  Then  we  traift  that  as  his  Majeftie  profefRs  religioun  with 
ws  and  thai  the  contraire  we  that  are  the  profeflburis  of  religioun  may  be 
his  Majefties  garde  and  admittit  in  the  maift  fenfible  and  warelyke  maner 
to  be  about  his  Majeftie  To  defend  his  perfoun  from  thair  violence  and 
to  accufe  thame  to  the  vttermaift  Quhilk  we  ar  myndit  to  do  and  it  fuld 
be  with  the  los  of  all  our  lyfis  in  ane  day  for  certainlie  we  are  deter- 
minatt  that  the  cuntrie  fall  nocht  bruik  vs  and  thame  bayth  fa  lang  as 
they  ar  Godis  profeffit  enemeis  • 

Sir  John  Carmychall  to  William  Earl  of  Angus  [1593  ?] 

186    jMy  Lord  my  humill  commendationis  being  rememberit  I  reflauit  gour 
aduerteifmentis  fra  my  cowfing  Wat  and  theiraftir  fpak  with  the  King  at 

2  a 


186  OEIGINAL  PAPEES  [sec.  xvi. 

greit  lenthe  tuiching  gour  matteris  quha  at  my  earnift  fute  and  defyre 
and  revaird  for  my  feruice  /  hes  becumit  mair  refonabill  nor  gour  defert 
deferuis  /  quhen  noftir  and  the  wyfis  hufband  fuld  wraik  as  now  gour  1  / 
knawis  quhither  men  be  of  gour  counfall  or  nocht  /  I  haue  brocht  it  to 
this  poynt  with  the  King  that  gour  1  /  fall  nathir  be  in  hafard  of  gour  lyfe 
landis  nor  honouris  gif  ge  will  crave  the  Kingis  mercy  and  grant  gour 
offence  quhilk  he  hes  to  lat  gow  fe  and  ge  can  nocht  deny  I  fall  mak  all 
thir  fure  /  fwa  that  the  greitteft  danger  ge  can  incur  is  to  remane  ane 
quhyle  in  waird  quhill  mattiris  be  fettillit  /  being  fure  /  nathir  gour  lyfe 
landis  nor  honour  be  in  danger  My  lord  albeit  ge  eftemit  me  ane  enemy 
befoir  I  was  ane  freind  and  gave  gow  the  beft  counfall  albeit  God  wald 
nocht  lecent  gow  to  except  it  and  thais  that  hes  drawin  gow  on  this  / 
if  ge  and  gour  hous  wraik  thay  haue  bene  the  occafioun  of  it  ■  Gif 
the  King  had  wraikit  at  this  tyme  /  I  had  bene  worthy  to  haue  bene 
hangit  quarterit  and  drawin  /  That  I  was  the  onely  flay  that  gour 
held  and  James  Dowglafs  had  nocht  bene  bayth  tane  at  gour  being 
in  this  toun  the  tyme  of  the  parliament  for  we  knew  mattiris  than 
as  we  do  now  hot  nocht  fa  cleirly  /  gif  gour  1  /  thinkis  meit  to  except  thir 
conditionis  lat  me  be  aduerteifit  and  I  fall  mak  thame  fure  anewche  /  gif 
ge  think  ge  wilbe  the  man  will  wraik  gour  felf  and  gour  hous  I  tak  the 
greit  God  to  vitnes  I  haue  done  mair  for  gour  1  /  and  gevin  gow  my 
counfall  mair  vprychtlie  for  gour  Handing  nor  ony  that  is  cumit  of  it  or 
ony  vaflall  ge  haue  /  I  haue  fend  my  cowfing  Wat  to  gow  to  deill  in  thir 
mattiris  quhom  with  ge  may  be  plane  /  gif  ge  wryte  ane  anfuer  to  me 
wryte  in  fie  plane  termes  as  the  King  may  fe  it  and  gif  ge  fend  ony  vthir 
fecreittis  fend  it  be  toung  with  fie  as  ge  think  maifl;  meit  /  fwa  for  this 
prefent  luiking  to  heir  fra  gow  how  far  I  may  fpeik  in  gour  name  I  com- 
mit gour  1  /  to  Godis  proteftioune  Edinburgh  this  fettirday  in  the  mornyng  • 
Be  gour  1  /  to  be  commandit  with  feruice  gif  ge  obey  God 
and  the  Kingis  Majeftie  • 

Carmychall  • 
To  the  Eicht  honorable  and  my  very  gud  lord 
and  maifl-ir  the  erle  of  Angus  gif  this  • 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  187 

Agnes  Countefs  of  Morton  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  • 

187  it  will  pies  gour  Lo  /  that  me  Lord  oflp  Argyll  is  come  heir  to  Dalkeith 
this  fetterday  in  the  nycht  and  his  Lo  /  will  be  mareit  this  Sonday  with 
gour  dochter  /  therfoir  I  pray  gour  Lo  /  be  nocht  oflFendit  for  I  will  tak 
the  baldnes  on  me  to  end  that  turne  I  man  craff  gour  Lo  /  pardone  for 
the  fame  and  prayis  gour  Lo  /  nocht  to  be  oifendit  at  the  fame  this  is 
wrettin  in  haift  this  fonday  in  the  morneing  nocht  ellis  bot  committis 
gour  Lo  /  to  the  proteftioun  of  God  • 

Be  gour  Lo  /  at  hir  power 

Agnes  Covntes  of  Morttone  • 
To  my  Lord  my  Lord 
Erll  of  Morttone  • 


Agnes  Countefs  of  Morton  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  • 

188  It  will  pleis  gour  Lo  /  the  Quenes  Majellie  will  be  ther  this  tyfday  and 
her  Majeflie  lepenis  that  gour  Lo  /  will  come  and  convoy  her  that  day 
therfoir  I  think  it  befl  that  gour  Lo  /  dyne  at  x  houris  and  be  heir  betuix 
ten  and  ane  efternone  I  think  me  Lord  Duke  and  the  Abot  of  Londoris 

fouper  with  gour  L  /  on  tyfday  therfoir  it  is  guid  that  gour  Lo  , 

command  gour  cowkis  and  ftewerttis  to  mak  good  cheir  And  nocht  ellis 
bot  committis  gour  Lo  /  to  God  • 

3our  Lo  /  at  power 

Agnes  Covntes  of  Morttone  • 
To  my  Lord  my  Lord 
Erll  of  Morttone  • 


188  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvi. 

W  illiam  Lord  Hereis  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  • 

189  JMy  Lord  efter  rycht  hartie  commendationis  Pleis  gour  L  / 1  haiff  refauit 
gour  L  /  letter  /  quhairby  gour  L  /  lliawis  that  the  tenentis  of  Preftoun 
hes  bene  at  gour  L  /  declairing  that  I  haiff  difchargeit  thame  to  anfuer 
gour  L  /  of  ther  dewteis  of  ther  landis  •  For  anfuer  therto  /  albeit  my  Lord 
my  umquhill  coufing  the  tyme  of  his  deceis  was  in  poffeffione  of  the  up- 
lifting of  the  maillis  and  dewties  of  that  Laird  of  Preftoun  /  ^it  fen  his 
deceis  I  haiflF  nather  commandit  thame  mak  payment  theroff  to  his  fone 
nather  git  contramandit  thame  mak  payment  of  the  famin  to  gour  Lo  / 
For  I  am  not  myndeit  to  ufe  courfRs  contrair  the  law  in  ony  forte  / 
althocht  as  gour  L  /  underftandis  honour  and  dewtie  obleiffis  me  to  do 
for  his  bairnis  •  Sua  leving  to  troubill  gour  L  /  forther  for  the  prefent 
quhill  uther  occafione  I  commit  gour  L  /  to  Goddis  prote&ioun  Terreglis 
the  fext  of  May  1594  • 

3our  L  /  at  power  to  command 

Herys  • 
To  the  Rycht  honorabill  my  verray  guid  Lord 
my  Lord  the  Erie  of  Mortoun  • 

W  arrant  to  retain  John  Alay  and  Rowie  Beteis  • 
REX. 
IQO  Williame  erle  Mortoun  Lord  Dalkeyth  tc"  IT  is  our  will  and  We  com- 
mand gow  that  for  certane  confiderationis  moving  ws  ge  retene  and  keip 
Johne  Alay  and  Rowie  Beteis  prefentlie  in  gour  keping  ftill  in  firmance 
quher  thai  ar  and  delyver  thame  to  na  perfoun  or  perfonis  nochtwithftand- 
ing  quhatfumevir  letters  or  charges  dire6t  to  gow  to  that  effe6t  quhill  ge 
knaw  farder  of  our  mynd  theranent  As  ge  will  anfuer  to  ws  upoun  gour 
obedience  Subfcrivit  with  our  hand  At  Dundie  the  day  of  Marche 

1597  •  .  ^ 


JAC.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  189 

W  arrant  to  charge  Adam  Strudgeon  and  others  • 

191    James  be  the  grace  of  God  King  of  Scottis  To  our  louittis  Johne  Weir 

Meffingeris  our 
Shereffis  in  that  part  conjundllie  and  feueralie  fpecialie  conftitute  greting 
OURE  will  is  and  We  charge  you  ftraitlie  and  commandis  That 
Incontinent  thir  our  letters  fene  ge  pas  and  in  our  name  and  auftoritie 
Command  and  charge  Adame  Strudgeon  James  Strudgeon  and  all 
utheris  havaris  keiparis  and  detenaris  of  the  houfe  place  and  fortalice 
of  Wraith  pertening  to  our  richt  traift  coufing  and  counfallour  Williame 
erle  of  Mortoun  To  rander  and  deliver  the  fame  to  Robert  Somervile 
fervitour  to  our  faid  coufing  in  his  name  /  to  be  keipit  be  him  to  his  behove 
and  to  remove  thamefelflBs  and  thair  fervandis  furth  thairof  within  fex 
houris  nixt  efter  thai  be  chairgit  be  gou  thairto  under  the  pane  of  trea- 
foun  With  certificatioun  to  thame  and  thay  failgie  that  the  fame  pane 
falbe  execute  upone  thame  conforme  to  the  lawes  of  our  realme  and 
aftis  of  parliament  tc  Gevin  under  our  fignett  and  Subfcrivit  with  our 
hand  AT  Drumfreis  the  fext  day  of  Aprile  And  of  our  Regnne  the  xxx 
gear  1597  • 

James  R  • 
Carmichaell  •  Newbotle  •  Trakquaie  • 

JJaniel  Archdeacon  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  • 

192  ixight  honorable  /  for  as  moch  as  yt  hath  pleafed  the  Allmightie  God 
to  make  me  an  inftrument  wherby  I  haue  reuealed  fuch  plotts  and 
praftifes  as  Francys  Moubray  had  intended  againft  his  Prince  and  the 
ftate  of  this  land  /  and  that  for  want  of  other  proofes  I  am  not  able  to 
make  his  treafons  knowen  to  the  worlde  /  I  am  conftrained  by  force  of 
armes  to  prooue  him  a  traitor  to  his  King  and  contrie  and  by  the  power 
of  God  to  compell  him  to  confefs  his  faultes  whereby  my  honeft  /  true  / 


190  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvii. 

and  faithefull  feruice  to  his  Maieftie  and  to  this  ftate  may  euidently 
appere  which  I  dout  not  but  I  fliall  be  able  to  bring  to  pafs  being  affifted 
by  the  power  of  God  /  who.  is  euer  inclined  to  fauor  and  help  the  true 
and  iuft  caufe  and  for  as  much  as  the  triall  of  this  matter  is  to  be  per- 
formed by  a  combat  betwene  Francys  and  me  and  the  coftome  in  fuch 
cafe  is  that  euerye  on  of  the  champions  is  to  choofe  2  Godfathers  he 
being  allreadie  prouided  for  his  parte  /  I  haue  thoght  good  to  prouide  me 
felf  choofing  your  Lordfliyp  as  a  nobleman  indued  with  true  chriftianitie 
louing  your  Prince  an  contrie  /  therefore  I  humblye  requeft  your  Lord- 
fhyp  to  grante  me  the  fauor  as  to  grace  me  and  affifte  me  with  your 
honorable  prefence  and  be  my  godfather  in  fo  iuft  and  fo  true  a  caufe ' 
thus  your  Lordfliyp  fliall  bynde  me  exedinglye  to  your  honorable  kinde- 
nes  •  Wedenfday  next  being  the  5*  day  of  Januarie  fliall  be  the  appointed 
for  the  combat  /  thus  ceafing  to  treble  your  Lordfliyp  any  forther  with 
my  mofl;  aifedionate  dutie  I  humbly  take  my  leaue  /  From  the  cafl;ell  of 
Edenbrough  this  27  of  December  1602  • 

Your  Lordfliyps  moft  humble  and  affeftionat  feruant  • 

Daniel  Archedeacon  • 
To  the  right  honorable  the  erle  of  Morton  • 

JLudovick  Duke  of  Lenox  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  • 

193  JMy  veray  guid  Lord  We  being  myndfuU  to  fettill  fum  guid  ordour 
with  the  miniflrie  of  our  kirkis  of  the  pryorie  of  Sanftandrois  and 
haveing  appoyntit  Wodnefday  nixt  to  that  affeft  We  will  heirfoir 
requeft  gour  Lo  /  to  fubfcrywe  this  teftificatioun  of  that  quhilk  gour 
Lo  /  geves  to  the  Minifl;er  of  Hadingtoun  mair  nor  the  dewtie  of 
gour  Lo  /  tak  /  that  gour  Lo  /  gevis  of  confcience  and  guidwill  the 
quhilk  may  helpe  ws  and  do  na  hinder  to  gour  Lo  /  becaus  We  haue 
agreit  be  the  advyife  of  the  faid  minifl;rie  that  quhair  thai  hawe  ony 
thing  furth  of  the  tua  part  We  falbe  releifit  of  als  mekle  of  the  third 
and  Swa  my  Lord  of  Murray  and  Sir  George  Douglas  dois  the  lyk 


jAc.  VI.]  OF  THE  EARLS  OF  MORTON.  191 

for  our  releif  Lyk  as  this  berar  will  fufficientlie  informe  gour  Lo  /  to 
quhom  it  will  pleis  gour  Lo  /  gif  credeit  /  nocht  doutting  of  gour  Lo  / 
forderance  of  our  weill  /  as  We  wis  gour  Lo  /  profperitie  and  weill  /  We 
remember  our  veray  luiflfeing  commendatioun  to  gour  Lo  /  and  fo  We  reft 

3our  Lo  /  veray  affeftionat  and  loveing  freind 
HaUyruidhoufe  9°  Januarij  Lenox  • 

1603. 
To  My  veray  guid  Lord  the  erle  off  Mortoun  • 

Alexander  fixth  Lord  Home  to  the  Earl  of  Mortoun  • 

194  JMy  Lord  and  luifing  father  I  reiafit  gour  Lo  /  letter  anent  the  repledg- 
ing  of  gour  regaliteis  /  I  haif  ane  fpeciall  dire6tioun  from  his  Majeftie  to 
caus  the  baillies  of  ilk  regalitie  to  be  prefent  with  me  at  the  courtis  and 
to  fuffer  nane  to  be  repledgit  Nochtwithftanding  therof  I  haif  overpaft  all 
gour  Lo  /  regalities  as  I  nethir  haif  nor  intendis  to  do  to  ony  utheris  / 
Lyke  as  I  falbe  redy  upone  all  occafionis  to  fatiffie  gour  Lo  /  commande- 
mentis  So  I  reft  • 

3our  Lo  /  fone  to  ferue  gou 
Peblis  the  xj  of  December  1603  •  Alex  •  L  •  Home  • 

To  my  verie  guid  Lord  and  luiflSt  father 
my  Lord  erl  of  Mortoun  • 

The  Prelbytery  of  Linlithgow  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  • 

195  JVly  Lord  Our  humbill  feruice  in  the  Lord  Jefus  being  rememberit  We 
reffauit  gour  L  /  letter  Villing  us  to  inform  gour  L  /  of  fik  perlbnis  within 
gour  L  /  regalitie  of  Caldercleir  as  ar  gyltie  of  haynous  crymes  aganis 
the  law  of  God  or  difobedient  to  the  difcipline  of  the  kirk  That  gour  L  / 
in  Juftice  court  mycht  minifter  Juftice  to  the  glorie  of  God  "^c  As  to 
gour  Lo  /  defyre  Efter  tryell  had  be  us  for  fatiffeing  of  gour  L  /  letter 
We  could  find  nane  within  the  foirfaid  regalitie  that  had  not  ather  latif- 


192  ORIGINAL  PAPERS  [sec.  xvii. 

feit  the  kirk  alreddie  or  quha  ar  not  prefentlie  under  the  difcipline  of  the 
famin  quhais  havie  fin  fuppois  We  lament  /  git  we  can  not  compleyne  of 
thame  to  gour  L  /  fen  they  ar  fubjeft  to  difcipline  We  fra  our  hartis  do 
prayfe  God  for  your  L  /  gude  affedioun  alwayis  /  quhilk  alfo  witnis  in 
this  gour  L  /  cair  to  have  fin  puneifl  that  God  may  be  glorifeit  Vifling 
that  we  might  have  the  lyk  experience  of  all  the  nobilitie  of  this  land  / 
Earneftlie  befeiking  gour  L  /  alfo  to  have  regard  of  the  miferabill  eftait 
of  that  people  quha  fua  lang  hes  bene  and  git  ar  deftitut  of  the  comfort 
of  the  ghofpel  That  gour  L  /  will  for  the  glorie  of  God  forfie  fum  gude 
meyne  quherby  that  kirk  may  be  plantit  /  quherin  quhen  the  prince  of 
paftouris  fall  appeir  gour  L  /  fall  find  that  it  wes  ane  gude  work  done  to 
his  glorie  •  The  Lord  preferve  gour  L  /  alwayes  Subfcrivit  be  our  Moder- 
ator In  our  name  At  Linlythqw  the  2  day  of  Februar  1 604  • 
3our  L  /  at  all  humbill  feruice  in  the  Lord 
The  brethren  of  the  Prefbiterie  of  Linlithqw  and  in  our  name 
To  the  Rycht  nobill  and  potent  Erie  R  •  Cornwall  Moderator  • 

My  Lord  Erie  of  Mortoun  tc"  • 

J_  he  King  to  the  Earl  of  Morton  • 

196  Right  truftye  and  weilbeloued  coufeing  We  greitt  you  weill  '  Vpoun  fura 
fpeciall  occafionis  of  our  fervice  haveing  thoght  your  repaireing  hither 
to  be  requifite  /  We  ar  thairfoir  to  will  and  defyre  you  vpoun  the  reflaite 
of  this  our  letter  with  all  convenient  fpeid  to  addrefs  your  felf  hither  to 
the  efi'ea  you  may  be  certified  of  our  forder  pleafure  and  will  in  fuche 
thingis  as  We  fall  Impairt  to  you  at  your  cumming  /  wherein  ye  fall  do 
ws  acceptable  fervice  And  fo  We  bid  you  fair  weill  From  our  courte  at 
Whitehall  the  fevint  of  January e  1607  • 

To  our  right  trufty  and  right  welbeloued  cofen  ^liT/Trl/'     '^ 

the  Earle  of  Mortoun  giue  thefe  •  /  -^^^""^^ 


INDEX    OF    KAMES. 


Aberbrothok,  or  Arbroath,  Lord  John  Ha- 
milton, Commendator  of,  39,  57,  85. 

Abbot  of,  85. 

Aberdeen,  provost  of,  [Menzies,]  39. 

Adamsop,  Patrick,  archbishop  of  St.  Andrews ; 
vide  Sanctandrois. 

Alay,  John,  188. 

Alva,  duke  of,  31. 

Andersonis,  143. 

Andro,  Joannes,  clerk  of  the  Privy  Council, 
95,  127. 

Angus,  Archibald,  sixth  Earl  of,  15. 

Archibald,  eighth  Earl  of,  64,  81,  91, 

100,  102,  104,  109,  135,  136,  157,  171. 

George,  Master  of,  5  ;  vide  Douglas. 

James,  Master  of,  157. 

— —  Jean  Lyoun,  Countess  of,  156. 

William,  ninth  Earl  of,  172,  177,  182, 

185. 

Anna  of  Deumark,  Queen  of  James  the  Sixth, 
187. 

Anstruther,  Johnne,  of  that  ilk,  13. 

Arbrothokis,  lord,  39  ;   cide  AberbrotLock. 

Archdeacon,  Daniel,  139. 

Argyll,  Archibald  fifth  Earl  of,   11,  34,  36, 
40,  41,  59. 

2 


Argyll,  Colin  sixth  Earl  of,  88,  100,  108,  113, 

125,  126,  129. 
Arran,  James  third  Earl  of,  11. 
Arthour,  James,  142. 

John,  142. 

Atholl,  John  fourth  Earl  of,  2G,  39,  53,  56, 

89,  100,  108,113. 


Bailye,  Jhone,  176. 

Balfour,  Alexander,  86. 

Mr.  James,   person   of   Flisk,  13;    vid^ 

Balfour,  Sir  James. 
Sir   James,    IS,    of  Pittendreich,    Lord 

President,  46,  48. 

Michael],  of  Burley,  13. 

Balthyok,  [Blair,]  laird  of,  140. 
Barclay,  David,  of  CuUerny,  13. 

David,  of  Strowie,  183. 

Bargany,  [Hamilton  of,]  10(1. 
Bedford,  Earl  of,  20. 
Bellendan,  Alexander,  44. 
Bellenden,  Sir  .John,  28. 
Bellis,  Wille,  41. 
Berwick,  Marishall  of,  72,  74. 
Beteis,  Rowie,  188. 


194 


INDEX  OF  NAMES. 


Beumond,  Sr.  tie,  Ambassador  from  France, 

30. 
Blyth,  James,  1 42. 
Boithwelhauch,  [the  Hamiltons  of,]  83;  the 

eldest  brother  of,  89. 
Bold,  Kobert,  Lord,  56. 
Bochane,  erle  of ;  vide  Buchan. 
Bordeaux,  161. 
Borthuik,  William,  Lord,  100. 
Boswell,  John,  of  Balmuto,  147. 
Bothwell,  James,  Earl  of,  18,  24,  44,  154. 
Bougomyn,  Mr.  Johne,  secretary  to  the  Queen 

Dowager,  7. 
Bowhous,  Peter  in  the,  176. 
Bowston,  Bernard,  44. 
Brechin,   Alexander,   [Campbell,]   bishop   of, 

100,  113. 
Broky,  Archibald,  12S). 

Thomas,  129. 

Brown,  Thomas,  84. 

Bruce,  Alexander,  minister  of  Slanis,  166. 

Buchan,  [Robert  Douglas,]  Earl  of,  39,  56,  64, 

85,  124,  130,  137. 

James,  fifth  Earl  of,  149. 

Buchane,  Christian,  countess  of,  12. 

Buchquhane,  52. 

Buchanan,  Mr.  George,  keeper  of  the  Privy 

Seal,  108. 
Burley,  lady,  123. 
Burnfield,  William,  70. 
Burnfieldis,  70. 


Caithness,  George,  Earl  of,  100,  108,  113. 
Robert  [Stewart],  bishop  of,  100,  108, 

113. 
Cambuskynneth,  Adam,  commendator  of,  1 00, 

109,  135. 
Campbell,    Sir    Duncan,  of   Glenurchy,    177, 

178. 


Carmichael,  James  of,  147. 

John,  younger  of  that  ilk,  81,  185,  186. 

Cathcart,  Allan,  Lord,  50,  100. 

Cawden,  John,  1 67. 

Cessfurd,  laird  of,  1G7;  vide  Kerr. 

Cecill,  Sir  Thomas,  secretary,  37. 

Chaip,  Henrie,  MawhiU,  145. 

Chalmer,  Jlr.  Dauid,  one  of  the  Lords  of  Ses- 
sion, 181. 

Chancellair,  Lord,  [John  Lord  Glammis,]  91, 
95,  102,  104,   109. 

Charteris,  John,  of  Cuthilgurdye,  87. 

Chattelherault,  the  Duke  of,  5,  11,  57,  187. 

Cherie,  Thomas,  notary  public,  27. 

Chisholme,  Michaell,  104. 

Clark,  Mr.,  20. 

Claud,  Lord ;  vide  Hamilton. 

Cleische,  laird  of,  137;  vide  Colvill. 

Cloisburne,  laird  of,  174. 

Cokburn,  Walter,  142. 

Colbrandispeth,  fewer  of,  71. 

Coldinghame,  priour  of,  5G. 

Coldj'ugham,  Alexander,  commendator  of,  100. 

Colvill,  Robert,  of  Cleish,  46,  100;  vid, 
Cleische. 

Colville,  James,  of  Easter  Weymes,  127,  163. 

Comptroller,  the,  [Sir  James  Colvill,]  2  ;  ride 
jMurray. 

Couinghame,  Andro,  103. 

Cornwall,  R.,  moderator  of  the  Presbytery  of 
Linlithgow,  192. 

Cowden,  Mr.  John,  197. 

Craig,  Mr.  Thomas,  advocate,  99,  112. 

Crawfurd,  David,  Earl  of,  100,  132. 

Craufurd,  John,  184. 

Craufurde,  Henry,  145. 

Robert,  iu  Powmylne,  145. 

Thomas,  in  Clachlokie,  146. 

Creichtoun,  Patrick,  of  Lugton,  and  his  lady, 
116,  117. 


INDEX  OF  NAMES. 


195 


Creichtoun,  Sir  Patrick,  of  Cranstounriddell, 

117. 
Crychton,  Mr.  Robert,  advocate,  126. 
Cuke,  Den  Dauid,  6. 
Culros,  Lord  of,  IS.J. 
Cuper,  Leonard  of,  79. 
Curasell,  (Courcelle,)  29. 


Dalgleische,  Mr.  Nicol,  minister,  156. 

Dalua,  Duke,  73. 

Darnley,  Henry ;  vide  Stewart. 

D'Aubigny,  the  Signeur,  119. 

Davidsone,  William,  176. 

Deir,  abbot  of,  [Keith,]  100,  108. 

Demstertouu,  Lawrence,  Kinrois,  l+C. 

D'Espernon,  Duke  of,  1 60. 

Denmark,  King  of,  1(14. 

Dischinton,  Thomas,  27. 

Domda,  Monsieur  de,  160. 

Douglas,  Mr.  Alexander,  71. 

'  Archibald,  of  Kilspindie,  64. 

Archibald,  184. 

Christian,  daughter  of  Douglas  of  Locli- 

leven,  140. 
Elizabeth,  lady,  daughter  of  the  Earl  of 

Mortoun,  165. 
[Margaret  Erskyne],  lady  of  Lochleven  ; 

vide  Erskyne. 

[Agnes  Douglas]  lady  of  Lochleven,  79  ; 

119,  140,  141,  143,  144,  146. 

Gavene,  Bowbedy,  146. 

George,     Master   of    Angus,     5  ;    vide 

Angus. 

Sir  George,  brother  to  the  laird  of  Loch- 
leven, 15. 

George,  sou  natural  to  Arclubald  earl  of 

Angus,  15. 

George,  of  Spittalhaucb,  84. 

George,  of  Kungawie,  127. 


Douglas,  George,  of  Parkheid,  156,  164. 

Sir  George,  190. 

G«orge,  184. 

Henrie,  142. 

Henry,  Mukert  Mylne,  146. 

James   of,    son    of    George    master    of 

Angus,  5. 

James,  of  Buchan,  124,  186. 

James  ;  vide  Slelrose. 

John,  of  Ilalthornden,  64. 

John,  107,  137,  176. 

John,  Kennestoun,  146,  151. 

Patrick,  son  of   Archibald    Douglas  of 

Kilspindie,  64. 

Sir  Robert,  of  Lochleven,  4,  6,  117. 

Robert,  son  of  the  laird  j)f  Lochleven, 

12,  87,  118. 

Robert,  Drumgarland,  1 45. 

i  Robert,  Anuecroche,  145. 
William,  of  Lochleven,  laird  of,  6,  12, 

14,  16,  28,  29,  45,  50-56,  58,  59,  61-63, 

72,  74,  76,  78,  79,  81,  82,  85-87,  90,  102, 

104,   107,    116-123,    127,    129-136,    143, 

147,  148,  154,  155. 

William,  15. 

William,  alias  Kyllie  William,  151. 

Dowglas,  Archibald,  15. 

Dryburghe,  Abbot  of,  41. 

Commendator  of,  [David  Erskine,]  100, 

109. 
Drysdaill,  Johnne,  29. 

James,  78,  79. 

Drumquhasill,    laird    of,    [Cunningham,]    GI, 

100,  113. 
Drumlanrig,  laird  of;  vide  Douglas. 
Dunfermling,  lord  of,  62. 
Robert  [Pitcarne],  commendator  of,  46, 

100,  108,  113,  126. 

Abbot  of,  10,  48. 

Dundee,  J.  [Scrimgeour],  Constable  of,  100. 


196 


INDEX  OF  NAMES. 


Dundie,  provost  of,  [James  Halyburton,]  56. 

Dunkansoun,  D.  Patricius,  6. 

Dunkeld,  J[ames  Paton],  bishop  of,  100,  113. 

Duik,  the  ,•  vide  Chattelherault. 

Dury,  David,  of  that  ilk,  13,  46. 

George,  46. 

George,  Usufructuar  of  Dunfennling,  70. 

Dwne,  laird  of,  58 ;  vide  Erskine. 


Edinburgh,  Provost  and  baillies  of,  40,  183. 
Eglintoun,  Hew,  Earl  of,  109,  113. 
Elizabeth,  Queen  of  England,  20,  32,  33,  35- 

37,  48,  56,  61,  89. 
EUott,  Archie,  of  the  Hill,  154,  155. 

Clemett,  155. 

Elphinston,  Michell,  137. 

Laird  of;  vide  Johnstoun. 

England,  Ambassador  of,  91. 
Ergylis,  lord  of;  vide  Argyll.. 
ErroU,  George,  Earl  of,  4,  8. 

Andrew,  Earl  of,  100,  109. 

Francis,  Earl  of,  165,  166,  168-170. 

Erskine,  Alexander,  of  Gogar,  108. 

Erskene,  John,  Lord,  7. 

Erskyne,  Slargaret,  Lady  of  Lochleven,  6,  7. 

9,  12,  17. 


Feyrne,  John,  27. 

Fiff,  Superintendent  of,  [John  Wynrame,]  52. 

Finlasoun,  176. 

Flemyng,  Malcolm,  Lord,  3,  35,  36. 

Forbes,  Maister  of,  58. 

Forestar,  Henry,  64. 

Sir  James,  of  Corstorphin,  64. 

Forres,  David,  General  of  the  Mint,  28. 
Fourrois,  -John,  44. 
France,  King  of,  30,  119,  143. 
Fyulaysone,  David,  46. 


Galloway,  [Alexander  Gordon,]  bishop  of,  56. 

Giffert,  John,  84. 

Glaramis,  -John,  tenth  Lord,  Lord  Chancellor, 

39,  100. 

Thomas  [Lyon],  Master  of,  148, 169, 184. 

Glencarne,   Alexander,  fifth  Earl  of,  25,  50. 

53-55,  100,  109,  113. 
Gordon,  John,  son  of  the  bishopof  Galloway,  56. 
Gouvernour,  the  Lord,  5  ;  vide  Chattelherault. 
Grahame,  J.,  26. 

John,  41. 

Gray,  Patrick,  Lord,  109. 

Patrick,  Master  of,  100,  109,  113,  146. 

Guthre,  Dene  Dauid,  6. 


Haddington,  minister  of,  [James  Carmichael,] 
190. 

Haitleis,  the,  70. 

Haitlie,  Alexander,  70. 

George,  70. 

Halyburton,  Mr.  James,  [provost  of  Dundee,] 
39,  56,  113. 

Hamilton. — Lists  of  the  persons  of  tiie  Sur- 
name of  Hamilton,  65,  66,  67,  68. 

James,  brother  of  the  laird  of  Grange,  fn. 

John,  of  Grange,  57. 

Lord  Claud,  57, 

Lord  John  ;  vide  Aberbrothok. 

Hanimilton,  Mr.  Thomas  of  Priestsfield,  181. 
Harford,  (Hertford,)  Erlle  of,  37. 

Countess  of;  vide  Katharene. 

Hay,  Alexander,  Clerk  Register,  91,  101. 
126,  154. 

Andro,  4. 

William,  Lord,  of  Yester,  64. 

Henderson,  William,  Commissary  of  Melrose. 

81,  151. 
Henry,  King;  vide  Stewart. 
Henry  the  Third,  King  of  France,  119. 


INDEX  OP  NAMES. 


197 


Uerries,  John,  fifth  Lord,  34,  35,  102,  104, 
106,  108,  113. 

William,  sixth  Lord,  188. 

Hewatt,  P.,  24. 

Hispane,  King  of;  vide  Spain. 

Home,  Alexander,  100. 

Patrick,  of  the  Brumehous,  7. 

Houme,  Mr.  David,  156. 

Sir  James,  100. 

Howntlys,  [Iluntlyis]  137. 
Howburne,  Patrik,  TuUiboill,  1 45. 
Hume,  Alexander,  fifth  Lord,  2G. 

Alexander,  sixth  Lord,  177,  191. 

Alexander,  of  JManderstoun,  64. 

Huntly,  George,  fifth  Earl  of,  38,  39,  41. 

George,  sixth  Earl  of,  158,  169,  170. 

Hutsone,  (Hudson,)  Jhone,  176. 


Incheffray,  abbot  of,  100. 
Innermeith,  James  Lord,  100,  109. 
Inverforrettie,  lord  of,  39  ;  vide  Ogilvy. 
Irland,  Thomas,  43. 


James  the  Fifth,  King,  1,  3,  4. 

the  Sixth,  King  of  Scotland,  27,  40,  43, 

56,  59-61,  63,  69,  72,  73,  75,  83,  88,  89, 
91,  92,  96-98,  101, 102,  104, 106-108, 113, 
116,  122-124,  127-135,  138,  144-146, 149, 
151,  154,  157,  158,  161,  163,  164,  171, 
179,  180,  182-184,  188,  189,  192. 

Johnstoun,  Johne,  brother  of  the  laird  of 
Elphinston,  104. 


Katharene,  dame,  Countess  of  Hartford,  37- 
Keith,  dame  Agnes,  Countess  of  Murray,  17, 
45,  51,  58. 

Master  of,  58. 

Kenneistoune,  guidman  of,  176. 


Ker,  Andro,  of  Fawdonside,  15,  100,  167. 

Johne,  of  Farnyhirst,  8. 

Mark ;  vide  Newbotil. 

Robert,  younger  of  Cessfurd,  61. 

"Walter,  of  Cessfurd,  8. 

WiUiarae,  of  Zair,  84. 

Keyth,  Robert,  of  Canterland,  58. 
Kinloch,  George,  in  Cleish,  146. 
Kinneir,  David,  Bonitoune,  176. 
Kirk,  Commissioners  of  the,  184. 
Kirkaldy,  Sir  William,  of  Grange,  17,  29. 
Knox,  John,  52. 
jMr.  John,  minister  of  Melrose,  167. 


Lamb,  Gilbert,  143,  144. 
Lathokar,  gudman  of,  121. 
Lawmouthe,  Hendrie,  51. 
Laivrie,  John,  Edinburgh,  147. 
Leirmonth,  George,  of  Balcomy,  73. 
Lennox,  Ludoviek,  Dnke  of,  1G3,  173,  190. 

Countess  of,  157. 

Lenox,  Levenax,  Matthew,  Earl  of,  Regent 

of  Scotland,  11,  53,  56,  GO-62,  G4,  69-71. 

Robert,  Earl  of,  125,  126,  138. 

Lesley,  John,  bishop  of  Ross ;  vide  Ross. 

Leslie,  -John,  of  Buchqubanc,  140. 

- —  William,  149. 

Levinax,  Levinox ;  vide  Lennox. 

Lewingstoune,  Mr.  168-170. 

Liddell,  Stewin,  72. 

Lindesay,  Patrick,  Lord,  15,  25,  46,  50,  53, 

5G,  100,  108,  111,  114. 
Lindsay,  .John,  of  Covington,  135,  136. 
Linlithgow,  Presbytery  of,  101. 
Lochinwar,  [Gordon  of,]  113. 
Lochleven,  laird  of;  vide  Douglas. 
Lochlewyne,  lady  of;  vide  Douglas,  Erskyne. 
Logane,  George,  of  Bonnytoune,  1 G2. 

John,  his  brother,  1 62. 

Londoris,  Abbot  of,  187. 


198 


INDEX  OF  NAMES. 


Longuevile,  Duke  of,  160. 
Lowett,  [Lovat,]  tutor  of,  40. 
Lugton,  laird  of,  116  ;  vide  Creichton. 

lady  of,  116. 

Lynlytligw,  William,  44. 

Lyon,  Jeane,  118. 

Lyoun,    Thomas,    of    Baldiikey,    113;    vide 

Glammis. 
Lytill,  Mr.  Clement,  advocate,  09,  1 1 2. 


M'Cdllocu,  Adam,  Marclimout  herald,  12. 
M'Gill,  Mr.  David,  advocate,  99,  112,  181. 
Mr.  James,  of  liankilour,  clerk  register, 

54,  55,  109. 
M'Intoshe,  Lauchlan,  of  Dunnachtane,  171. 

son  of  the  preceding,  171. 

Maitland,   Sir  John,   Lord   Thirlestane,   146, 

147,  150. 

WiUiam,  of  Lethington,  28. 

Manson,  Finlay,  64. 

Mar,  John,  Earl  of.  Lord  Regent,  12,  14,  17, 

26,  41,  45,  46,  50,  53-58,  63,  71-78,  92, 

96,  100,  109,  120,  126. 

John,  Master  of,  88,  100. 

Annabella  [Murray],  Countess  of,  79. 

Marchestoun  [Naper],  laird  of,  178. 
JIarischal,  Merschell,  William,  third  Earl,  8. 

William,  Master  of,  8. 

AYilliam,  Master  of,  108. 

Mary  of  Guise,  Queen  Dowaricr,  7. 

Mary,  Queen  of  Scots,  10-13,  15-18,  21-40. 

Maxwell,   John   of,   brother  of  Robert  Lord 

Maxwell,  2. 

John,  Lord,  86,  100,  109,  113,  179,  ISO. 

Robert,  Lord,  1,  2. 

Robert,  son  of  the  preceding,  1 . 

Mazieres,    Andrew   de,    minister    in    France, 

160-1G2. 
Meldrum,   Grissel,   mother  of   George   Lear- 
month  of  Balcolmy,  73. 


Melginche,  the  gudman  of,  [Mercer,]  141. 
Melrose,  Commendator  of,   [James  Douglas,] 
43,  77,  145,  150,  151. 

chamberlain  of,  81. 

monks  of,  44. 

Melville,  Melwyn,  Sir  Robert  of,  141,  15G. 
Menteith,  William,  fifth  Earl  of,  100,  109. 
Mercer  of  Melginche  ;  vide  Melginche. 
Merser,  Gabriel,  in  Cleish,  146. 

Gabriel,  of  Sawling,  46,  47. 

Meyn,  Thomas,  44. 

Merschell,  Earl  of;  vide  Marischal. 

Monro,  Andro,  of  Newmoir,  140. 

Montago,  Andro,  4. 

Montrose,  John,  third  Earl  of,  100,  108,  113, 

129,  132. 
Moravien  ;  vide  Murray,  bishop  of. 
Mortoun,  James,  Earl  of,  1,  3,  8,  15. 

James,  Earl  of,  Lord  Regent,  15,  26,  28, 

53-55,  62,  63,  69,  74,  80-87,  90,  92,  95, 
97,  98,  101,  102,  104,  106-110,  11.3,  115. 
116,  122,  124,  135,  156. 

William,  Earl  of,   157,  158,  160,   162- 

174,  176-182,  187-192. 

Agnes  [Lesley],  Countess  of,  176,  187. 

Catharine  [Stewart],  Countess  of,  1-3. 

Mowbray,  John,  23.    %.-Cxi  ,  A%</ 
Mowtray,  Henry,  133,  134. 
Mure,  James  and  Mungo,  Langton,  156. 
Murray,  Annabella ;  vide  Mar. 

James,  Earl  of,  Lord  Regent,  13,  14,  17. 

28,  .30,  35,  36,  39,  40,  4.3,  48,  49. 

James,  fourth  Earl,  190. 

Countess  of ;  vide  Keith. 

James,  1 1 9. 

John,  4. 

Patrick,  of  Tibbermuir,  81. 

Sir  William,  of  Tuliibardine,  comptrol- 
ler, 56,  100,  109,  113. 
Murray,  [Patrick  Hepburne,]  bi.shop  of,  40, 
100,  113.  190. 


INDEX  OF  NAMES. 


199 


Navarre,  Henry,  King  of,  160-162. 

Ness,  Artbour  of  the,  57. 

Newbotil,  Mark  [Ker],  commendator  of,  100, 

108,  113,  189. 
Northumberland,  Earl  of,  8,  62,  73-75. 

A.,  Countess  of,  75. 

Noue,  M.  de  la,  160. 


Ogill,  Robert,  Lord,  8. 
Ogilvy,  James,  Lord,  100,  109. 

laird  of  Inverquharity,  39. 

Thomas,  brother  to  the  laird  of  Inuer- 

quharity,  142,  \4i. 
Oliphant,  Mr.  William,  advocate,  141. 
Orchaden,  Ad. ;  vide  Orkney. 
Orkney,  Adam   [Bothwell],   bishop   of,    100, 

109,  113. 

Robert,  Earl  of,  12G. 

Orme,  David,  45,  53-55. 
Ormestoun,  James,  of  that  Ilk,  154. 


Painter,  Charles,  46-48. 

Percy,  Sir  Henry,  8. 

Perth,  Provost  and  baillies  of,  183. 

Shereffisof,  183. 

Phay,  M.  de,  161. 

Pitcarne,  Mr.  Robert,  10;  vide  Dunfermling 

Pittarrow,  laird  of ;  vide  "Wishart. 

Plusgardene,  (Pluscardine,)  priour  of,  144. 

Pope,  [Sixtus  the  Fifth,]  ICO. 

Porterfield,  Robert,  78. 

Prestoun,  laird  of,  188. 

Prince,  [James  the  Sixth,]  40. 

Protasius,  161. 

Pyngill,  George,  28. 

Queen,  the  Dowariar  ;  vide  Mary. 
Queen  of  England  ;  vide  Elizabeth. 
Queens  of  Scotland  ;  vide  Anna,  Mary. 


Quhyte  (Whyte),  Peter,  Portraok,  146. 


Ranuolphe,  Thomas,  72,  74,  89. 
Rankeilour,  laird  of ;  vide  M'Gill. 
Regent,  Lord  ;  vide  Mar,  Mortoun,  Murray. 

Earls  of. 
Richardsoun,  Mr.  Robert,  [commendator  of  St. 

Mary's  Isle,  and  treasurer  to  Queen  Jlary,] 

10,  28. 
Riche,  Gavis,  35. 
Robertsone,  Duncan,  4. 
Ross,  [John  Lesley,]  bishop  of,  35,  40. 
Ross,  Archedean  of,  40. 
Rothes,  Andrew,  Earl  of,  106,  109,  158. 
Rutherfurd,  Andrew,  of  Hundolee,  82. 

Charles,  120. 

George,  of  Farnytoun,  82. 

Geort;e,  of  Fernitoun,  59,  60,  72,  80. 

John,  of  Hunthill,  82. 

Richard,  of  Edzerston,  82. 

Rutherfuird,  Johne,  Know,  120. 
Ruthven,  Alexander,  15. 

Patrick,  third  Lord,  15. 

AVilliam,  fourth  Lord,  25,  50,  81,  100. 

102,  104,  106,  108,  111,  113,  114.  126. 

William,  Master  of,  15. 

Ruthvene,  Maistress  Lilias,  17o'. 


Sanctandrois,  Archbishop  of,  [John  Hamil- 
ton,] 34,  35,  41,  57. 

Archbishop  of,  [.John  Douglas,]  78. 

Archbishop  of,  [Patrick  Adamson,]  121, 

141. 

Prior  or  Commendator  of.  James  [Stew- 
art], 6,  9. 

Convent  of,  6. 

Provost  of,  39. 

Sanctcolme,  commendator  of,  James  [Stewart], 
126. 


•200 


INDEX  OF  NAMES. 


Saiujuliar,  Edwanl,  Lord,  2G,  174. 

.Scotland,  Cliancellar  of,  G4,  91,  95,  101. 

Lords  of,  48. 

Scharpe,  Mr.  John,  advocate,  99,  112,  135, 
13fi. 

•Scliaw,  John,  Latbangy,  146. 

Scott,  Robert,  notary  public,  17. 

Sir  William,  of  Balwery,  13,  l-C. 

— —  Mr.  William,  181. 

Sir  Walter,  of  Branxholme,  43. 

Setoun,  George,  Lord,  29,  73,  77. 

Robert,  Maister  of,  100. 

Seytoun,  J.,  of  Tulibodye,  100. 

Shawe,  Johne,  14. 

William,  1 4. 

Skynner,  George,  39. 

Somerwell,  Hew,  Lord,  100. 

Soraerville,  Robert,  189. 

Spain,  Philip,  King  of,  32,  33. 

Ambassador  of,  20. 

St.  Andrews  ;  vide  Sanctandrois. 

St.  Mary  Isle,  commeudator  of;  vide  Rich- 
ardson. 

Sfeidman,  Alexander,  Kinros,  145. 

Stevinsoun,  John,  78, 

Stewart,  Abraham,  of  Monbletoun,  130. 

Andrew,  Lord,  of  Ochiltrie,  26,  50. 

Elizabeth,    daughter   of  James   earl   of 

Murray,  17. 

Henry,  Lord  Darnley,  14,  15,  20. 

Lord  James,  Prior  of  St.  Andrews,  6,  9  ; 

vide  Murray,  Earl  of. 

James,  100,  113. 

James,  son  to  John  Earl  of  Buchan,  132. 

John,  of  Tracquair,  100,  141. 

John,  of  Aldone,  44. 

William,  82. 

Strang,  Mr.  Richard,  advocate,  99,  112. 

Strudgeon,  Adam,  189. 

James,  189. 

Sussex,  Earl  of,  56. 


Sym,  Mr.  Alexander,  advocate,  99,  112. 
Sympyl,  Robert,  Lord,  26,  50. 


TnES.\UREn,  the,  4,  91,  130,  184. 
Thomson,  Peter,  Hay  Herald,  15. 
Thyrlstane,  lord  of,  [Sir  John  Maitland,]  146, 

147,  150. 
Tod,  Hew,  137. 

Trabrowne,  laird  of,  [Heriot,]  56. 
Traill,  Captain,  83. 
Traquair,  Lord  of,  189. 
Treasurer ;  vide  Theasurer. 
Tullibardine,  Comptrollare ;  vide  Murray,  Sir 

William. 
Turing,  Katharine,  117. 


UcHiLTRiE,  lord  of  ;  vide  Stewart. 

Urquhart,  James,  1 44. 

Urquhard,  Walter,  Sheriff  of  Cromarty,  64. 


Wallace,  Robert,  in  Melrose,  44. 

Wartlaw,  (Wardlaw,)  James,  30. 

Weir,  Johne,  189. 

Wemeis,  Wester,  laird  of,  147. 

Wemeis,  young  laird  of,  79,  121. 

Wemis,  dene  -James,  6. 

Willie,  the  lad,  29. 

Wischart,  Sir  John,  of  Pittarrow,  17,  39,  58. 

Wod,  Mr.  John,  secretary  to  the  Regent  Earl 

of  Murray,  45,  52. 
Wynram,  Dearr  John,  6. 


YorNO,  Adam,  in  Middilrig,  183. 

George,  69. 

Henry,  183. 

William,  183. 


INDEX    OF    PLACES. 


Aberbrothok  ;  ricfc  Arbroatb. 

AberdeeD,  Town  of,  10,  39,  40,  73,  166. 

Aberdour,  122,  156. 

Alloway,  16. 

Angus,  39. 

Arbroath,  (Aberbrothok,)  119. 

Auchterhouse,  118,  176,  177. 


Balmuto,  148. 

Bannettill  and  Balgedie,  lands  of,  142. 

Berwick,  56. 

Bischopshire,  80. 

Blais,  7. 

Borthwick,  Place  or  Castle  of,  23. 

Bourdeaux,  161. 

Bowtoun,  (Bolton,  in  England,)  36. 

Brechin,  4,  169,  170. 

Briseilis,  (Brussels,)  83. 

Burley,  barony  of,  14,  123. 

Bumgranys,  alias  Burnsyde,  lan^ls  of,  87 

Buthil,  barony  of,  2. 


Cai.dbrcleir,  regality  of,  191. 
Carbarry  Hill,  25. 
Carriden,  lands  of,  57. 


Carrick,  59. 

Chartres,  town  of,  in  France,  160. 

Cliddisdale,  34,  75. 

Coldbrandspeth,  71,  138,  153,  158. 

Corriemukloch,  177. 

Craigmillar,  56. 

Crawfurd  John,  34. 

Creichtoun,  19. 

Cromarty,  Water  of,  127-129,  131,  132. 

Cupar,  (Cupar-Angus.)  80. 

Cuthill,  87. 


Dalkeith  House,  and  Castle,  5,  1 9,  56,  80, 

102-107,  117,  129-133,  171. 
Dee,  Water  of,  128,  129,  131,  132. 
Domdy,  160. 
Douglas,  91. 
Douglasdale,  34. 
Douglas  Water,  34,  35. 
Drumfries,  179,  189. 
Drumlanrig,  34,  175. 
Drygrange,  44. 

Dumbarton  Castle,  28,  30,  31,  36,  38. 
Dunbar  Castle,  18. 
Dundee,  39,  144,  176,  177,  188. 
Dunfermling,  54,  123. 


2e 


202 


INDEX  OF  PLACES. 

f-NVEHNESs,  Castle  of,  140,  142. 


Dnnfermling,  Abbey  of,  10. 

Dunkell,  173,  174- 

Dminottar,  52,  .58.  122. 

Dunnonn,  31.  Jedburgh,  16,  81,  82. 

Duplin,  141. 

Dury,  place  of,  70,  71. 

KElLtOCR,  177. 

Kerse,  57. 
Edinburgh, /)a««2m.  Kilros,  4. 

Castle    of,    ]  8,    30,    36,    40,    73,    92,      Kinghorn,  mains  of,  1 43 

101-106,    110-115,   125,    135,    136,    182,      Knokdolien,  148. 
]90.  Know,  the,  120. 

Edmestoun,  56.  Kynloss,  40. 

Eglisgreg,  kirk  of,  14.  Kynneill,  lands  of,  57. 

Kynross,  barony  of,  176. 


Falkland,  Palace  of,  1,  139,  140,  163,  1{ 

183. 
Fetterlether,  lauds  of,  133. 
Finlarg,  178,  179. 
Forth,  Water  of,  131,  132. 
Fossaway,  4. 
Fowlis,  mains  of,  176. 
Fjrfe,  85;  sherrifdom  of,  159. 


Galloway,  41. 
Gilmertoun,  56. 
Glamniis,  170. 
Glasgow,  34,  41,  75. 
Glenbervy,  172,  177. 
Grangemuir,  1 56. 


Langhope,  S. 

Ijangnewtoun,  59,  60.  167. 

Largis,  33. 

Leith,  70-72,  74,  77,  78,  143,  163. 

Lethindie,  133. 

I^evinax,  or  Lennox,  75. 

Liddisdaill,  22. 

Lindores,  176. 

Linlithgow,  57,  153,  192. 

Lochlevin,  Castle  and  Island  of,  6-13,  24-26. 

29,  73,  123. 
Lochmaben,  35. 
Logyalmond,  168,  169. 
London,  147. 

Longnewtoun  ;  vide  Langnewtoun. 
Lugtonn.  116,  117,  156. 


HALYRroEuousE,  Abbey  .and  Palace  of,  7, 
84-87,  89-91,  124-128,  147,  149,  154-158, 
165,  184,  191. 

Hammiltoun.  30,  57. 

Howburn.  84. 


Melrose,  Abbey  and  Town  of,    19,  4.'!,  44, 

77,  151,  167. 
Mernis,  the,  39. 
Montaubau,  161. 
Montrose,  169.  ITO. 


INDEX  OF  PLACES. 


203 


Musselburgh,  56. 


Newcastle,  15,  56. 
Newhouse,  165. 
Nisbitt,  barony  of,  120. 
Nithisdale,  41. 
Norhara,  8. 
Norroway,  163,  164. 


Slanis,  kirk  of,  165,  166. 

Spittlehaiicli,  84. 

StevinstouD,  84. 

Stincher,  50. 

Stirling,  or  Striviling,  Castle  of,  26,  29,  37, 
40,  45,  53-57,  60,  61,  63,  71,  73,  79,  89, 
91,  108,  113-116,  119-123,  145,  146. 

Stirlingshire,  Strivilingshire,  168. 

Strachquhur,  (Strachur,)  42. 

Striviling ;  vide  Stirling. 


Paris,  119,  143. 

Peblis,  16,  191. 

Perth,  or  St.  Johnstoun,  72,  138,   141,  153, 

158. 
Pittenweem,  144. 
Portmook,  43. 
Poy tiers,  in  France,  161. 
Prestoun,  mains  of,  2. 
Prestoun,  188. 


QUEENSFERRY,    182. 


Reidswyhe,  the,  81. 

Rochelle,  (in  France,)  142-144,  162. 

Ruthven.  81,  1.34. 


Tantallan  ;  riilf  Thomptallon. 

Terreglis,  188. 

Teviotdale,  56,  120. 

Thoire  in  Xaintonge,  (in  France,)  160. 

Thoraptallon,  (Tantallan,)  69,  86. 

Tweddcil,  168,  169. 


Upsio,  (in  Norway,)  1C4. 


West  Marches,  the,  179. 
West  Port,  (Edinburgh,)  104. 
Whitehall  Palace,  192. 
Woodfield,  lands  of,  156. 
Wraith,  place  and  fortalice  of,  189. 


St.  Andrews,  City  and  Castle  of,  6,  17,  43, 
46,  47,  52-55,  78,  121,  138-141,  184. 

Priory  of,  190. 

St.  Johnstoun  ;  vide  Perth. 

St.  Serffis  Inch,  (Lochleven,)  29. 


York,  36. 


Zeland,  83. 


EDINnURGU  ;    T.  CONSTABLE,   PKINTER  TO  HBK   MAJESTY. 


