^^./inr-  C 


^C^  AC.  ij- 


12,  South  Castle  Street.  Ei^nibu/jh. 


/  /  / 


/ct  yi^  /u  J.  /Ui  tn<?  /ii  /j//.^/l 

/         / 

/n/i.cU/^    /^  /L/^//^ 


/>t^<^A 


^./...    X 


TLM' 


'<-     C      ///a^A  /My^.  4 


\ 


Af^^-e^oi  4x/aL t^   /Ln. *.<j-^QjU^      As 
//'rnc  ^C44^XV^ 

^ — 7/ 


/ 


/V;?t«^-tn.».      //J     /C'^*~  (^t^ 


nYC  Mi^-^f^V^ 


/fe/vocct^C^  AJ-Yir^acK 


>^ 


RECISTRUM      MON  A  STERI I 


DE      CA  MB  USKE  NNE  TH. 


PRESENTED 


CIjc  ftttmbcrs  of  tljc  (0>rampian  Cliib. 


THE    MAROUESS    OF    BUTE. 


I 

Conttuts. 

INTRODUCTION, 

PAGE 

v-cxl 

Description  of  the  Register  of  1535, 

v-xii 

The  Original  Charters  now  lost, 

xiii 

Transcript  by  Walter  Macfarlane,  the  Antiquary,  1 7  38, . 

xiv 

Xotice  of  Macfiirlane,    ..... 

xv-xvii 

History  of  the  Abbey,                 .... 

xviii 

Lands,  Fishings,  etc,  belonging  to  tlie  Abbey,    . 

xxi 

Poverty  of  the  Abbey,                .... 

xxvi 

The  Earlier  Records  of  the  Abbey, 

xxix 

Recently  discovered  Charters,    .... 

XXX 

Historical  Events  connected  with  Cambuskenneth, 

xxxvi 

Parliaments  held  at  Cambuskenneth,  1 3 14- 1 3  2  G , 

xxxix 

TiiE  Aeeots  of  Cambuskenneth, 

xlviii 

I.  William,  1147,  to  XX.  John,  1473,    . 

xlviii 

XXI.  Henry  Arnot,  Treasurer,  1473-1504,  . 

Ixiv 

XXII.-XXIII.  David  and  Andrew,  1504-1510, 

Ixxi 

XXIV.  PatrickPantar,  1510-1517,    . 

Ixxii 

XXV.  Alexander  Mylne,  1517-1548. 

Ixxxviii 

XXVI.  John  Erskine,  circa  1550, 

xcvii 

XXVII.  David  Pantar,  1552-1558,      . 

xcviii 

XXVIII.  Adam  Erskine,  1562-1608, 

XXIX.  The  Honourable  Alexander  Erskine,  1608-]  640,  cxiii 

Ei'ection  of  the  Abbey  into  the  Lordship  of  Cardross,      .              .  cxi.x 

"  Mar's  Wark,"  in  Stirling,        .....  cxxv 

Royal  and  Eminent  Persons  buried  at  Cambuskenneth,    .              .  cxxviii 


II                                                   CONTENTS. 

l'AGE 

TABULA,  ....... 

cxli 

REGISTRUM  S.  MARIE  DE  CAMBUSKEXNETH, 

1-318 

ABSTRACT  OF  THE  REGISTER, 

319-400 

ROLL  OF  MEMBERS  OF  THE  GRAMPIAN  CLUB,      . 

405 

IXDEX  OF  PERSONS, 

409 

INDEX  OF  PLACES,        ..... 

432 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Title-page :  tlie  West  Dour  of  Cambuskenneth  Abbey,  rostored  from  a 

fragment  now  remaining. 

Signature  of  Mr.  James  Foulis,  Clork-Register, 

vi  and  4 

The  Royal  Arms  of  Scotlaml,  as  in  the  Original  Register,  1535,       hetwecn  vi  and  vii 

The  First  Page  of  the  Original  Manuscript  Register,  1535,     .            „ 

viii  and  ix 

The  Armorial  Bearings  of  Ale.xander  Myhie,  Abbot  of  Cam- 

buskenneth,  and  Mr.  James  Foulis,  Clerk-Register,  and 

"  ExasticTOi,"  1535,      ....... 

X  and  xi 

Signature  of  Jolin  Earl  of  Mar  in  1693, 

xiv 

Portrait  of  Walter  Macfarhxne,  the  Autiquarj',  and  Transcriber 

of  the  Register  of  Cambuskenneth  in  1738,        .                hetween 

xvi  aml  xvii 

Seal  of  Abbot  John,  1292,    ..... 

lii 

Seal  of  AbbotPatrick,  (v>m  U40,      .... 

Ix 

Signatures  of  Abbot  Henry  Arnot,  1492  and  1501,   . 

kx 

Signature  of  Alibot  David,  150G,       .... 

Ixxi 

Seal  of  Abbot  Patrick  Pantar,  1510, 

Ixxxvi 

Signature  of  King  James  the  Fourth,  1512,  . 

Ix.xxvii 

Signature  of  Patrick  Pantar,  as  Secretary,  1512, 

Ixxxvii 

CONTENTS. 


Lease  by  tlie  Bisliop  of  Dunkekl,  Gtli  August  1505,  holograpli 

of  AlexanJer  Mylue,  as  Notary,  afterwarJs  Abliot,  .  hdween  xciv  aml  xcv 

Siguatures  of  Abbot  Alexander  Mylue,  1524,  .  .  xcv  «yw?  xcvi 

Siguature,  etc,  of  Abbot  David  Pantar,  1557,  .  .  .    cii  ««</ civ 

Seal  of  the  Conveut  of  Cambuskenneth,  1562,  .  .  .  cvii 

Letter  by  Adam  Erskiue,  Commendator  of  Camljuskenueth,  to 

the  Laird  of  Duu,  youuger,  lOth  Juue  157'J,       .  hetiree/i  cviii  hikI  cix 

Siguatures  of  King  James  the  Sixth  aud  Adam,  Commendator,  .  cxii 

Holograijh  Letter  of  Kiug  James  the  Sixtli  to  "  Jlion  Slaiti.s" 

(Johu  Earl  of  Mar),       .  .     ■         .  .  hetweeii  cxxii  anil  cxxiii 

Holograph  Letter  of  Kiug  James  the  Sixth  to  "  Lady  Minny" 

(Anuabella  Murray,  Dowager  Countess  of  Mar),  .,     cxxii  ajid  cxxiii 

"  Mar's  Wark,"  Stirliug,  with  Ver.ses  carved  above  the  Doors,       „  cxxvi  nml  cxxvii 

House  of  Betou's  Mill,  Banuockburn,  in  whicli  Kiug  James 

the  Third  was  killed,  llth  Juue  1488,  .  .  .  cxxxi 

Mouument  to  King  James  the  Third  aud  his  Queen,  erected 

by  Queeu  Victoria  at  Cambuskeuueth  in  18G4,  hrtureii  cxxxiv  and  cx.xxv 

Coffer  or  Offertory  Box  of  the  AI)I:(ey  of  Cambuskeuueth,  from 
the  original,  found  iu  the  Ituins  of  the  Abbey.  A  beauti- 
ful  specimen  of  early  fifteenth  century  irou-work.  (The 
property  of  Mr.  Paton,  Duufermline),    ....  cxxxix 

The  Tower  of  Cambuskenueth,  ....  Iietireen  cxl  tmd  cxli 

Corbels  and  Gurgoyles  at  Cambuskenneth  Tower,       .  .       „        cxl  aiid  cxli 

Groiuing  of  the  Turret  of  Cambuskeuueth  Tower,       .  .       „        cxl  nnd  cxli 

Monogram — probably  "Monasterivm  S.  Marie  de  Camvs- 
kenuet,"  on  supposed  Key-Stone  of  Cambuskeuueth,  from 
the  original  at  AVesterton,  .  .  .       „        cxl  aml  cxli 

Canopy  of  Mural  Pauelliugs  at  Cambuskenneth  Abbey,  .        „        cxl  and  cxli 


IV                                                     CONTENTS. 

M(juldings,  etc,  at  Camhuskeimeth  Abbey,    . 

rAOE 

hetween  cxl  and  cxli 

Carved  Stones  at  Cambuskenneth  and  "  Mar's  Wark"  in  Stirlin 

g,  „       cxl  aiul  cxli 

Plan  of  the  Foundations  of  Cambuskenneth  Alibey,    . 

,,        cxl  mul  cxli 

View  of  the  Kiver  Forth  from  Camluiskenneth  Tower, 

„        cxl  und  cxli 

llluminated  Letters  in  tlie  Register  of  Cambuskenneth, 

hehceen       2  aml  3 

Charter  by  King  Robert  the  Bruce,  of  the  Mill  of  Arringrosk, 

lOthJuue  1324,        ..... 

8  and  9 

Charter  by  King  William  the  Lion,  of  a  toft  above  Harth 

(Airth),  29th  September  1214, 

28  and  29 

Charter  by  King  Robert  the  Bruce,  precejjt  for  teinds  of  Buth- 

kennar,  17th  Sejitember  1371, 

GO  and  61 

Precept  })y  King  James  the  First,  for  teinds  of  Buthkennar, 

2d  September  1424,                .... 

64  and  65 

Charter  l)y  King  David  the  First,  with  coiisent  of  his   son 

Henry,  of  the  lands  of  Cambuskenneth,  etc,  circa  1147, 

70  and  71 

Charter  by  King  David  the  First,  of  the  Church  of  Clack- 

mannan,  etc,  ifH/t' 1 153,         .... 

„         76  arul  77 

Charter  by  King  Malcolm  the  Fourth,  of  the  Churcli  of  Clack- 

mannan,  c/rot  1160,                .... 

„         78  and  79 

Charter  by  King  AVilliam  tlie  Lion,  of  a  Merk  of  Silver  in 

Crail,  circa  1178,        . 

88  and  89 

Charter  liy  Kiug  William  the  Lion,  of  the  Church  of  Forteviot, 

circa  1 175,     . 

„     132  and  133 

Charter  by  King  David  the  First,  of  Ketliston,  cirai  1150,     . 

„     250«»(Z251 

CoIIected  Seals  and  Signatures,         .... 

401-404 

Description  of  the  Register  of  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth 

MADE  IN  THE  YEAR  1535. 

Of  all  the  Registers  of  tlie  ancient  religious  houses  of  Scotland, 
the  Register  of  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth  is  the  only  one  which 
has  been  specially  authenticated  by  royal  and  judicial  authority. 

Alexander  Mylne,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth  iu  the  reign  of 
James  the  Fifth,  who  was  the  first  President  of  the  Court  of 
Session  established  by  that  monarch,  beiug  a  lawyer  and  historian, 
as  well  as  an  ecclesiastic,  kuew  the  value  and  importance  of  a  large 
collection  of  early  charter  muniments.  He  fouud  those  of  his 
Abbey — some  of  them  dating  from  the  middle  of  the  twelfth 
century — going  rapidly  to  decay ;  and  to  prevent  the  injury  which 
might  arise  from  their  loss,  he  took  steps  to  procure  a  warrant 
from  the  King  for  their  trauscription.  A  petitiou  was  preseuted  to 
the  Lords  of  Council  by  the  Abljot  aud  Convent,  settiug  forth  that 
the  charters  and  evidents  belongiug  to  them,  hitherto  kept  iu  the 

b 


vi  INTRODUCTION. 

Abbey,  had,  from  its  damp  situation,  already  suffered  mucli  from 
mildew,  wliich  was  uot  ouly  destroying  the  seals  and  writing  but 
the  very  parchments  themselves,  aud  that  so  quickly,  that  unless 
some  remedy  was  speedily  applied,  they  would  soou  be  utterly 
destroyed.  They  therefore  requested  that  the  charters  and  evidents 
should  be  trausumed  and  trauscribed  in  the  form  of  a  Ijook,  written 
on  parchment,  autheuticated  by  the  signatures  of  the  Council  and 
Clerk-Eegister,  aud  by  the  King's  seal.  On  the  24th  of  July  1535, 
the  Lords  of  Council,  after  due  intimation  to  all  parties  interested, 
ordained  that  a  transumpt  of  the  charters  aud  other  ^mts  shoukl  be 
made,  which  shoukl  have  the  same  force  iu  all  time  comiug  as  the 
originals,  aud  as  if  each  was  separately  inserted  in  an  Act  of  his 
Majesty's  Council. 

The  transcription  thus  ordered  was  duly  executed  in  a  folio 
volume  of  one  hunch'ed  and  seventy-eight  leaves  of  vellum,  on  which 
were  engrossed  trauscripts  of  two  hundi'ed  and  twenty-five  charters 
of  lands  and  other  property  granted  to  the  Abbey,  and  of  Papal  bulls 
and  other  muuiments  relating  either  to  the  property  or  to  the 
ecclesiastical  business  of  the  Abbey.  At  the  end  of  the  transcript 
of  each  charter  the  Cierk-Register,  Mr.  James  Foulis  of  Colinton, 
attests,  in  this  form,  tliat  it  agrees  with  the  original : — 


REGISTER  OF  CAMBUSKENNETH,  1535. 


The  muniments  are  engrossed  iu  the  Register  alphabetically, 
according  to  the  names  of  the  lands  and  chiirches,  fishings,  and 
other  subjects  with  which  they  deal.  Thus  the  charters  of  the  lands 
of  Arngrosk,  Alva,  and  Alloa  are  placed  first  in  the  Register,  while 
the  foundation-charter  of  the  Al^bey,  and  the  confirmation  of  it, 
which  are  much  earlier  in  date,  and  from  theii'  importance  might  be 
expected  to  appear  first  in  the  Register,  are  pkxced  after  all  the  docu- 
ments  containiiig  hiuds  whose  names  begin  with  the  letters  A  aud  B. 

Great  care  was  bestowed  on  the  preparatiou  of  the  Register.  It 
is  written  in  a  plain,  distiuct  and  legible  haud,  of  which  the  character 
is  well  showu  in  the  facsimile  of  the  transcript  of  the  original 
charter  of  foundatiou  by  Kiug  David  the  First,  and  of  other  royal 
charters,  which  are  given  in  this  vokime.  The  whole  volume  was 
eugrossed  by  the  same  ■\viiter ;  and  there  are  occasioually  slight 
correctious,  with  here  aud  there  a  blauk  supplied  by  the  hand  of 
the  Clerk-Register,  which  show  that  his  attestatiou  was  more  than 
formal. 

An  impressiou  of  the  Great  Seal  of  Kiug  James  the  Fifth  was 
origiually  appeuded  to  the  vokime  by  a  strong  cord  of  purj^le 
and  yellow  silk.  This  kirge  seal  may  have  been  looked  upou  as  au 
iucouveuieut  appendage  to  the  book,  or  it  may  kave  been  aj^pro- 
priated  by  some  coUector  of  seals  ;  but  kowever  tkis  may  be,  it  kas 
been  removed,  and  tke  cord  aloue  remaius. 

Tke  Register  kas  for  a  froutispiece  tke  Royal  Arms  of  Scotland, 
tke  lion  rampaut  on  a  skield  or,  witk  tke  double  tressm'e,  supported 


INTEODUCTION. 


by  a  singlc  unicorn,  collarccl  aud  chaiued,  in  a  recumbent  position, 
haviug  tlie  national  acliievemeut  resting  ou  his  back.  The  shielcl  is 
surmountecl  by  a  large  regal  crowu,  aucl  euvii'onecl  by  a  gokl  collar 
of  thistles.  From  the  collar  depoucls,  at  the  side  of  the  unicorn,  a 
medallion  of  Saiut  Aucbew.  Ou  each  side  of  the  shiekl  is  placed 
the  initial  ktter  of  Kiug  James  the  Fifth,  with  the  figm'e  5.  On 
a  scroll  below  is  the  motto  "lu  mi  Defens."  A  facsimile  of  this 
illumiuation  is  given  in  the  present  work.  The  first  page  of  the 
Eegister  is  illuminated  iu  the  style  of  au  ancient  missal,  with  a  floral 
border,  aud  of  this  a  facsimile  is  also  giveu.  This  page  contains  the 
fii'st  part  of  the  warrant  of  the  King  and  Couucil  for  the  trauscrip- 
tion,  the  iuitial  letter  of  the  King  being  highly  oruameutal. 

At  the  end  of  the  Eegister,  and  opposite  the  List  engrossed  page, 
are  blazoned  the  armorial  bearings  of  the  two  officials,  Abbot  Mybie 
and  the  Ckrk  Register  Foulis,  who  were  principally  coucerued  in 
obtaiuLug  aud  superintending  the  trauscriptiou  of  the  Eegister.  The 
arnis  of  the  former  are  a  shiekl  restiug  ou  a  cross,  argent  three 
cushions,  2  and  1,  gules,  aud  for  crest  a  cross,  with  the  motto  on  a 
scroll  beneath  "  Confido."  The  arms  of  Mr.  James  Foulis,  Clerk- 
Eegister,  are  argent,  three  laurel  kaves,  with  the  motto  on  a  scroll 
beueath,  "Ne  Qvid  Niniis." 

Between  these  two  shiekls  the  following  liues  are  ^^Titten  : — 

"  Fecit  Alexander  Cambuskynnetheus  abbas, 
Qua  fortha  ambiguis  It  sinuosis  aquis, 
Has  veteres  carie  exesas  transcribere  cartas, 


('% 


c»w; 


^^*-> 


I^  #,»,iS^ 'yH*^  ^***^  "^  "^***^ 

i^^««vm*»»^&^  f^*^  «<-,«»t«^6»H^*^« 

r&6»»j  ««fe^t-i^^il»»*  pr^mw^COftiMA^J^^wtteim»!^ 

\<,stf>ifi.^**^^'^<^''^^'*^  <»»^>«6^  »»j_ 

i  Qfftyrar)  ^  ;pc»^m+»*»»«j^ifft  M  n»<»»wa/l  |».^f;i»ivt>i^ 


<o»»oic>«»v<w  eti»<tti«t>»<^»^f«i»»i'  ^    ) 


1  C&Mty  ^ 


^!^v 


REGISTER  OF  CAMDUSKENNETH,  1535. 


Sic  reparat  sancti  jura  vetusta  loci. 

Defuit  haud  operi  noster  labor  omnia  nostra 

Instrumeuta  manu  sepe  uotata  docent." 

A  facsimile  of  tlie  page  of  the  Eegi.ster  containing  these  annorial 
bearings  and  lines  "will  be  found  in  the  present  volume.  This  fac- 
simile,  and  those  mentioned  above,  have  been  made  a  little  smaller 
than  the  originals,  to  suit  the  size  of  the  printed  page. 

Prefixed  to  the  Eegister  is  a  Table  of  Contents,  extending  to 
six  folios,  which  gives  the  designation  of  each  charter  or  other  writ 
in  the  Eegister,  without,  however,  stating  their  terms  or  import.' 

A  description  of  this  Eegister  was  given  by  Mr.  Eichard 
Augustine  Hay,  commonly  called  Father  Hay,  aliout  two  centmies 
ago,  at  which  time  the  Great  Seal  of  King  Jamcs  the  Fifth  was  still 
appended  to  it.  Under  the  head  of  "  Kamiskeunethum,  or  Campus 
Kennetlii,"  the  Father  says, — "  I  have  seen  a  very  fiue  book  in  parch- 
ment  containiug  the  Eecords  of  this  house  in  my  Lord  Tarbat's  hand, 
the  broad  seal  appended  to  a  cord  of  silk  passing  through  every  leife. 
Every  page  of  the  book  was  signed  by  Fowles,  Eegister  in  the  days  of 
King  James  the  fifth.  On  the  first  leife,  there  is  a  scutcheon  of  our 
Scots  arms  EntowTcd  with  a  Cordon  green,  to  which  hangs  a  medale 
of  eight  Corners,  whereupon  Saint  Andrews  is  represented.  This  gave 
occasion  to  the  Late  institution  of  that  Order.  Ujjon  the  gate  as  you 
enter  Linlithgow  Palace,  there  is  likewise  a  scutcheon  en^droud  with 

'  On  a  blank  folio  at  the  begiimmg  of  the         thecse  Facultatis  Juridicte   Edinburgi,  A.   4. 
Eegister  is  this  marking  :   "  Ex  Libris  Biblio-         6.  and  34.  1.  2." 


INTRODUCTION. 


a  Cordon  composd  of  tbistles  aud  Saint  Andrews,  wherto  hangs  a 
medale  representing  that  Apostle.  In  the  house  of  Weems,  King 
James  the  fifth  is  paiuted  with  a  green  Ribljon  about  his  neck,  and  a 
medale  of  Saint  Andi-ews  hanging  therto,  and  on  his  mantle  a  cross 
sutch  as  our  knights  have,  all  which  I  take  to  proceed  from  the  fancie 
of  the  Workcmen,  having  found  no  solid  grouud  to  believe,  that  there 
was  any  sutch  order  in  the  world  before  King  James  the  Seventh. 
What  arguments  the  Eegister  produced,  have  no  solidity,  and  what 
is  said  by  Sir  George  ]\I'Kenzie  for  asserting  tkat  business  is  alto- 
gether  false.  I  myself  having  shown  him  that  AVilliam  Sinclare, 
Earle  of  Orkney  and  Cathnes,  in  his  disposition  of  Rosline  and  Pent- 
land  to  his  sone  Sir  Oliver,  takes  no  such  title  as  knight  of  Saint 
Andrews,  which  nevertheless  the  Advocat  had  alledged  iu  his  Genea- 
logies,  for  proveing  the  Antiquity  of  that  Order  of  Knights,  who,  ac- 
cording  as  King  James  the  Seventh  establishd  them,  carried  a  purple 
Ribbon  about  their  neck,  with  a  plain  gokl  medale  Oval  hanging 
therto.  On  the  one  side  w^as  a  Saint  Andrews  on  his  crosse,  and  on 
the  other  a  thistle.  On  their  cloaks  and  coats  they  bore  in  the  begin- 
ning  a  fower  square  crosse  of  Saint  Andrews,  or  a  saltier :  in  the  midle 
there  was  a  Thistle  emnrond  with  those  words,  '  Nemo  me  impune 
lacesset.'  The  whole  is  embroidred  in  silver  and  blew  silk.  Some 
short  time  thereafter,  the  Earle  of  Arrane  changed  the  Eibbon,  and 
took  a  blew  Eibbon,  which  he  carried  over  his  shoulder ;  and  in  Scot- 
land  my  Lord  Perth,  Chancellour,  and  Duke  Gordon  alterd  the 
medale,  and  tooke  a  medale  ovall  em-iched  with  Diamonds,  and  as  for 


l^^cttpmat  mnia|wmmttrmloni/ 
iXn^fuirliftttO  o;m  nofnt  lfttqj:ommiitifAf^ 
jXj^fmimctHjitflmi  fcp:  nomm tDmuvi 


FATHER  HATS  DESCRIPTION  OF  TIIE  REGISTER.  xi 

the  cross  wliicli  was  upon  their  cloaths,  they  added  fower  flower  de 
luces  of  sHver  to  fiU  up  the  fower  coruers  of  the  cross  near  the  midle, 
answerable  to  the  motto  that  surrouuded  the  thistle.  Since,  I  hear 
that  there  are  severall  othcr  alterations  made,  aud  that  Lord  George 
Hamilton  carries  a  greeu  Eibbon  over  his  shoulders."^ 

It  has  beeu  supposed  that  the  Eegister  was  written  iu  the 
office  of  the  Kiug's  Chaucery,  where  all  writs  passing  uuder  the 
Great  Seal  were  engrossecl  But  thi-oughout,  expressious  are  used 
in  the  headings  of  particuhxr  documeuts  which  show  that  they 
had  been  copied  into  tbe  Eegister  by  a  member  of  the  Convent. 
Thus  the  heading  of  the  fouudatiou-charter,  in  the  same  hand  as 
the  rest  of  the  Eegister,  is  "  Prima  carta  originahs  Dauid  Eegis 
fundatoris  nostri  de  Cambusk}Tin'eth."  ^  "  Nostri "  obviously  here 
means  the  Aljbot  aud  Convent  of  Cambuskenneth.  Agaiu  we  fiud 
wi-its  with  such  headiugs  as  "Compositio  inter  nos  et  abbatem  de 
Cupro,  de  ecclesia  de  Glenylefi" ;  "^  and  "  Compositio  inter  nos  et 
Dunfermling  super  diuersis  decimis."  ^  These  expressions  could 
not  have  been  used  by  a  strauger  scribe  in  the  King's  Chancery. 
They  were  quite  natural  when  used  Ijy  a  member  of  the  Couvent 
engaged  in  engrossing  the  writs  ;  and  the  use  of  the  word  "  noster  " 
in  the  "  Exasticum"  is  almost  conclusive  that  the  writs  were 
transcribed  by  one  of  the  brethren  of  the  Abbey ;  and  this  cou- 

^  Mr.  Eichard  Augustine  Hay'3  Scotia  Sacra,  tom.  i.  ji.  511,  in  tlie  Library  of  tbe  Faculty  of 
Arlvocates,  Edinburgh.  "  Infra,  p.  71,  No.  51. 

3  In/ra,  p.  137,  No.  105.  *  Infra,  p.  149,  No.  IIS. 


xii  INTRODUCTION. 

clusion  is  supported  by  the  fact  tliat  in  every  religious  house  of  such 
importance  as  Cambuskenneth  there  was  a  Scriptorium,  or  writing- 
room,  in  which  scribes  belonging  to  the  house  were  occupiecl  in 
engrossing  instruments  under  the  direction  of  their  superiors.  In 
the  present  case  the  Eegister  was  probably  written  in  the  Abbey 
itself,  and  afterwards  coUated  by  the  Clerk-Register  in  the  manuer 
abeady  described. 

From  the  care,  lal^om-  and  expense  bestowed  on  the  transcription 
of  the  writs,  it  is  obvious  that  the  Eegister  was  considered  at  the 
time  a  work  of  uo  inconsiderable  value  and  importauce.  But, 
notwithstanding  the  labour  bestowed  upon  it,  and  the  formal 
certificate  by  the  highest  official  connected  with  the  PubHc 
Eecords  that  the  transcript  of  each  charter  engrossed  had  been 
coUated  with  the  original,  there  occm-  throughout  the  Eegister 
numerous  clerical  errors,  which,  though  not  afiectiag  the  substance, 
somewhat  disfigure  it.  Both  the  transcrilier  in  writing  out  the 
work,  and  the  Clerk-Eegister  in  collating  it,  have,  in  many  instances, 
misread  the  names  of  leading  witnesses,  who  are  now  woU  known  to 
charter  students  from  the  frequent  occurrence  of  their  names  as 
witnesses  to  early  Scottish  charters. 

These  and  simUar  mistakes  have  been  reproduced  in  the  present 
volume,  and  in  the  case  of  most  of  the  important  errors  a  coiTcction 
is  suggested  by  words  enclosed  witbin  brackets.  A  few  minor 
and  ob\dous  mistakes  have  been  coiTccted  in  the  print ;  whUe  others 
not  afi"ecting  the  sense  have  been  allowed  to  remain.     At  the  end 


TIIE  ORIGIXAL  CHARTERS  NOJI'  LOST. 


of  the  Index,  several  of  the  errors  which  occur  iii  the  Eegister  are 
pointed  out.  The  contractions  in  the  Register  have  been  discharged, 
all  contracted  words  being  printed  ad  longum.  These  are  the  only 
freedoms  which  have  been  taken  in  the  printing  of  the  Register. 

As  the  original  charters  were  extant  in  the  ycar  1535,  when  they 
were  transcribed,  it  was  thought  that,  although  some  of  them  maj- 
have  since  perished  from  the  damp  and  mildew  which  even  at  that 
early  period  had  overtaken  them,  others  might  still  be  traced  to  the 
custody  of  the  present  or  former  owners  of  the  Abbey  of  Cam- 
buskeuneth  since  the  Reformatiou.  This  hope  was  strengthened 
by  the  opiuiou  expressed  by  Sir  Johu  Graham  Dalyell  iu  liis 
excellent  aualysis  of  the  Register,  that  only  a  portion  of  the 
writings  had  been  offered  for  transcription,  or  that  ouly  those  whieh 
were  considered  the  most  important  had  been  selected  Ijy  the 
keeper  of  the  public  archives.  Sir  Johu's  opinion  as  to  the  partial 
transcription  was  based  upon  some  origiual  documeuts  falliug  under 
his  notice.^  He  however  attril)utes  the  selectiou  of  what  was  to  be 
copied  to  the  Clerk-Register,  but  it  seems  probable  that  the  trauscrip- 
tion  was  executed  by  a  scribe  of  the  Convent,  aud  if  this  was  the 
case  it  is  also  pruliable  tliat  the  selection  was  niade  1;iy  his  superiors. 

Careful  iuquiries  have  beeu  made  for  the  origiual  charters,  but 
without  success.  The  preseut  proprietors  of  tlie  Abbey  aud  lauds 
of  Cambuskenneth  are  tlie  trustees  of  Cowau's  Hospital  in  Stir- 
ling ;    an    iustitution    which    acquired    these    lands    in    the    year 

'  Brief  Aualysis  of  the  Chartulary  of  Cambuslienneth,  1 82S,  [i.  43. 


INTRODUCTION. 


1709  from  Sir  Jobn  Ei'skme  of  Cambuskenueth  and  AJva,  wliose 
family  liacl  been  in  possession  of  tliem  from  nearly  the  time  of  the 
Reformatiou  until  the  sale  to  Cowans  trustees.  But  neither  in  the 
repositories  of  Cowan's  trustees,  nor  in  those  of  the  Erskines,  has 
any  trace  of  the  ancient  charters  been  discovered.  They  may  have 
been  destroyed  in  the  year  1559,  when  a  great  part  of  the  Abbey 
was  pulled  down,  and  the  whole  of  its  furnishings  were  carried  off ; 
or  their  disappearance  may  be  attributcd  to  the  neglect  with  which 
they  would  probably  be  treated  after  they  had  been  engrossed  in 
the  Register,  which,  on  the  other  hand,  has  evidently  been  preserved 
mth  great  care.  It  descended  to  John  Erskine,  Eaxl  of  Mar,  the 
famous  leader  of  the  insurrection  in  1715,  who  has  thus  subscribed 
his  name  on  one  of  the  blank  leaves  in  the  volume. 


tP 


The  Register  is  now  the  property  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. 
In  1738  a  copy  of  it  was  made  at  the  exj^ense  and  under  the  superin- 
tendence  of  Walter  Macfarlane  of  that  Ilk,  or  of  Arrochar.     This  is 


MACFARLANES  TRANSCRIPT,  1738. 


a  Iblio  volume,  of  three  Inmdi-ed  aud  twelve  folio  pages,  and  is 
entitled  :  "  Eegistrum  Coenobii  de  Cambuskenneth  Impensis  Walteri 
M'Farlan  de  Eodem  In  ipsius  manu  transcriptum  m.d.ccxxxviii." 
Notwithstanding  this  title,  Macfarlane  has  only  added  dates  to  some 
of  the  charters,  and  the  whole  volume  is  in  the  well-known  hand 
of  Alexander  Taitt,  who  was  much  employed  by  Macfarlane  in 
transcribing  the  chartularies  of  the  religious  houses  of  Scotland, 
and  who  appears  to  have  been  a  good  Latin  schohxr.  He  was  son 
of  John  Taitt,  merchant  in  Edinburgh,  as  we  leam  from  the  will 
of  Mr.  Thomas  Euddiman,  Keeper  of  the  Advocates'  Library  in 
Edinburgh,  dated  17th  March  1736,  to  which  Alexander  Taitt,  and 
another  scholar,  Walter  GoodaU,  assistant-keeper  of  the  Librarj', 
are  attesting  witnesses." 

Throughout  this  transcript  the  dates  added  to  charters,  and  the 
corrections  holograph  of  Macfarlane,  his  distinct  handwriting  is 
readily  recognised.  Macfarlane's  transcript  has  been  of  much  service 
in  preparing  the  present  work  for  the  press.  It  is  now  the  property 
of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates,  Edinburgh,  and  was  kindly  lent  to  the 
Editor  by  the  curators  of  their  library.^ 

Walter  Macfarlane  did  much  for  the  preservation  of  many  of  the 
historical  muniments  of  Scotland,  besides  those  of  Camljuskeuueth, 
and  hiS  labom-s  seem  to  justify  somethiug  more  than  a  passiug  notice 
of  liim.     He   was   descended   from  the    ancient   Earls   of  Lennox, 

'  Original  Will  of  Mr.  Thomas  Rucldiiaau.         tliec£e  Facultatis  Juridica'  Ediuburgi,  .Jac.  5. 
-  It  bear.s  this  luarking  :   "  lu  Libris  Biblio-       4.  5,  and  35.  3.  37." 


ISTRODUCTION. 


his  direct  ancestor,  Gilclirist,  ha\-ing  branched  off  iu  the  thirteenth 
century.  Maldouen,  third  Earl  of  Lennox,  granted  to  his  brother 
Gilchrist  the  upper  part  of  the  original  parish  of  Luss,  which 
•was  called  Arrochar,  as  a  portion  for  a  younger  son.  Gilchrist 
was  the  progenitor  of  the  Clan  Pharlan,  or  that  of  the  Macfarlans. 
A  descendant  of  Gilchrist  was  named  Bartholomew,  or  in  Gaelic 
Parlan,  and  from  him  the  clan  took  their  surname  of  Macfariane. 
The  chiefs  of  the  clan  wcre  designated  Lairds  of  Arrochar,  or 
Macfarlane  of  that  Ilk,  for  several  centuries,  and  in  earlier  days  were 
famous  for  their  raids  and  feuds.  Walter  ]\Lacfarlane,  the  chief  of 
the  chvn  in  the  middle  of  the  cighteenth  century,  derives  his  fame 
from  the  peaceful  occupations  of  the  historian  and  the  scholar. 

A  countryman  of  his  own  in  the  Lennox,  and  a  contemporary, 
wiio  ranks  high  in  tlie  rcpublic  of  letters,  celebrates  this  hiird  of 
Macfarhxue  as  "  the  greatest  genealogist  I  ever  knew  in  any  countr}^, 
and  perfectly  acquainted  with  all  the  Antiquities  of  Scothand."' 
Another  contemporary  euhigizes  him  as  a  famous  antiquary  who 
coukl  rcpeat  all  the  poems  of  Ossian  in  the  original  Gaelic." 

Bishop  Keith,  iu  his  Catalogue  of  Bishoj^s,  expresses  his  obligations 
to  Walter  IMacfadane,  chief  of  that  name,  "  universally  acknowledged 
to  be  the  first  antiquary  in  the  kingdom." 

After  An-ochar  had  been  possessed  for  five  centuries  and  a  half 
by  thc  family  of  Macfarlane,  the  representative  in  the  year  1785  sold 
for   £28,000   the   property   to   William  Ferguson   of  Eaith,   whose 

1  Tobias  Smollett  in  his  "  Humphrey  Clinker.''         ^  The  Chiefs  of  Colquhoun,  vol.  ii.  p.  80. 


«^SA.  .;>•      & 


'  ixlane,  clii 


WALTER  MACFARLANE  THE  ANTIQUARY.  xvii 

son,  Robert  Ferguson,  again  sold  Arroeliar  to  tlie  late  Sir  James 
Colquhoun  of  Luss,  at  the  enhanced  price  of  £78,000. 

The  mansion-house  of  AiTochar,  in  which  SmoUett,  when  on  his 
journey  to  the  Highlands,  was  eutertained  by  Walter  IMacfariane  the 
antic[uary,  has  been  rendered  memoraljle  in  the  pages  of  "  Humphi-ey 
Clinker."  Having  fallen  into  ruins  it  was  removed,  and  a  neat 
mansion  has  been  erected  near  its  site  by  the  present  proprietor. 
The  carved  stone,  marking  the  date  of  the  erection,  etc,  of  the  old 
house,  has  been  carefully  preserved,  and  is  built  into  the  modern 
mansion,  with  a  Gaelic  inscription,  to  the  effect  that  it  was  brought 
from  the  principal  door  of  the  house  which  John,  chief  of  the  Mac- 
farlanes  and  laird  of  AiTochar,  built  iii  the  year  1G97.  The  chief 
referred  to  was  the  father  of  AValter  the  antiquarian. 

Walter  died  at  his  town  house,  in  the  Canonffate  of  Edinburoh, 
on  the  5th  of  June  1767.  After  his  death  his  valuable  collection 
of  manuscripts  on  the  History  and  Antiquities  of  Scotland  was 
purchased  by  the  FaciUty  of  Advocates.  They  form  the  best 
monument  of  the  learning,  iudustry,  and  accomplishmeut  of  that 
resjsected  chief  of  the  Clan  ]\Iacfarlaue.  His  portrait  is  preserved  in 
the  Museum  of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries  for  Scotland.  An  engrav- 
ing  has  been  made  from  wliich  the  impression  in  this  work  is 
executed. 


INTEODUGTIOX. 


HlSTORY  OF  THE  AbBEY. 

Tliis  Introductiou  might  have  beeu  limited  to  a  descriptiou  of 
the  Manuscript  Eegister,  now  printed  for  the  first  time,  and  of  a 
statement  of  the  rides  which  the  Editor  has  laid  down  for  himself 
in  executing  his  task.  But  it  may  add  to  the  interest  of  the  book 
to  give  a  short  accouut  of  the  Abbey  ;  of  its  territorial  and  other 
possessions  ;  its  Abbots  and  Commendators ;  the  historical  events 
with  which  it  has  been  connected  ;  the  Royal  and  eminent  persons 
interred  within  its  walls ;  and  its  diiferent  buildiugs,  etc. 

The  founder  of  this  Abbey  was  King  David  the  First  of  Scot- 
laud,  by  whom  so  many  other  religious  houses  were  founded  iu 
his  kiugdom.  To  his  piety  and  liberality  Scotland  was  indebted  for 
four  bishoprics,  eleveu  abbeys,  two  uuuueries,  and  other  religious 
iustitutions  of  less  note.  No  other  Scottish  sovereigii,  either  before  or 
after  his  time,  bestowed  on  the  Church  such  exteusive  benefactious. 

Audrew  of  Wpitoun,  in  his  "  Cronykil  "  of  ScotLaud,  himself  au 
eminent  churchmau,  aud  Prior  of  St.  Serfs  Inch  in  Lochleven, 
gratefuUy  commemorates,  iu  liis  veruacuLar  tougue,  the  piety  of  King 
David  as  the  founder  of  so  many  abbeys  : 

"  He  illumynd  in  liis  dayis 
His  landys  uyth  k^rrkis  and  wytli  abbayis. 
Byschaprykis  he  fimd  bot  foure  or  thre  ; 
Bot,  or  he  deyd,  nyne  left  he. 
Abbays  he  foundit  nyne  or  ten, 
And  set  in  yame  relygyws  men. 


1 


CHARTEES  GRANTED  TO  THE  ABBEY. 


Haly-nvdhows  he  byggyd  syne, 
Cambuskynel  nere  Strewelyne  ; 
All  j\v  abbays  foundyd  he 
And  rychely  girt  yame  dowyt  be."  ^ 


The  Abbey  of  Cambuskenueth  was  appropriated  for  monks  of  tlie 
order  of  St.  Augustine,  and  dedicated  to  the  Virgin  Mary. 

In  the  foundation-charter,  King  David,  with  the  consent  of 
his  eldest  son,  Prince  Henry,  granted  and  confirmed  to  the  church 
of  St.  Mary  of  Stirling  the  lands  of  Cambuskermeth,  and  the  fishing 
between  these  lands  and  Polmaise,  and  other  subjects.  This  charter 
is  without  date,  but  it  was  probably  granted  in  the  year  1147.  In 
the  Manuscript  Eegister  it  is  headed  "  Prima  Carta  originalis  David 
Regis  fundatoris  nostri  de  Cambuskynneth."'^ 

The  lands  of  Cambuskenneth  being  thus  granted  to  the  church  of 
St.  Mary  of  Stirling,  the  King  probably  inteuded  that  the  name 
of  the  uew  Abl^ey  should  be  Stii-liug.  His  grandson,  Kiug  Malcolm 
the  Fourth  (the  Maiden),  also  grauted  a  charter  of  confirmation  to 
the  church  of  St.  Mary  at  Stirling  of  the  hxnds  of  Cambuskenneth 
aud  others.^  That  charter  is  also  without  date,  but  it  was  probal.ily 
granted  iu  the  year  1165. 

Kmg  AVilliam  the  Liou  confirmed  to  the  chm-ch  of  St.  ]\Iary 
of  Stiiiiug  the  lands  of  Cambuskeuueth  aud  others,  by  a  charter 
made  about  the  year  1168.'' 

'  Wyiitoiin's  Cronykil,  vol.  i.  p.  292.  ^  Infra,  p.  70,  No.  50. 

-  Infra,  p.  71,  No.  51.  ^  Infra,  p.  72,  No.  52. 


XX  INTnODUCTION. 

In  adclitiou  to  these  suceessive  royal  coufirmations,  the  Popes 
coufirmed  the  fouudatiou  of  the  uew  Abbey  under  the  name  of  the 
church  of  St.  Mary  of  Stirling.  PojDe  Eugene  the  Third,  by  a  bull, 
dated  30th  August  1147,  declared  that  he  took  the  chm-ch  of  St. 
Mary  of  Stii-liug  uuder  his  protectiou,  aud  also  that  of  St.  Peter,  and 
ordaiued  that  the  cauonical  order  of  Arrosia,  iustituted  there  by 
William  the  Abbot,  with  the  couusel  of  Eobert,  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews, 
should  be  iuviolably  observed  for  ever.  The  same  Pope  confirmed 
to  the  Abbot  the  lauds  of  Cambuskeuueth  aud  others.^ 

Pope  Alexander  the  Third  iu  1164,  aud  Pope  Celestiue  the  Thix-d 
in  1195,  coufii-med  to  the  church  of  St.  Mary  of  Stirliug  the  town 
and  lauds  of  Cambuskenneth,  aud  many  other  lands  which  had  beeu 
gi-auted  to  that  Abbey  since  its  foundatiou  by  Kiug  David.^  During 
the  twelfth  ceutury,  aud  for  more  thau  fifty  years  after  its  fouudatiou, 
the  church,  in  all  charters  relating  to  it,  is  called  St.  Mary's  of  Stirling. 

As  early,  however,  as  tlie  year  1201,  that  uame  was  chauged 
into  tlie  church  of  St.  Mary  of  Cambuskenneth,  as  appears  from  two 
Ijulls  by  Pope  Innocent  the  Third.^  Tlie  same  Pope,  l^y  a  IjuII,  dated 
6th  May  1207,  addressed  to  the  Abbot  aud  cauous  of  St.  Mary  of 
Cambuskenneth,  declared  that  he  took  the  church  uuder  his  pro- 
tectiou,  and  also  that  of  St.  Peter,  and  he  confii"med  to  the  Abbot 
aud  canous  aU  their  goods,  and  jjarticularly  the  towu  of  Cambus 
kenneth,  and  many  other  subjects  thereiu  specified.* 

'  Ivfra,  \x  38,  No.  23.  ^  /„yvn,  p.  48,  No.  27,   aad  p.  51,  No.  31. 

^  Infra,  jjp.  40-42,  Noa.  24,  25.  *  Infra,  p.  47,  No.  26. 


EXDOWMEXTS  OF  THE  ABDEY.  xxi 

Iii  all  thc  bulls  grauted  by  succeediug  Popes,  raugiug  from 
the  ycar  1207  to  1433,  the  church  is  uamecl  St.  Mary''s  of  Cambus- 
keuueth,  never  of  Stirliug.' 

Kiu2;  William  the  Lion,  in  a  charter  without  date,  Ijut  orauted 
probably  in  the  year  1200,  coufirmed  to  the  church  of  St.  Mary  of 
Cambuskeuneth  the  grauts  which  Seher  de  Quinci  had  made  to  it 
of  the  hiuds  of  DugljTi.-  Kiug  Alexander  the  Secoud,  in  the  year 
1249,  coufirmed  to  the  canous  of  Cambuskeuneth  the  charter  which 
his  father,  Kiug  William  the  Lion,  gave  to  the  church  of  St.  IMary  of 
Stuiiuo-  of  the  lauds  of  Cambuskeuueth.^ 


LaNDS,  FlSHINGS,  AND  OTHER  PrOPERTY  WHICH  BELONGED 
TO  THE  AbBEY. 

lu  the  course  of  the  four  ceuturies  duriug  which  the  Abbey 

of  Cambuskeuneth  flourished,    it   received   mauy   grants   of  lands 

aud  other  property  from  the  bounty  of  successive  sovereigns,  aud 

the   liberality  of  opuleut  subjects ;  aud  in  the  course  of  time   its 

revenues  became  cousiderable.      Its  lands  at  Cambuskenueth  were 

not  exteusive,  but  a  part  of  them  was  very  valuable.     The  popular 

rhyme,  that 

■'  A  loop  of  the  Fortli 
Is  worth  an  earldom  in  the  North," 

is  justified  by  the  natm'e  and  fertility  of  the  soil  in  the  fiue  carse 

1  Iitfra,  pp.  48-55,  Noa.  26,  28-35.  ^  Infra,  p.  92,  No.  72.  ^  /„_;Va,  p.  73,  No.  53. 

d 


INTBODUCTIOX. 


land  arourid  Cambuskenneth,  which  produces  rich  crops  of  the  more 
vahxablc  kinds  of  graiu.  But  the  possessions  of  the  Abljcy  were 
widely  scattered,  and  a  glance  at  the  multifarious  character  of 
its  property  will  show  the  diiSculty  which  persons  constantly 
resident  in  the  Monastery  must  have  experienced  in  managing  it 
profitaljly. 

By  the  foundation-charter  the  Abbey  was  endowed,  by  King 
David  the  First,  with  the  lands  of  Cambuskenneth  and  Colling  and 
Dunbodwin,  or  Tulibodwin  ;  fishings  both  of  districts  and  nets  ;  forty 
shilhngs  of  the  King's  rent  of  Stirling ;  the  cane  of  one  ship ;  one 
saltwork,  with  as  much  Land  attached  as  belonged  to  one  of  the 
King's  saltworks ;  the  tithes  of  the  farm  of  the  Kiug's  lordship  of 
Stirling;  the  offerings  made  in  the  church  ;  twenty  "cudrinis"'  of 
cheese  from  his  Majesty's  rent  of  Stirling. 

By  tinother  chaiter  granted  by  King  David,  and  renewed  by  his 
son,  Malcolm  the  Fourth,  the  Abbot  and  Convent  obtained  the  church 
of  Clackmannan,  with  forty  acres  of  Lind  and  the  priest's  toft,  or  tofts, 
in  Stirling  and  Linlithgow. 

Kiug  William  the  Lion  confirmed  the  above-meutioned  grants 
made  by  King  David  the  First  and  Malcolm  the  Fourth,  and  in 
addition  granted  to  it  the  church  of  Clackmannan,  witli  foiiy  acres 

'  This  vrord  is  spelleJ  in  several  differeiit  from  Tulymurthac,  instead  of   tliese  twenty 

ways  in  the  Eegister,  and  the  exact  meaning  cudrinis ;  and  the  transcriber  of  the  Eegister 

of  it  has  not  been  ascertained  ;  but  by  the  heads  the  writ — "  Donatio  centum  petrarum 

charterNo.  224,  p.  216,  i)i/>a,  the  eonvent  re-  casei  de  Tulymurthac." 
ceived  a  grant  of  twenty  "  cowgall "  of  cheese 


LAXDS  BELOXGING  TO  TIIE  ABBEY.  xxiii 

of  laud  ;  tlie  priest's  toft  in  tlie  towu  aud  the  easemeuts  iu  busli 
aud  plain  ;  tlie  teiuds  of  tlie  Kiugs  pleas  and  profits  of  Stirliug, 
Stirlingshii'e,  aud  Callauder ;  exemption  from  tolls  and  custom  ;  a 
full  toft  iu  luverkeithing ;  and  sixty  shilliugs  of  the  Kiug's  caue  of 
Perth  yearly. 

Besides  the  lands  of  Cambuskeuneth  aud  others  iu  the  couuty  of 
Claekmaunau,  the  couveut  possessed  lauds,  chm-ches,  patrouages, 
aud  other  property  iu  the  couuties  of  Stii-Iing,  Perth,  Forfor,  Fife, 
Aberdeen,  Linlithoow,  Dumbarton,  Berwick,  aud  Edinbm-gh. 

The  lands  in  these  other  coimties  which  belonged  to  the  Abbey 
comprehended  Arngrosk,  uow  Arugask,  with  mills ;  lands  iu  Alva, 
uear  the  spriug  or  weU  of  St.  Servan,  aud  between  that  spriug 
and  the  church  ;  tofts  in  Aii-th ;  oxgates  of  land,  and  toft  aud  pas- 
turage  iu  Balcormok;  land  iu  St.  Mary's  Street  in  the  towu  of 
Berwick  ;  the  lands  of  Badenheath  ;  the  lauds  of  CoIIin,  supposed  to 
be  Collie  or  Cowie,  inthe  parish  of  St.  Niuiau's ;'  tofts  in  the  burghs 
of  Stirling  and  Liulithgow  ;  lands  of  Cushnie,  in  the  eai-ldom  of  Mar  ; 
the  lands  of  Duglin,  in  Fife ;  Dunipace,  iu  the  barony  of  Herbert- 
shire  ;  lauds  and  tofts  in  Foi-teviot ;  lauds  in  Fuleche ;  half  a  carucate 
iu  Kii-kintuIIoch  ;  the  land  of  Kettlestou,  in  the  constabulary  of  LLn- 
lithgow ;  half  a  caracate  in  Petcorthy ;  laud  in  Kintulach,  in  the 
earldom  of  Strathern ;  lauds  in  Linlithgow ;  lands  of  Mm'eton, 
formerly  caUed  Ladylaud,  in  the  shire  of  StrrUng ;  Mobbscroft ;  the 
lands  of  ]\Ialar,  uear  Touch  ;  toft  iu  Perth  ;  lauds  iu  TUIicoultry,  etc. 

^  The  Abbots  of  Cambuskeuueth  had  a  resideuce  at  Trosk,  ou  the  borders  of  Collie  or  Cowie. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Tlie  Aljbey  possessed  the  church  ancl  teinds  of  Arngask,  the 
church  of  St.  Servan  of  Alva,  the  chapel  of  Alloa,  the  churches  ancl 
teinds  of  Clackmannan,  Crathie,  Forteviot,  Glenyleff,  Kirketoun,  or 
Eggles,  now  callecl  St.  Ninian's,  Kincardine,  Kirkintilloch,  Kil- 
maronock,  Kinnoul,  Kinclevin,  Lecroth  (Lecropt),  Tullibody,  and 
Tullicoultry. 

Besides  the  grants  of  lands,  churches,  etc,  now  mentioncd,  the 
Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth  obtained  many  special  grants  of  other 
property  and  privileges.  They  had  the  right  of  fishing  in  the  river 
Forth  between  the  lands  of  Cambuskenneth  and  those  of  Polmaise, 
and  also  the  fishings  of  Carsyn  (Kersie)  aud  Tullibody,  with  fisliings 
in  the  river  Clyde,  near  Eenfrew.  They  also  obtained  a  right  to  the 
half  of  the  hides,  fat,  and  tallow  of  the  animals  slaughtered  for  the 
Kiiig  at  Stirling ;  the  pasturage  of  five  hundred  sheep  and  twenty 
cows  and  a  yoke  of  oxen  in  Balcormock  ;  and  right  of  free  liurial 
to  such  as  should  desire  to  be  interred  at  Cambuskenneth. 

Part  of  the  annual  revenues  derived  from  certain  gardens  at 
Cambuskenneth,  formed  by  individual  al:)l)ots  and  monks,  was 
assigned  for  the  support  of  the  altars.  One  garden,  called  "  Para- 
dise,"  afforded  ten  shillings  annually  to  the  altar  of  St.  Nicholas.' 
An  aunuity  of  ten  shillings  was  appropriated  to  the  altar  of  St. 
Andrew  from  the  garden  made  hj  the  late  Abbot,  Sir  David  White, 
of  happy  memory,  and  Sir  William  Amistrang.^  The  annual  sum 
of  twenty  shillings  was  giveu  to  the  altar  of  St.  John,  from  another 

1  Infra,  p.  .307,  No.  214.  -  Tnfra,  p.  .S07,  No.  214. 


PEOPERTY  OF  TIIE  ABBEY. 


garden,  made  by  Sir  Jolm  Greenlaw  and  Thomas  of  St.  Andrew.* 
The  sum  of  six  shillings  and  eightpence  yearly  was  assigned  to  the 
altar  of  St.  Lawrence,  after  the  decease  of  Sir  William  Mekose,  from 
the  garden  which  he  and  Sir  John  Masterton  had  made." 

As  stated  in  the  sketch  of  the  parish  of  Dunipaee,  in  the  New 
Statistical  Account  of  Scotland,  that  parish  was  originally  a  chapel 
of  the  parish  of  Eggles,  now  St.  Ninian's,  and  was  conveyed,  along 
with  the  other  chapels  and  oratories  of  that  parish,  to  the  Aljbey 
of  Cambuskenneth,  by  E.obert,  Bishop  of  St.  Andi-ews.  It  is 
addcd,  that  in  the  latter  part  of  the  thirteenth  century  an  uncle  of 
Sir  William  Wallace  was  parson  or  officiating  priest  of  Dunipace. 
Sir  William  frequently  made  his  uncles  house  his  home.^ 

After  the  Eeformation,  returns  were  obtained  by  tlie  Crown  of 
the  property  belonging  to  tlie  religious  houses,  with  the  intention 
of  assigning  a  third  of  the  benefices  for  the  stipends  of  the  Eeformed 
clergy.  The  rental  of  the  property  of  Cambuskenneth  was  then 
returned  as  follows  : — 

MoneyScots,     .  .  .  .£9.30  13     4| 

Wheat,  1 1  chals.     1 1  bolls,  2  firlots. 

Bear,  28    „        1 2     „  3     ,,        3  pecks,      2  lippies. 

Meal,  31     „  6     „  3     „        3     „  2     „ 

Oats,  19     „        15     „  3     „        3     „  2     „ 

In  whole,  91  chaLs.  1.3  bolls,  1  firlut,  2  pecks,  2  lippies.* 

This  rental  does  not  inchide  any  of  the  fishings.     Those  in  tlie 

1  /n/ra,  307,  No.  214.  ■  Jhhl.  <  AiipenJix    to     Keith's    Cluirch   History, 

^  Parish  of  Dnnipace,   in    New    Statistical       Book  iii.  p.  182. 
.\ccount  of  Scotland,  vol.  viii.  p.  3S7. 


xxvi  INTRODUCTIOX. 

river  Fortli  adjoiuing  the  Abljey  must  have  been  valuable,  and  \-ery 
couveuient  for  the  memljcrs  of  the  Couvent  ou  their  spare  days. 

It  is  a  commonly  received  opiuion  that  the  abbeys  of  Scothind 
were  very  opuleut,  and  that  the  mouks  lived  iu  the  greatest  luxury. 
But  the  uature  of  the  property  of  Cambuskeuueth  was  such  as  to 
render  the  mauagemeut  of  it  expeusive  aud  difficult,  aud  their 
Register  reveaLs  that  the  commuuity  were  often  in  indigence.  Their 
extreme  poverty  is  referred  to  iu  several  of  the  gi'ants  as  a  special 
reason  for  giviug  the  canons  relief  in  various  forms.' 

The  Register  also  affords  evidence  of  the  wretched  state  of  other 
religious  establishments.  Clement,  Bishop  of  Dunblane,  al^out  the 
year  1239,  repau-ed  personally  to  the  Pope  and  represeuted  to  him 
that  the  cathedi-al  chm'ch  of  his  see  had  on  one  occasion  been  vacaut 
for  upwards  of  a  centuiy,  aud  duriug  that  time  its  property  had 
Ijcen  seized  by  secular  persons,  aud  although  several  Bishops  had 
siuce  been  appointed  to  it,  yet  the  property,  from  their  simplicity 
or  uegligence,  had  not  only  not  been  recovered,  but  uearly  the  whole 
residue  had  been  alienated,  aud  the  church  had  been  destitute  of 
a  pastor  for  about  teu  years,  as  uo  one  qualified  could  be  induced  to 
uudertake  the  office. 

The  Bishop,  when  himself  consecrated,  found  it  iu  such  desola- 
tion  that  he  had  not  a  spot  in  the  cathedral  whereon  to  lay  his 
head ;  aud  so  sleuder  were  the  episcopal  revenues  that  they  could 
hardly  maiutain  liim  during  the  half  of  the  year.     There  was  no 

1  Infra,  p.  3,  Xo.  1  ;  p.  78,  No.  58  ;   p.  88,  Xo.  67  ;   p.  205,  Xo.  151. 


POVERTY  OF  TUE  ABBEY.  xxvii 

college,  Divine  service  being  performcd  by  a  rural  cliaplaiu  in  tlic 
roofless  church.  To  remedy  this  sad  state  of  matters  the  Pope 
proposed  that  a  fourth  part  of  the  tithes  of  all  the  parish  churchcs 
in  the  diocese  should,  if  this  coukl  be  done  without  much  offence, 
be  assigned  to  the  Bishop  as  a  fund  for  the  support  of  himself  and 
a  dean  aud  canous  to  be  established  there.  The  Pope  also  directed 
that  the  episcopal  seat  shoukl  be  transferred  to  the  Abljey  of  thc 
(tanons  of  St.  Johu  within  the  same  diocese.  This  appropriation  of 
the  titlies  met  ^^-ith  streuuous  opposition  on  the  part  of  the  Abbot 
and  canons  of  Cambuskenneth,  whicli  led  to  both  parties  submitting 
themselves  to  the  decision  of  the  Bishops  of  Gkasgow  and  Duukekl, 
by  whose  good  offices  a  compromise  was  cffected,  and  a  serious  scan^kxl 
avoideck' 

Differences  arose  and  were  agitated  in  the  years  1392  and  1.393, 
lietween  Eobert  Sinckiir,  Bishop  of  Dunkekl,  and  Wilkam  Blackburn, 
Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth.  In  this  coutest  the  Abbot  prevaik'd.  He 
obtained  the  excommunication  of  the  Bishop  for  alleged  injuries  and 
losses,  which  appear  to  have  consisted  in  unjustly  removing  somo 
domestic  animals  belonging  to  the  Abbot.  After  several  citations 
had  been  served  upon  the  Bishop,  the  sentence  of  excommunication 
was  publicly  pronouuced  upon  him  in  the  church  of  the  Carmelite 
Friars  of  Tulylum,  in  his  own  diocese,  during  the  celebration  of  mass." 
To  put  a  bishop  out  of  the  pale  of  the  Chm"ch  was  certainly  a 
grave  step,  and  one  very  rarcly  adoptctl. 

1  Ivfm,  p.  162,  No.  125.  -  Infra,  pp.  9.5-106,  Nos.  7.5.7S. 


xxviii  INTBODUCTIOX. 

Tke  clispute  betweeu  tlie  Bishop  of  Duukeld  aud  the  Abl^ot  of 
Cambuskeuneth  came  uuder  the  uotice  of  Kiug  Eobert  the  Third, 
aud  it  is  probable  that  he  made  some  endeavour  to  briug  about  a 
recoucLliatiou  betweeu  the  parties.  Had  either  of  them  appUed  to 
him  to  act  judicially  they  woukl  have  iucurred  the  ceusure  of  the 
Pope,  aud  the  fear  of  this  may  have  led  to  the  Krugs  grautiug 
a  certificate,  dated  at  Duudouald,  28th  March  1395,  to  the  efi"ect 
that  the  Abbot  had  not  brought  the  Bishop  before  him  judicially 
ou  any  account ;  aud  that  wheu  both  attended  him  in  the  vestry 
of  the  Preaching  Friars  of  Perth  on  the  1  Ith  of  February  preceding, 
he  was  not  sitting  judicially  in  theii'  cause/ 

The  Abbey  aud  barony  of  Cambuskeuneth  are  said,  in  the  Old 
Statistical  Accouut  of  the  Parish  of  Stii-ling,  to  have  been  reckoned 
part  of  that  parish.  What  gave  rise  to  this  arrangement  is  not 
kuowu,  unless  it  was  that  the  servants  belougiug  to  the  Abbey 
worshipped  iu  Stir-ling,  or  that  its  canons,  monks,  or  friars  per- 
formed  divine  service  in  the  church  of  Stirling,  thus  originating  a 
couuexiou  which  continued  to  subsist  after  the  Reformation.  One 
thing  is  certain,  that  such  a  connexiou  has  actually  subsisted ;  for 
there  is  a  seat  in  the  church  of  Stirliug  allotted  for  the  inhabitants  of 
ihe  village  of  Cumbuskeuneth  ;  and  au  elder  from  it  has  sat  in  the 
sessiou  of  StirHng  ahnost  without  interruption  since  the  year  1559. 
The  Ijarouy  of  Cambuskenneth  pays  a  part  of  the  stipend  of  the  first 
miuister  of  Sth-Uug  ;  but  it  is  subject  to  poors  rates  iu  the  parish  of 

'  Infra,  p.  31",  No.  225. 


k 


EARLIER  RECORDS  OF  TIIE  ABBEY. 


Logie,  and  to  tlie  jurisdictiou  of  the  Sheriff  of  Clackmanuan.  The 
Commissary  of  Stixling  also  exercises  his  jurisdiction  over  it  as  a 
part  of  the  parish  of  Stirling,  and  the  Commissary  of  Duublane 
exercises  his  jurisdiction  over  it  as  lying  within  the  parish  of  Logie.^ 

The  Eaeliek  Eegisters  of  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth, 
AND  additional  Charters  discovered. 

Hitherto  it  has  been  generally  believed  that  the  only  Eegister 
which  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth  had  ever  possessed  was  that 
which  was  formed  in  the  year  1535.  It  appears,  however,  from 
documents  which  have  beeu  discovered  iu  searchiug  for  the  origiual 
charters,  that  there  must  have  been  at  least  one  previous  Eegister 
of  the  charters  of  the  Abbey.  Extracts  or  transumpts  of  thi-ee  early 
writs  by  the  family  of  Comyn,  who  were  proprietors  of  Kii^kintilloch, 
have  been  preserved,  and  each  is  certified  by  two  notaries  public  as 
having  been  extracted  De  lihris  Regisfri  Gamhuskynneth,  One  is 
in  the  Eegister  of  1535;"  but  the  other  two  are  not,  and  the 
extracts  of  these  must  have  been  made  from  a  separate  aud  previous 
Eegister.  No  other  proof  of  the  existence  of  a  separate  Eegister  has 
been  discovered,  but  these  extracts,  and  copies  of  other  writs  which 
have  been  discovered  in  private  charter-chests,  show  that  there  were 
early  charters  granted  to  the  Abbey,  which  have  not  l^een  tran- 

'  Original  Statistical  Account  of  tlie  Parish       of  this  cliarter   shews,   from   several   words 
of  Stirling,  vol.  viii.  p.  272.  being  different,  that  it  was  not  taken  from 

2  Infra,  p.  175,  No.  132.     The  old  extract       the  Register  of  1535. 


scribed  into   the   Eegister    of   1535,    and   make   it  probable   that 
a  pre\dous  Register  was  still  in  existence  at  that  date. 

One  of  the  charters  not  transcribed  into  the  existing  Register, 
althougli  bearing  to  lie  De  libris  Registri  Camhushjnneth,  is  a  grant 
by  AVilliam  Comyng,  Earl  of  Buehan,  of  the  church  of  Kirkintilloch, 
with  au  oxgate  of  laud,  adjoiuing  the  churchlaud  thereof,  to  the  Abbey 
of  C*amljuskeuneth.  It  is  not  dated,  but  it  was  probably  granted 
iu  the  begiuuiug  of  the  thii-teenth  ceutury,  as  the  granter  became 
Earl  of  Buchan  in  the  year  1210.  The  original  is  written  in  Latin, 
and  is  to  the  followiug  effect : — 

"  To  all  the  sons  of  Holy  Mother  Church  who  shall  see  or  hear  this  ■writing, 
"William  CSvniyng,  Earl  of  Buchan,  eternal  salvation  in  the  Lord  :  Let  all  persons  of 
present  and  future  times  know  that  I,  AVilliam  C^Tnyng,  Earl  of  Buchan,  for  the 
salvation  of  my  soul,  and  the  souls  of  my  spouse,  and  of  my  heirs,  and  for  the 
welfare  of  all  my  ancestors  and  successors,  have  for  ever  quitclaimed  all  right 
which  I  and  my  heirs  have  believed  that  we  have,  or  can  in  any  way  have,  in 
the  church  of  Kirkintilloch,  and  in  its  chapels,  and  in  all  other  things  belonging 
to  tlie  same  cliurch,  for  me  and  my  heirs,  to  God  and  the  Church  of  St.  Mary 
of  Cambuskenneth,  and  tlie  canons  now  serving,  and  who  will  hereafter  serve  God 
and  the  blessed  Mary,  imposing,  on  the  part  of  myself  and  my  heu-s,  the  malison 
of  Almighty  God,  and  my  own  on  every  one  who  shall  presume  to  frustrate  this 
renunciation  :  Wherefore  I  will  that  the  foresaid  canons  may  hold  and  have  the 
foresaid  church  in  free  and  pure  and  pei-jjetual  ahns,  with  the  chapels  and  lands  and 
ofiFerings  and  teinds,  and  revenues  of  every  kind,  and  with  an  oxgate  of  land  ad- 
joining  the  churchland  on  the  east  side,  which  I,of  my  own  proper  gift,  have  bestowed 
on  the  said  canons,  for  the  welfare  of  my  soul,  in  pure  and  perpetual  alms,  to  be  lield 
as  freely  as  any  other  church  land,  in  all  things,  namely,  in  common  pasture,  etc."  ^ 

1  Tbe   witnesses  to   thia   charter  are  Mr.       Mr.  P.  of  tlie  castle  ;  Theodorit  Helyas,  my 
Hugh,  rector  of  the  church  of  KirkintUloch  ;       presbyter  ;    William,   chaiilain  to   the  Coun- 


EARLIER  RECORDS  OF  THE  ABBEY.  xxxi 

The  other  charter,  which  appears  to  have  beeu  extractccl  from  au 
earlier  Eegister,  is  a  coufii-mation  of  the  grant  of  the  oxgate  of  laud 
macle  in  the  foregoing  charter,  with  certaiu  aclditions.  It  is  uot 
dated,  but  it  was  probably  grauted  towards  the  close  of  the  thii-teeuth 
century.     The  origiual  is  in  Latin,  aucl  is  to  the  followiug  effect : — 

"  To  all  the  faitliful  (followers)  of  Christ  who  shall  see  or  hear  this  writing,  Jolm 
Cwmyng,  son  of  the  deceased  John  CwTayng,  eternal  salvation  in  the  Lord  :  Know 
ye  that  we  have  grautecl  and  confirmed,  for  us  aud  our  heirs,  that  perpetual  gift 
which  William  Cwmyng,  the  deceased  Earl  of  Buchan,  of  happy  memory,  made  to 
God  and  the  blessed  Mary  and  to  the  canons  of  Cambuskenneth,  of  one  oxgate  of 
land  in  the  territory  of  Kirkintilioch,  to  be  held  and  possessed  by  the  said  cauons 
and  their  successors  as  freely  and  c^uietly  as  the  charter  of  the  same  William  made 
thereupon  to  the  said  canons  more  fully  purports  aud  bears ;  and  we  grant  and 
give,  and  by  the  present  writing  confirm,  for  us  and  our  heirs,  to  the  said  canons 
and  theii-  successors  for  ever,  for  the  soul  of  Eva  our  mother,  iu  augmentation  of 
the  said  oxgate  of  land,  the  whole  land  adjoining  that  oxgate,  between  Luggy  and 
Buthlane,  cultivated  and  uncultivated,  as  far  as  the  said  oxgate  of  land  extends, 
with  oue  acre  of  land  on  the  east  side  of  the  said  oxgate  .  .  .  with  thirty  ^  cart- 
loads  of  peats,  to  be  received  each  year  at  the  sight  of  the  bailie  of  the  burgh  of 
KirkintUloch,  in  our  peat-moss  of  Kirkintilloch,  which  at  our  instance  our  men  of 
Kirkintilloch  unanimously  granted  for  ever  to  these  canons,  and  their  tenants 
wliomsoever  dwelling  on  the  said  land,  in  our  open  court  of  Lengze,  we  there  con- 
firming  for  ever,  for  us  and  our  heirs,  the  foresaid  lands,  with  the  peats  foresaid, 
to  these  canons  :  To  be  held  and  jjossessed  in  free,  pure  and  perpetual  alms,  with 
free  and  peaceable  entry  and  exit,  as  well  to  the  saicl  peat-moss  as  to  the  said 
oxgate,  with  its  augmentations  above  mentioned,  as  often  as  they  please  and  have 
need,  as  freely,  quietly  and  honourably  as  the  aforesaid  oxgate  is  granted  and  con- 
firmed  to  these  canons  by  the  charter  of  the  foresaid  William  Cwmyn  :  Moreover 

tess;   A.  of   Rule,  clerk  ;    E.    of  Mwliantis,  Ciilbert   Law,  uotai-ies  iniblic. — [Old  copy  in 

andPi.  of  Wiltiin,  knights  ;  R.  of  Hibestoter,  the  Wigton  or  Ciimbernauld  Charter-chest.] 
Eobert  of  Lamarderob,  my  clieuts,  etc.     The  ^  The  uumber  here  is  conjectural,  a  part  of 

extract  is  attested  by  John   Anderson   and  the  word  being  torn  away. 


INTEODUCTION. 


we  aud  our  lieirs  vn\\  warrant,  maintaiii  and  for  ever  defeud  against  all  men  tlie 
said  oxgate  of  laud,  witli  its  augmentations  foresaid,  and  witli  the  use  of  the  fore- 
said  peat-moss  in  all  the  before-mentioned  liberties,  to  the  foresaid  canons  and  their 
successors ;  and  tliat  that  gift,  grant  and  confii-mation  may  obtain  tlie  strengtli 
of  perpetual  firmness,  we  have  strengthened  the  present  writing  by  thc  impression 
of  our  seal."^ 

A  few  other  wits  have  been  discovered,  rflatiug  to  the  property 

of  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth.     One  of  these  is  a  gi'aut  of  the 

church  of  Kinclaven,  by  King  William  the  Lion,  which  may  be  thus 

translated  from  the  original  Latin  : — "  William,  by  the  grace  of  God 

King  of  the  Scots,  to  all  upright  men  of  his  whole  land,  clergy  and 

laity,  greeting :  Let  all  persons  of  preseut  aud  future  times  know 

that  I  have  giveu  aud  granted,  and  by  this  my  charter  have  cou- 

firmed,  to  God  and  to  the  church  of  St.  Llaiy  of  Cambuskenneth, 

and  to  the  canons  serving  God  there,  the  church  of  Kinclethvene, 

with  the  lands  and  teinds  and  all  kinds  of  offerings  and  all  other 

lauds  aud  their  pertinents,  to  be  hekl  in  free,  pm^e  and  perpetual 

alms,  as  freely,  quietly,  fully  aud   houourably,  as  they  hokl   other 

churches." " 

1  The    \vitnesses   are   William    Euffo   and  chest.]     The  old  copies  o£  the  three  charters 

Robert  of  Cultoiine,  knights ;  Fergus  Kennedy,  now  described  are  contained  on  a  single  sheet 

our  steward  ;  John,  his  brother  ;  Adam  Scot ;  of  paper,  on  which  there  is  an  indorsation,  in 

Malcolm   Constable  ;    David  de   Gartenocht;  very  old  writing,  as  follows  :   "  Ilejn,  Laiit  to 

Cristina,  daughter  of  the  parson  of  Kyj>pen,  thc  Dene  of  Eestalrig  the  bukis  of  Chawser  and 

with  many  others.     Then  follows  an  attesta-  Goicer." 

tion  that  the  charter  was  extracted  from  the  ^  The    witnesses   to   this   charter    are   H. 

Books  of  the  Register  of  Cambuskenneth,  by  chancellor,  A.  abbot  of  Dunfermlin,  Earl  Gil- 

Mr.  John  Symmerwell,   notary  public  ;  and  bert,  Robert  the  Kuig's  chaplain,  William  of 

that  a  true  cojiy  of  it,  as  thus  extracted,  was  MorevUle,  the  coustable,  WiUiam  of  Lindese, 

made  by  Gilbert  Law,   notary  public. — [Old  A.  Sheriff  of  Stirling,  Walter  Corbet  at  StirUng. 

copyin  the  Wigton  or  Cumbernauld  Charter-  — [Old  copy  CharterintheMarCharter-chest.] 


RECENTLY  DISCOVERED  CHARTEES.  xxxiii 

Another  of  these  charters  is  a  grant  Ijy  the  Abbey  of  Cambus- 

kenneth  to  William  of  Moray  of  Polmaise  of  a  piece  of  land  called 

the  Knoll,  in  the  tenement  of  KukispuU,  iu  the   shire  of  Stirhug. 

Transhxted  from  the  origiual  it  is  in  these  terms  : — - 

"  To  all  who  shall  see  or  hear  this  charter,  David,  by  the  Divine  permission 
Abbot  of  the  Monastery  of  Cambuskenneth  and  the  convent  of  the  same  place, 
everlasting  salvation  in  the  Lord  :  Know  ye  that  we,  with  the  consent  of  our  whole 
chapter,  having  well  considered  the  interests  of  our  monastery,  have  given,  sett, 
and  iu  feu-farm  let  to  our  beloved  William  of  Moray  of  Polmaise  that  piece  of 
laud  commonly  called  the  Knoll,  lyiug  in  the  tenement  of  KukispuU,^  within  the 
shire  of  Stirliug,  to  be  held  and  possessed  the  foresaid  piece  of  land  of  Knoll  by 
the  foresaid  William  and  his  heirs  of  us  and  our  successors  in  feu  and  heritage 
for  ever,  by  all  its  right  ancient  marches  and  divisions  .  .  .  for  rendering  there- 
from  aunually,  .  .  .  four  shillings,  to  be  received  in  name  of  feu-farm  at  the 
two  customary  terms  of  the  year,  namely,  at  Whitsunday  and  Martinmas  in  winter, 
by  equal  portions,  for  every  other  burden,  exaction  and  demand  which,  by  us  or 
our  successors,  can  in  any  way  be  exacted  or  required.  And  we,  the  foresaid 
David,  Abbot,  and  convent,  will  warrant,  maintain  and  for  ever  defend  the  said 
piece  of  land  to  the  foresaid  William  and  his  heirs,  in  the  form  foresaid,  against 
all  men  and  women.  In  testimony  whereof  our  common  seal  of  our  chapter  is 
appended,  at  our  monastery  foresaid,  on  the  9th  day  of  the  month  of  June,  in  the 
year  of  our  Lord  one  tbousand  four  hundred  and  forty-nine."  ^ 

Another  writ  Avhich  has  been  discovered,  relates  to  the  compro- 
mise  of  a  dispute  between  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth  and  the 
To)ATi  of  Stirling,  in  regard  to  the  fishing  of  a  part  of  the  water  of 
Forth,  dated  at  Edinlmrgh,  31st  Marcli  1501.  Au  abstract  of  this 
will  suffice.  Henry,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  for  himself,  and  as 
procurator   for   the   couvent,   ou   the    one   jjart,    aud   Sir   Duncan 

'  The  Kuowe  of  Cockspuw  is  the  liouse  of  -  Original  Cliarter  in  the  Polmaise  Charter- 

Polmaise. — [Modem  Lndorsation  on  Charter.]       uhest. 


xxxiv  INTRODUCTION. 

Forester  of  Skippinche,  knight,  James  of  Menteith,  provost  of 
StirUng,  and  George  of  Crechtoune  of  Brothertoun,  for  themselvos 
ancl  as  procurators  for  the  whole  community  of  the  burgh  of  Stir- 
ling,  on  the  other  part,  bound  themselves  to  abide  by  the  decreet  of 
the  arbiters  named,  who  were  to  judge  and  decide  upou  the  "re- 
treiting"  of  an  Act  given  by  the  Lords  of  Council  for  the  said 
Abljot  and  Couveut  of  Caml^uskenneth,  anent  the  fishing  of  a  part  of 
the  Water  of  Forth,  claimed  to  beloug  to  them.  The  arbiters  were 
William,  bishop  of  Aberdeeu,  Mr.  Eichard  ]\lurehede,  dean  of 
Ghisgow  and  secretary  to  the  King,  ]\Ir.  Walter  Drummond,  dean 
of  Duubhme  and  clerk  of  the  Register,  aud  two  others.  They  were 
to  convene  at  Ediuburgh,  on  the  lOth  of  May  following,  and  were  to 
give  forth  their  decreet  within  twenty  days  thereafter.  Until  that 
decreet  was  issued,  the  profits  of  the  fishings  of  the  part  of  the  water 
in  question  were  to  remain  as  they  theu  were. 

On  the  20th  of  July  1501,  the  arbiters  decerned  and  delivered  their 
decreet  in  reference  to  this  dispute,  to  the  effect  that  the  Abbot  aucl 
Convent  of  Cambuskeuneth,  aud  their  successors,  should  have  in  per- 
petuity  the  fishing  of  five  cobles  up  and  dowu  at  their  pleasure  in  the 
Water  of  Forth,  while  the  community  and  town  of  Stirling,  for  the 
payment  of  £20  to  the  said  Abbot,  should  enjoy  the  remauent  of  the 
said  fishing  and  cobles  of  the  Water  of  Forth,  in  time  coming, 
without  impediment  by  the  said  Al.ibot  aud  Convent,  or  their  suc- 
cessors.' 

'  Original  Decree  in  the  Charter-cliest  of  the  burgh  of  Stirliug. 


RECENTLY  DISCOVERED  CHARTEES. 


Anotlier  origiual  writ  found  at  Polmaise  is  a  precept  by  David 
Pantar,  Bishop  of  Ross,  and  perpetual  commendator  of  tlie  Monastcry 
of  the  Virgiu  Mary  of  Cambuskenneth,  of  the  Order  of  St.  Augus- 
tine,  of  the  diocese  of  St.  Audrews,  dated  Ist  April  1557,  to  his 
procurators,  William  Wordye  and  David  Bouating,  to  infeft  William 
of  Moray  of  Polmas  in  the  piece  "  of  our  lands '"'  commonly  called 
the  KnoU,  iu  "  our  barony  "  of  Colly,  and  in  the  tenement  of  Cukis- 
pull,  and  shii-e  of  Stu-Iiug. 

The  names  of  the  Commendator  aud  convent  subscribiug  are — 
Dauid,  bischop  of  Eoss,  commendatour  of  Cambuskenneth  ;  Dominus 
Andreas  Home,  Dominus  Dauid  Nycholl,  Dene  George  Jhonstouu, 
Dene  Andro  Ea,  subprior,  Dene  Janies  Dalmahoy,  Dean  John  Asone, 
Dominus  Wilelmus  Brown,  Dominus  Ninianus  Greme,  Dene  Thomas 
Wordye,  Domiuus  Guliellmus  Eeid,  Dene  Archibaldus  M'Brek,  Dene 
Thomas  M'Brek,  Dominus  Johannes  Paniter.^ 

'  Original  Preoept  in  the  Polmaise  Charter-cliest. 


INTRODUCTION. 


HlSTORICAL  EVENTS  CONNECTED  WITH  CaMBUSKENNETH. 

In  the  reign  of  Iving  Alesander  the  Third,  Scotland  was  much 
divided  on  the  measures  adopted  during  his  minority.  After  the 
King  aud  Queen  proceeded  to  London,  on  a  visit  to  her  father,  King 
Henry  the  Thii-d,  in  the  year  1257,  the  party  of  the  Comyns,  who 
were  very  powerful — there  being  then  thirty-two  knights  and  three 
earls  of  that  name, — gained  great  iufluence.  One  of  the  questions 
of  the  day  was  the  a^ipointment  of  a  bishop  of  Ghxsgow,  in  which, 
as  each  got  the  upper  hand  in  the  Councils  of  the  kingdom,  the 
Scottish  or  English  party  prevailed.  The  Comyns  got  the  Pope's 
delegates  to  publish  a  senteuce  of  excommimication  against  the 
King's  Councillors,  which  was  pronounced  by  the  Bishop  of  Dun- 
blane  and  the  Abbots  of  Jedburgh  and  ]\Iekose,  iu  the  Abbey 
church  of  Cambuskenueth ;  and  afterwards  was  repeated  l^y  "  bell 
and  candle  "  in  aU  the  chapels  of  the  kingdom.' 

During  the  War  of  ludepeudence,  one  of  the  gi-eatest  of 
Wallace's  victories  over  the  English  was  achieved  ou  or  near  the 
ground  of  Cambuskenneth.  This  was  the  famous  battle  of  Stu-ling, 
fought  on  the  llth  of  Septeml^er  1297,  in  which  the  slaughter  of  the 
English  was  so  great  that  it  has  been  said  that  nearly  the  half  of  their 
army,  which  cousisted  of  50,000  foot  aud  1000  horse,  was  slain. 

Kiug  Edward  the  First  of  Eugland,  iu  his  Aictorious  progress  in 
Scotland  iu  the  year  1303,  after  haviug  penetrated  as  far  uorth  as 

'  Chroiuea  de  Mailros,  p.  182. 


BOBERT  JFISIIJET,  BISIIOP  OF  GLASGOJF.  xxxvii 

the  shke  of  Moray,  and  marehed  to  the  Castle  of  Kildrammie,  iu  the 
shire  of  Aberdeen,  proceeded  thence  to  Dundee,  and  then  to  StirUng 
and  Cambuskenneth,  where  he  was  on  the  Ist  of  November.  Early 
in  December  he  went  on  to  Dunfermline,  where  he  took  up  his  winter 
quarters,  and  was  joined  by  his  Queeu. 

When  Edward  had  discomfited  the  Scots,  Robert  Wishart, 
Bishop  of  Ghxsgow,  though  he  had  commanded  his  bailiff  to 
assemble  the  forces  of  his  sce  to  march  against  the  Priuce  of 
Wales,  came  to  the  Kiug  at  Camljuskeuneth,  aud  prayed  for  his 
grace  and  mercy  for  all  his  ti'espasses.  Here,  for  the  fifth  time,  he 
took  the  oath  of  fealty  to  Kiug  Edward  as  before,  upou  the 
consecrated  host,  upon  the  Gospels,  upon  the  cross  of  St.  Neot, 
aud  upon  the  Black  Rood  of  Scotland.  He  was  graciously  received 
by  Edward,  who  restored  to  him  the  temporahties  of  his  see,  which 
he  had  forfeited  by  his  treasou.  This  took  place  in  the  beginniug 
of  March  1303-4.  These  facts  were  recorded  in  articles  to  be  pro- 
pouuded  before  Pope  Clemeut  the  Fifth,  by  Kiug  Edward  against 
Wishart,  Bishop  of  Glasgow,  who,  in  the  war  between  the  Scots 
aud  the  Euglish,  was  coustantly  changing  sides,  aud  although  he 
took  the  oath  of  fealty  to  the  English  sovereigu  at  six  difiereut 
times,  always,  when  circumstances  favoured  the  Scots,  broke  it,  aud 
assisted  his  countrymen  with  all  his  power.^ 

At  Cambuskenueth,  ou  the  Feast  of  St.  Barnabas,  1304,  an  im- 

*  Palgrave'3  Documents  and    RecorJs    illustrating   the    History   of   Scotlancl,    vol.    i.  pp. 
clxxix.  345. 


xxxviii  INTRODUCTION. 

portant  treaty  was  secretly  entered  into  between  Eobert  of  Bruce, 
Earl  of  Carrick  and  Lord  of  Annandale,  and  William  of  Lamberton, 
Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  whereby  they  bound  themselves  in  confede- 
racy  against  all  men.  A  notarial  instrumeut  (1306),  containrng  a 
certified  copy  of  this  indenture,  bears  that,  on  that  day  and  year, 
meeting  together  at  Cambuskenneth,  and  conferring  with  one 
another  in  regard  to  future  dangers,  desiiing  to  escape  them,  as  far 
as  it  was  possible,  and  more  prudently  to  resist  by  strenuous 
efforts  their  enemies,  they  entered  into  a  covenant  of  friendship. 
By  it  they  became  bound  faithfully  to  consult  one  anothers  safety 
in  all  their  afiliirs  and  transactions  whatsoever,  at  all  times  and 
against  all  persons,  and  continually,  without  deceit,  to  give  assist- 
ance  or  help,  by  themselves  and  their  men,  to  the  utmost  of 
their  ability,  and  that  none  of  them  should  attempt  any  arduous 
busiuess  without  consulting  thc  other.  It  was  further  stipulated, 
that  whoever  of  them  should  first  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
dangers  impending  over  the  other,  should  forewarn  him,  or  cause 
him  to  be  forewarned,  and  should  endeavour  to  avert  the  same, 
according  to  his  ability.  All  these  things  they  eugaged  faithfully 
to  fulfil  aud  observe,  fully  and  without  deceit,  an  oath  of  fidelity 
on  each  side  being  given,  under  the  pain  of  £10,000  to  be  applied 
for  the  recovery  of  the  Holy  Land.  It  is  then  stated  that  the  seal 
of  each  party  was  afiixed  to  that  portion  of  the  indenture  which 
remaiued  in  possession  of  the  other.^ 

'  The  original  of  this  indenture  has  been  lost ;     but  the  notarial  instrument  in  which 


rARLIAMENTS  AT  CAMBUSKENNETII,  1314,  132G.         xxxix 

In  the  year  1314,  on  tlie  6th  of  November,  a  Parliameut  was 
held  by  King  Kobert  the  Bruce  iu  the  Monastery  of  Cambuskenneth, 
iu  which  it  was  enacted,  with  the  advdce  and  consent  of  the  bishops 
and  other  prelates,  the  earls,  barous  and  other  uobles,  and  the 
whole  commons  of  the  kiugdom  of  Scotland,  that  all  who  had  died 
in  war  or  otherwise  against  the  faith  and  peace  of  the  King,  or 
who  had  uot  returued  to  his  peace  and  faith,  although  they  had 
been  repeatedly  called  ou  and  lawfully  warned  to  do  so,  should  be 
for  ever  dispossessed  of  all  their  tenemeuts  and  of  all  rank  or  position 
within  the  kingdom,  and  should  be  held  in  other  respects  as  enemies 
of  the  King  and  kiugdom,  and  be  perpetually  excluded  from  all  claim 
to  hereditary  or  any  other  rights  in  future,  either  for  themselves  or 
their  heirs.  The  original  Act  of  Parliameut  is  now  lost ;  but,  from 
copies  yet  preserved,  it  appears  that  the  seals  of  the  King,  six  bishops, 
fourteen  abbots,  five  priors,  the  High  Steward  of  Scotlaud,  several 
earls  aud  many  barons,  were  appended.' 

In  the  year  1326  another  Parliameut  was  held  at  Cambuskeuueth, 
which  is  famous  in  the  history  of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotlaud. 

In   consequence   of  the    birth   of  a   son   to  King   Robert    tlie 

its  tenns  have  been  preserved  was  drawn  up  expressed  in  the  notaria]  instrument  referred 

at  Newcastle-upon-Tyne,   Uth  August   1306,  to,  it  has  been  published  for  the  first  time  in 

when  the  Bishop,  on  being  shown  the  part  of  an  autheutic  form  by  Sir  Francis  Palgrave,  in 

the  indenture  to  which  his  seal  was  affixed,  his  Documents   and  Eecords  iUustratiug  the 

acknowledged,  ia  the  presence  of  wituesses,  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  y\i.   cln.,  clvii., 

its  authenticity  ;  uponwhich  anotarialinstru-  32.'?,  324. 

ment  was  drawn  up  by  a  notary-pubUc,  and  '  The  Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of  Seotlaud, 

attested  in  the  usual  form.     The  indenture  is  vol.  i.  p.  104,  and  Tabula,  pp.  13,  44. 
noticed  by  Lord  Hailes  (vol.  i.  p.  342),  but,  as 


xl  IXTRODUCTION. 

Braee,  at  Dunfermline,  on  5tli  March  1323,  it  was  found  necessary 

to  set  aside  previous  Acts  of  Parliament,  wliich  had  been  made  for 

the  settlemeut  of  the  Cro^\Ti,  and  to  confirm  the  succession  by  a  new 

Act  in  favour  of  this  his  only  son.    Accordingly,  an  Act  of  settle- 

ment  of  the  Crown  was  made  by  the  ParHameut  at  Cambuskenneth, 

entailing  the  succession  on  Da^dd,  son  of  King  Robert,   and  the 

heirs  of  his  body ;  and  failing  them  on  Pioliert  Stewart,  only  son  of 

Bruce's  daughter,  IMarjory,  then   deceased,  by  her  spouse,   Walter 

Stewart,  Lord  High  Steward  of  ScotLaud.     To  these  heirs  the  clergy, 

earls,  barons  and  all  the  nobility,  with  the  people  there  assembled, 

swore  fealty  and  homage,  in  the  presence  of  the  King.     Ancbew  of 

Wyntoun  concludes  his  history  of  the  year  132G  with  an  account  of 

this  Parliament : — 

"  Dat  ilke  yhere  gaddr^-cle  syne 
At  Kamyskynel  be-syd  Stryvelyne 
Erlys,  byschapys  and  barownys, 
Prelatis,  and  oyir  gret  persownys, 
To  ye  Kyng  Eobertis  swne  Dawy 
Ware  bwndyn  in  fewtie  straytly, 
And  til  hys  systyr  swne  Eobert, 
Dat  cald  be  swrname  wes  Stewert : 
In  case  yat  hys  eme  Dawy 
Suld  dey,  but  ayre  of  his  body, 
Dis  Eobert  Stwart  hys  ayre  suld  be 
Neyst  successyve  in  yat  reawte."  ^ 

The  history   of  this  imjiortant   Act  of  the  settlement   of  the 

Crown   is   reniarlcable.      It   was   lost   before   the    year    1650.     Sir 

1  Wyntown's  Cronykil,  vol.  ii.  p.  134. 


PARLIABIENT  AT  CAMBUSKEXNETH,  1326.  xli 

James  Balfour  of  Kinnaird,  baronet,  Lyon-King-of-Arms,  wlicn 
aliroad,  discovered  the  missing  Act,  aud  carefully  preserved  it  for 
many  years.  He  appeared  in  tlie  Parliament  of  King  Charles  the 
Second,  held  at  Perth,  on  the  25th  day  of  December  1650,  aud 
produced  and  deUvered  to  the  King,  in  presence  of  the  Estates 
of  Parliament,  an  "  old  monument,"  as  it  is  called,  concerning 
the  entail  of  the  Crown  of  Scotland,  made  by  King  Eobert  the 
Bruce  iu  favour  of  tlie  race  of  the  Stewarts,  of  the  date  at  Caml  )us- 
kenneth  the  15th  of  July  1320.^  The  Parhament  ordered  the  "old 
monumeut"  to  be  recorded  in  the  Books  of  Parliament,  and  care- 
fully  preserved.  But  before  the  registration  could  be  completed, 
the  Eecords  of  Parliament  were  taken  to  London  by  the  orders  of 
Cromwell,  who  theu  became  master  of  Scotland,  aud  the  Act  of  1 3  2  6 
again  disappeared.  Its  disappearauce  may,  without  much  difficulty, 
be  explained.  After  the  restoration  of  King  Charles  the  Second,  many 
of  the  Eegisters  which  Cromwell  carried  to  Loudon  were  sent  from 
the  English  Metropolis  to  Scotland.  But  it  appears,  from  a  report 
by  the  Lords  of  Session  made  to  the  House  of  Lords  on  the  27th  of 
February  1740,  that  in  a  storm  at  sea  eighty-five  hogsheads  of  them 
were  shifted  out  of  the  frigate,  the  "Eagle,"  into  another  vessel. 
This  vessel  sank,  ancl  all  these  i'ecords  were  thus  irrecoverably  lost. 
The  portion  of  the  Eecords  which  reached  Scotland  did  not  contain 
the  "  old  monument "  made  at  Cambuskenneth  in  1326  ;  nor  has  any 
trace  of  it  been  fouud  siuce  the  year  1650.     It  was  uukuowu  to  Mr. 

'  The  Acta  of  the  Pai-liaments  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  564. 


xlii  INTRODUCTION. 


William  Eoljertsou  when  he  gave,  in  the  year  1798,  his  distinct 
account  of  the  other  Acts  of  Settlement  of  the  Crown  ;  ancl  the 
successive  Editors  of  the  Acts  of  Parliament,  Mr.  Thomson  and 
Mr.  Innes,  take  no  notice  of  it.  No  one  at  present  connected  with 
the  National  Records  of  Scotland  is  aware  of  the  existence  of  the 
Act  of  the  settlement  of  the  Crown  on  Prince  David  and  the  race  of 
Stewart.  The  probal)iHty,  theu,  is  that  it  shared  the  fate  of  the  vast 
collection  of  Scottish  Eecords  which  went  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea 
iu  the  manner  uow  described. 

After  the  passiug  of  this  Act,  King  Eobert  the  Bruce,  appre- 
heusive,  from  his  increasing  infirmities,  that  the  heirs  to  the  Crown 
might  be  left  miuors,  aud  that  the  kiugdom  might  be  involved  iu  the 
cahxmities  of  civil  war  by  the  renewal  of  the  oh;l  dispute  Avith  Baliol 
about  tlie  successiou,  despatclied  his  trusty  compatriot,  the  good  Sir 
James  Douglas,  to  Johu  Baliol,  who  was  then  resideut  in  France,  with 
the  view  of  iuduciug  him,  \)j  hirge  preseuts  and  promises,  to  reuouuce 
all  claim  to  the  succession.  Doughxs  was  successful  iu  his  importaut 
missiou.  Baliol  readily  asseuted  that  Kiug  Eobert  the  Bruce  and 
his  heirs  shoutd  remain  in  the  uudistmi)ed  possessiou  of  the 
Crowu  of  ScotLand.' 

Previous  to  this,  an  Act  of  Parliameut  had  been  passed  for  the 
settlemeut  of  the  succession  to  the  Crown,  at  Ayr,  26th  April  1315, 
which  settled  it,  in  the  eveut  of  the  decease  of  King  Eobert  the 
Bruce  without  heii"s-male  of  his  body,  on  his  ouly  brother,  Edward 

1  Buclianaii's  History  of  ScotlaaJ,  Aikman's  edition,  vol.  i.  p.  437. 


PAELIJMENT  AT  CAMBUSKENNETH,  1326.  xliii 

Bruce,  and  tlie  beirs  of  his  body ;  whom  failing,  on  Marjory,  his 
daughter,  and  the  heirs  of  her  body,  on  conditiou  that  she  should  not 
many  without  the  consent  of  her  father,  or,  in  case  of  his  death, 
without  the  consent  of  tbe  majority  of  the  Estates  of  ParUament ; 
whom  failing,  on  the  nearest  lawful  hcir  descended  of  the  body  of 
King  Robert.  In  the  event  of  the  heir-male  beiug  a  minor  wheu  the 
succession  opened,  Thomas  Eandolph,  Earl  of  Moray,  was  to  be  his 
guardian,  and  Governor  of  the  kingdom. 

Another  Act  had  been  passed  at  Scone  in  December  1318,  when, 
in  consequence  of  the  death  of  Edward  King  of  Ireland,  the  King's 
brother,  and  of  his  daughter  ]Marjory,  the  succession  to  the  Crowu 
was  settled,  in  the  event  of  the  death  of  King  Eobert  without  male 
issue,  on  Eobert  Stewart,  only  son  of  his  daughter  ]\Iarjory,  by 
her  spouse,  Walter,  Lord  High  Steward  of  Scotland.  It  was  also 
provided  that  should  Eobert  Stewart,  or  the  heir  to  the  Crown, 
succeed  when  a  minor,  Thomas  Eandolph,  Earl  of  Moray,  and  failing 
him  James  Lord  Douglas,  should  be  his  tutor,  aud  Governor  of  the 
kiugdom.^ 

The  revenues  of  the  Crown  having  been  mueh  i|npaii'ed  by  the 
long-continued  wars  with  England,  King  Eobert  the  Bruce  pf^ayed  the 
Parliament,  held  at  Cambuskenneth,  15th  July  1326,  for  such  a  pecu- 
niary  grant  as  his  own  and  the  State's  necessities  requii-ed.  A  graut 
of  supphes  was  immediately  made.     The  Act  by  which  it  was  made 

'  The  Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of   Scotland,       Robertsou"s  Index  to  the  EecorJs  appenileil, 
Reign  of  Robert  the  First,  vol.  i.  pp.  104,  105;       \>\\  G-10. 


xliv  INTRODUCTION. 

narrates  that  King  Roliert,  holdiug  his  fuU  Parliament  at  Cambusken- 
neth,  the  earls,  barons,  burgesses  and  all  other  freehoklers  of  his 
kingdom  being  assembled,  set  forth  that  the  lands  and  rents  which 
anciently  belonged  to  his  Crown  had  been  so  much  diminislied  l^y 
different  grants  and  transfers  made  on  the  occasion  of  war,  that  he 
had  not  sustentation  suitable  to  his  rank  without  imposing  an  intoler- 
able  burden  on  his  people.  He  therefore  earnestly  requested  that  as 
he  had  sustained  both  in  his  person  and  property  many  inconveniences 
in  the  efforts  he  had  made  for  recovering  and  preser^dng  their 
libeilies,  the  Parliament  would  be  pleased,  from  the  gratitude  due 
from  them,  to  find  ways  and  meaus  by  which  he  might  be  maiu- 
tained  in  a  manner  correspondiug  with  his  rank  without  oppressiag 
his  people.  Regarding  this  petition  as  just  and  reasonable,  the 
Parhameut  "  unanimously,  thankfully  and  lovingly,"  granted  him 
annually  for  his  lifetime,  to  be  wholly  applied  for  his  use,  the  tenth 
penny  of  all  their  farms.and  rents,  botli  from  their  dominical  lands 
and  wards,  and  from  theii-  other  hxuds  whatsoever,  to  be  estimated 
according  to  the  valuation  of  the  lands  and  rents  in  the  time  of 
Alexander  the  Third,  exceptiug  only  that  in  case  of  destruction 
by  war  the  tenth  penny  should  be  departed  from  in  proportion 
to  the  amount  of  farm,  which  could  not  then  be  collected  from 
the  foresaid  lands  and  rents,  to  be  determined  by  an  inquest  to  be 
faithfully  made  by  the  sheriff  of  the  place.  This  arrangement  was 
completed  by  an  indenture  entered  into  by  the  Parliament  of  the 
date  mentioned.     The  attestinor  chTUse  is  in  the  foUowino-  terms : — 


PAULIAMEXTS  AT  CAMUUSKEXXETH.  xlv 

"  lu  wituess  of  all  which,  to  ouo  part  of  this  iudeutuiv  remaiuiug 
with  the  said  earls,  barous,  l)urgx'sses  aud  freeholders,  the  common 
seal  of  the  kingdom  has  beeu  put ;  whilst  to  the  other  part,  re- 
mainiug  with  our  lord  the  Kiug,  the  seals  of  the  earls,  l:)arous  aud 
other  great  freeholders,  together  witli  the  commou  seals  of  the  burghs 
of  the  kingdom,  iu  their  name,  and  of  the  whole  commuuitv  who 
are  unauimous,  have  beeu  appeuded."' 

Frdm  the  terms  of  this  Act  it  is  quite  clear  that  the  burgesses 
aud  freeholders  took  part  as  members  in  the  proceediugs  of  the 
Parliament.  They  are  more  explicitly  meutioued  iu  this  Act  than  in 
that  of  the  year  1315,  the  first  occasiou  on  which  we  fiud  a  trace 
of  them,  and  the  commoii  seals  of  their  burghs  are  appended  along 
with  those  of  the  earls  and  liarons  who  were  present.  This  is  tlie 
first  instance  in  which  we  havc  distiuct  evideuce  that  the  burgesses 
of  cities  were  admitted  to  share  as  menibers  iu  the  deliberatious 
of  the  Scottish  Parliameut,  although  Kiug  Robert  the  Bruce  was 
always  anxious  to  secure  the  approval  uot  only  of  the  uobles  and 
barons  but  of  the  whole  commuuity. 

At  the  same  Parliameut  at  Cambuskenueth,  au  auspicious  matri- 
monial  alliance  was  arranged  between  Christiau  Bruce,  sister  of  the 
Kiug,  aud  Sir  Auclrew  Murray  of  Bothwell,  a  brave  aud  valiant 
soldier,  who  was  afterwards  Eegent  of  Scotland." 

So  frequently  had  the  Parliament  met  at  Cambuskeuuetli,  aud  so 

1  The  Aets  of  the  Parliaments  of  .Scotlaml,       Cluli,   p.  .")4  ;    Balfoui"s  Anualsi  of  .Scotlaiul, 
Keign  of  Robertthe  First,  vol.  i.  p.  115.  vol.  i.  p.   Ufi. 

-  Extracta   ex   Cronicis  Scocie,  Abbotsford 


xlvi  INTEODUCriON. 

notable  were  tlie  Parliaments  whicli  assembled  there  from  the  im- 
portant  busiuess  transacted,  that  one  of  the  buildings  connected  with 
the  Abbey  was  known  as  the  "  Parliament  Hall." 

The  three  successive  Rol)crts  of  Scotland  were,  during  their 
reigns,  frequent  visitors  at  Cambuskenneth.  King  Robert  the  Bruce 
granted  a  charter  at  Caml)uskenneth  ou  the  12th  of  JMarch,  in  the 
sixth  year  of  his  reign  (1311),  iu  favour  of  the  Abbey  and  Convent 
of  Scone.'  Before  many  wituesses  of  distinction,  he  granted  at 
Cambuskenneth  another  charter  on  the  20th  of  July,  in  the  twenty- 
first  year  of  liis  reign  (1326).'' 

Kiug  Robert  thc  Second  also  granted  chartersat  Cambuskenneth, 
on  16th  and  18th  January  in  the  teuth  year  of  his  reign  (1380), 
which  show  that  hc  had  remained  at  the  Monastery  for  several  days.' 
The  King's  expenses  at  Cambuskcnneth  are  stated  in  tlie  accounts  of 
the  Chamberhxin.* 

King  Robert  the  Third  received  a  resignation  at  Cambuskenneth 
in  the  second  year  of  his  reign  (1392),  of  the  lands  of  Ricardstoun 
and  Warynstoun,  in  the  barony  of  Currie  and  shire  of  Edinljurgh, 
raade  by  Marion  of  Wardlaw,  and  her  son,  Andrew  of  Wardlaw.^ 

A  prophecy  in  reference  to  the  death  of  King  James  the  Secoud 
at  the  siege  of  Roxburgh,  in  the  year  1460,  is  counected  with  one  of 

'  Liber  Ecclesie  de  Scon,   Maitlaud  Chib,  *  Accounts   of   tlie   Chamberlain,    vol.   ii. 

1843,  p.  102.  p.  115. 
^  Registrum  Magni  Sigilli,  p.  108,  No.  60. 
3  Ibkl.  pp.  142,  143,  Nos.  77,  83.  °  Registrum  Magni  Sigilli,  p.  209,  No.  40. 


DEATH  OF  KIXG  JAMES  THE  SECOXD,  14G0.  xhii 

the  officials  of  Cambuskemietli  :  Dmiiig  tlie  siege  tlie  King  pro- 
ceeded  to  examine  a  battery  wliich  was  playiug  upou  the  town  of 
Roxburgh.  One  of  the  canuon  which  composed  this  battery  was  u 
great  gun  of  Flemish  manufacture,  which  had  been  purchased  by 
King  James  the  First,  but  not  tested  during  his  reign.  It  was  made 
of  longitudiual  bars  of  irou,  fixed  with  iron  hoops,  which  were  made 
tight  in  a  rude  fashiou  by  oak  wedges.  Owing  to  the  iguorauce  of 
the  engineers,  this  caunou  was  overc]iarged.  The  Kiug  being  close 
to  it,  watchiug  the  directiou  of  the  guns,  the  cannou  exploded,  and 
he  was  struck  by  one  of  tlie  wedges  iu  the  groin,  which  broke  his 
thigh,  aud  caused  his  death.  This  tragedy  was  foretold  to  the  King 
long  before  it  happeued.  "  That  accideut  of  the  cleath  of  the  Kiug, 
if  it  may  be  related,  was  loug  before,  as  is  said,  foreshown  to  the 
Kiug  by  the  hxte  John  Templeman,  who  was  the  father  of  Sir 
WiUiam  Templeman,  Superior  of  the  Monastery  of  Cambuskenneth, 
who,  whLLst  [tendiug]  his  flock  on  the  Ochil  hills — ."^  Here  the 
mauuscript  abruptly  closes,  and  what  John  Templeman  predicted 
remains  untold. 

'  Extracta  ex  Cronicia  Scocie,  Abbotsford  Club,  1842,  (i.  244. 


ixriionrcTiox. 


THE  ABBOTS  OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 

The  long  liue  of  Abbots  of  tliis  religious  house  can  be  traced  with 
consideral)le  accuracy.  The  roll  contains  the  names  of  several  who 
were  fanious  as  statesmen,  senators  and  schohirs. 

I.    WlLLIAM,  THE  FlRST  AbBOT,   1147   1104. 

WiLLiAM,  Abbot  of  the  Church  of  St.  iMaiy  of  Stiiiiiig,  who  was 
the  first  Abbot,  and  the  institutor  of  the  church,  received  from  Pope 
Eugene  the  Third  a  Bull,  dated  30th  August  1147,  proceeding  upon 
a  petition  by  Eobert,  Prior  of  St.  Andrews.  By  this  BuU  his  Holiness 
took  the  church  under  liis  own  protectiou  and  that  of  St.  Peter  ; 
ordained  that  the  canonical  order  of  Arrosia,  instituted  there  by  tlie 
Abl)ot,  should  be  inviolably  j^^reserved  for  ever ;  and  confirmed  to  tlie 
Abbot  and  his  successors  all  the  grants  made  to  them,  particuLarly 
the  land  of  Cambuskenneth,  etc'  "  William,  Abbot  of  Stirling,"  was 
witness  to  a  charter  by  Prince  Henry,  son  of  King  David  the  First, 
to  the  Church  of  Newbottle.^  Abbot  Wilham  died  before  the  year 
lir>4,  when  Alfred  is  named  as  the  Abbot. 

n.  Alfred,  the  Second  Abbot,  1164-1195.- 

Alfred,  Abbot  of  the  Church  of  Stiiiing,  who  was  the  second 
who  held  the  ofHce,  received  from  Pope  Alexander  the  Third  a  Bull, 
dated  5th  December  1164,  takiiig  the  Church  of  Stiiiing  under   his 

'  Infrn,  p.  38,  No.  23.  -  Registrum  S.  Maric  cle  Newbutle,  p.  15. 


THE  .UIBOTS.  xlix 

own  protectiou  and  tliat  of  St.  Peter.  By  tlii.s  Bull  lie  (•oiifiriued  to 
tlie  Alibot  all  liis  possessious,  particularly  tlie  land  of  Cambuskeuu(.'tli, 
the  fishing  betweeu  tliat  land  aud  Polmaise,  aud  one  uet  in  tlie 
water,  and  many  other  possessions  thereiu  specified ;  together  with 
the  free  right  of  burial  iu  Cambuskenueth  to  those  who  were  desirous 
to  be  there  iuterred,  unless  they  were  excommuuicated  or  iiiterdicted 
persons.  The  bull  also  piwided  that  on  the  death  of  an  Abbot  uo 
oue  should  be  appoiuted  to  that  diguity  by  craft  (ir  violeuce,  but 
should  be  chosen  by  the  fiiars,  or  the  more  jirudeut  of  theni,  accord- 
iug  to  the  rule  of  St.  Augustine.  Excommunicatiou  and  the  divine 
wrath  were  threatened  agaiust  those  who  should  disturb  the  Abl)ots 
iu  the  possessiou  of  their  property.' 

Alfred,  Abbot  of  Stirliug,  was  one  of  tlie  wituesses  to  a  diarter  b}- 
King  Malcolm  the  Fourth  to  the  Cliurch  of  Holyrood,  without  date, 
but  which  must  have  been  granted  about  the  year  1165." 

Abbot  Alfred  died  before  the  year  1195,  when  Nicholas  was  the 
Abbot. 

III.  NiCHOLAS,  THE  Third  Abbot,  1195-1207. 

NiCHOLAS,  Abbot  of  the  Church  of  St.  !Mary  of  Stirling,  who  was 
the  third  who  held  that  office,  received,  in  the  year  1195,  from  Pope 
Celestine  the  Third,  a  Bull  taking  him  uuder  the  Papal  protection, 
and  confii*ming  to  him  all  his  possessions  as  therein  enumerated. 
The.se  possessions  are  exteusive,  and  show  that  uumerous  grauts  Iiad 

'  In/ra,  p.  40,  No.  24.  -  Kegistruni  8.  Marie  Je  Newbotle,  p.  2"J8. 


INTEODUCTION. 


been  madc  to  the  church  duriug  the  period  vvliich  had  ehipsed  froni 
its  foundation  by  King  David  the  First.  The  Bull  debars  any  one 
from  extorting  from  the  monks  payment  of  teinds  either  from  culti- 
vated  or  from  pasture  Linds.  It  also  invests  them  with  the  privilege 
of  ofFeriug  au  asylum  within  their  walls  to  those  who  fled  from  the 
world  ;  prohibits  the  brethi-en  from  leaving  the  Abljey  after  pro- 
fession,  except  for  the  purpose  of  eutering  a  convent  where  stricter 
rules  are  enforced ;  coufers  on  the  monks  the  right  of  selectmg 
priests  for  their  parish  churches  to  be  presented  to  the  bishop  of  the 
diocese  for  induction,  and  of  choosing  their  Abbots  ;  and  grauts  the 
right  of  free  burial  witliiu  its  sacred  precincts  to  sucli  as,  from  feehngs 
of  devotion,  should  desire  to  be  there  interred.^ 

Abbot  Nichohis  died  before  the  year  1207,  when  William  was  elected. 

IV.   WlLLIAM,  THE  FoUKTH  AbBOT,   1207-1253. 

WiLLiAM,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenueth,  is  the  next  on  record. 
"  Aono  1207,  WiUielmus  Canonicus  Saucte  Crucis  electus  est  in  ab 
batem  de  Cambuskenueth."^ 

Abbot  WiUiam  died  before  the  year  1253,  when  Eichard  appears 
as  Abbot. 

V.   RlCHARD,  THE  FlFTH  AbBOT,  1253-1269. 

RiCHARD,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  is  one  of  the  -witnesses  to  an 

1  Infra,  p.  42,  No.  25.  farlane,  p.  .'{17,  in  the  Library  of  the  Faculty 

2  Father  Hay's  MS.,  as  quoted  iu  trauscriiit       of  Arlvocates,  Ediaburgh.     Jac.  5.4.5,  .35.3.7- 
of  the  ChartiUary  of  Cambuskenneth  by  Mae- 


THE  ABBOrS.  li 

instrument  of  resignation  made  in  a  eouncil  held  at  Stirling,  on  17th 
December  in  the  fifth  year  of  the  reign  of  King  Alexander  the  Third 
(1254),  by  Emma,  daughter  aud  heiressof  the  deceased  Gilbert  of 
Smythetune,  widow,  of  the  lands  of  Smythetune  to  the  Abbey  of 
Dunfermline.^     This  Abbot  died  in  the  year  1269." 

VI.    ElCHARD,  THE  SlXTH  AbBOT,   12G9-1285. 

EiCHARD  Gkose  (Grossius)  was  made  Abbot  of  Cambuskenueth 
in  the  year  1269,  ou  the  death  of  his  predecessor  of  the  same  Christian 
name.  He  was  previously  Prior  of  the  Church  of  Cambuskeimeth. 
Richard,  while  he  lived,  had  a  higli  reputatiou  for  sauctity,  and 
after  his  death  wms  signalized  by  the  wouderful  appearances  that 
were  seen  around  his  tomb.  "  He  was  renowned,"  to  quote  froni  au 
old  MS.,  '•  for  signs  and  miracles  after  his  death.  Near  to  his  monu- 
ment  there  were  seen  brazen  candlesticks,  also  a  very  ancient  himp  ; 
also  a  very  old  wooden  chest  suitable  for  receiving  the  offeriucs  of 
the  faithful."^    He  was  succeeded  by 

VH.  JoHN,  THE  Sevexth  Abbot,  1285-1296. 

In  a  charter  by  Thomas  of  ]\Iouymusk  to  Sir  Patrick  Graham  of 

the  lands  of  Cuyl,  in  the  earldom  of  Strathern,  without  date,  but 

granted  about  the  year  1285,  the  first  witness  named  is  "  Domino 

Johanne  Abbate  de  Cambuskenueth."''    It  was  probably  this  Abbot 

'  The  Acts  of  the  Parliaraents  of  Scotland,  ^  Translation    of  Latin    MS.  qnotation  in 

vol.  i.  }i.  84**.  Macfarlane'3   Traiiscript  of   the    Register  of 

Canibuskenneth,  p.  317. 
-  MS.  of  Father  Hay,  ul  supru.  ■•  Original  Charter  at  Buchanau  Castle. 


IXTHODUVTIOX. 


wlio,  on  tlie  I7tb  of  Marcli  1289  and  14tli  ^Marcli  1290,  attended  tlit- 
Parliameuts  of  Queen  Margaret,  lield  at  Birgham,  under  the  nanie 
of  the  Abbot  of  "  Camlniskiual."'  The  seal  of  Al>bot  Johu  is  pre- 
served  iu  the  Public  Record  Office,  Loudou, 
to  a  deed  dated  1292,  aud  an  eueraving  of 
it  is  here  given.  AVithin  a  Gothic  niche  is  re- 
preseuted  a  figure  of  the  Virgiu,  with  a  royal 
c  rown,  holding  the  infant  Jesus  with  a  cruci- 
fiirni  nimlius.  In  the  Ijase  of  the  shield  is  the 
licad  of  au  ecclesiastic,  and  his  hand  holdiug 
a  crozicr.  Abbot  Johu  died  liefore  the  year 
129f;,  when  Patrick  was  Abbot. 


VIII.  Patuick,  EiGHTH  Abbot,  129(>-1310. 
Patrick,  Abbot  of  Cambuskcuneth,  swore  fealty  to  Edwaid  thc 

First  ou  12th  August  1296.  He  was  interred  beneath  the  stouc  arch, 
aud  an  iuscriptiou  ou  the  stoiie  contaiued  an  epitome  of  his  lifc.  The 
uotice  of  the  iuscriptiou  is  in  tliese  terms  ;  "  Is  sub  arcu  hipideo 
positus  est  superaddita  hxpidi  Inscriptione,  (jue  epitomen  vita;  cnn- 
tiueret."' 

IX.  GlLBEKT,  THE  NlNTH  AbBOT,    1310-1  oll. 

GlLBEET,  Abbot  of  Cambu.skenneth,  was  wituess  to  au  indeuture 
between  Sir  Niel  Campbell  of  Lochaw,  Sir  Christoplier  Setou,  and 

1  Tlie  Acts  of  the  Parliameuts  of  Scotlaiul,        Scotl.-ind,  1286-1306,  Ediii.  1870,  vol.  i.  p.  V1S>. 
vol.  i.  |i,  8.5;   Historical  Doeuments  rel.^tiiig  to  -  M.S.  in  MacfarKane,  ut  svpra,  [i.  317. 


THE  ADBOTS.  liii 

Sir  Gilbert  Hay  of  Loelierward,  iu  tlie  year  1310,  as  appears  from 
]Macfarlane's  Mauuscript.'  Abhot  Gilbert  was  dead  before  the  12tli 
of  September  of  the  following  year,  wben  Fergus  was  Abbot. 

X.  Feegus,  the  Tenth  Abbot,  1311-1330. 

Fergus,  Abbotof  Cambuskeuueth,  granted  letters,  dated  12th  Sep- 
tember  1311,-  making  over  to  the  Abbot  and  Couvent  of  Cupar  the 
Church  uf  Gleuisla,  which  liad  been  couferred  on  the  Alibey  of  Cam- 
buskeuueth  l)y  Kiug  William  the  Liou.  The  letters  contain  the 
reservatiou  of  a  yearly  pension  of  £10,  to  be  paid  by  the  Abbey  of 
Cupar  to  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth. 

Fergus  was  probably  the  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth  who,  on  the 
26th  April  1315,  attended  a  Parliameut  at  Ayr,  iu  which  an  Act  was 
passed  already  noticed,  for  the  settlemeut  of  the  Crown  in  the  event 
of  the  death  of  Kiug  Robert  the  Bruce.  The  seal  of  the  Abbot  of 
Cambuskenneth  was  attached  to  the  original  of  that  Act.^  Tlie  same 
Abbot  atteuded  another  Parliament  held  at  Scone  ou  3d  December 
1318,  also  already  uoticed,  and  to  its  priucipal  Acts  Iiis  seal  was 
appeuded.'' 

lu  the  time  of  this  Abliot  the  gift  of  tlie  patrouage  of  the  Chureh 
of  Kilmarouock  was  couferred  on  the  Abbey  by  Kiug  Eobert  the  Bruce. 
The  charter  making  this  graut   is  dated  at   Scone,    IGth   Jauuary 

^  MS.  in  Macfarlane,  ut  siipra,  ji.  318,  ■«■here  -^  The  Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotland, 

the  indentnre  is  said  to  be  in  the  custody  of       vol    i.  ji.  1(14,  and  Tabula,  p.  14. 
the  Earl  of  Winton.  ^  Ibkl.  p.  10.5,  and  Tabula,  p.  14. 

-  liifra,  p.  137,  No.  105. 

h 


liv  INTRODUCTION. 

1325,  and  it  wtis  confirmed  by  tlie  Bishop  of  Glasgow  witli  his 
ring  to  the  Abbot.'  Sir  Richard  Stirling,  presbyter,  having  in  the 
year  1522  been  presented  by  the  Abbot  of  Carabuskenneth  to  the 
perpetual  vicarage  of  Kilmaronock,  was  personally  invested  with  the 
cure  by  the  .4j?chbishop  of  Ghisgow,  who  placed  his  ring  upon  his 
finger.^  The  vicar  was  further  forraally  invested  with  the  vicarage, 
by  the  delivery  to  him  of  the  key  of  the  door,  the  chalice  and  paten, 
and  the  missal  of  the  high  altar  of  the  Church.^ 

Fergus  died  before  the  year  1335,  when  John  was  Abbot. 

XI.  JoHN,  Eleventh  Abbot,  1330-1335. 
The  only  notice  of  this  Abbot  now  existing  is  that  he  died  on 
loth  March  1335. 

XII.    JOHN  OF  KlNCARDINE,  TwELFTH  AbBOT,   1336-1342. 

On  the  death  of  the  preceding  Abbot,  Prior  John  of  Kincardine 
was  unanimously  elected  as  his  successor  by  the  Chapter  of  the 
Monastery  on  the  24th  of  April  thereafter,  and  singing  the  Te  Deum 
the  Chapter,  according  to  custom,  bore  liim  to  the  great  altar  of  their 
church,  to  be  confirmed  by  the  Prior  of  St.  Andrews.*  In  the  letter 
of  John  of  Carrall,  Prior  of  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskcnneth,  a  simiLar 
narration  is  given  of  what  took  jAace  in  the  chapter-liouse  thereof, 
on  25th  April  1336.*  Abbot  John  of  Kincardine  died  before  1342, 
when  WilUam  was  Abbot. 

1  In/ra,  p.  200,  No.  146.      ^  7„y,.„_  p  oil,  No.  1.54.      '  Infra,  p.  130,  No.  9S. 
-  In/ra,  p.  209,  No.  153.      <  Infra,  p.  130,  No.  98. 


TIIE  ABBOTS. 


XIII.   WiLLiAM,  Thirteexth  Abbot,  1342-1350. 

This  Abbot  received  frorn  Pope  Clemeut  the  Sixth  letters,  dated 
2d  October  1342,  addressed  to  the  Bishop  of  Glasgow,  and  desirino- 
him  to  inquire  iuto  the  right  of  the  Abbot  aud  Couveut  of  Cani- 
buskeuneth  to  the  patrouage  of  the  Church  of  Kilmarouock,  which 
had  been  granted  to  them  by  King  Robert  the  Bruce.'  William 
died  before  1350,  when  Adam  was  Abbot. 

XIV.  Adam,  Fourteenth  Abbot,  1350-1360. 

On  the  22d  of  August  1350  a  precept  was  granted  by  Brice, 
Dean  of  Fife,  to  the  Rector  of  Tony,  stating  that  he  was  so  occupied 
with  the  afFairs  of  the  Lord  Bishop  as  to  be  uuable  to  give  to  Adam, 
Abbot  of  Cambuskenueth,  institution  into  the  vicarage  of  Clackmau- 
nan,  aud  enti"eating  the  Rector  to  go  personaUy  to  the  ^dcarage  witli 
Adam  the  Abbot,  and,  iu  his  stead,  to  give  him  institution  thereiu.- 
Abbot  Adam  also  obtaiued  from  William  Laudale,  Bishop  of  St. 
Andrews,  a  precept,  dated  at  Lochleven,  22d  August  1350,  of  the 
^dcarage  of  Clackmannan,  for  the  purpose  of  relieving  the  Abl^ey  froni 
the  loss  which  it  had  sustaiued  through  wicked  men.  The  Dean  of 
Fife  was  charged  by  that  prccept  to  give  the  Abbot  institution  and 
corporal  possessiou  of  the  fruits,  rents,  etc,  of  the  vicarage.^  Adam 
died  before  tho  year  1361,  when  Gilbert  was  Abbot. 

I  Infra,   p.  205,  Xo.  151.       "■  Infra,  p.  77,  No.  56.       ^  Infra,  p.  80,  No.  61. 


Ivi  IXTRODUCTION. 


XV.    GlLBERT,  FlFTEENTH  AbBOT,   1360-1389. 

Ou  7tli  Februaiy  1361  a  charter  was  raade  by  William,  Bishop 
of  St.  Auelrews,  grautiug  to  Gilbert,  Abbot,  aucl  the  Couveut  of  Cam- 
buskenueth  the  Church  of  Kiunoull,  with  its  lauds,  teinds,  offerings, 
etc,  and  investing  thc  Abbot  thereiu,  reserviug  tbe  right  of  Brice, 
rector  of  the  church.  The  charter  bears  that  Kobert  of  Erskiuc, 
Lord  of  that  llk,  and  of  the  barony  of  Kinuoull,  had  grauted  the 
patronage  of  the  Church  of  KinuouU  to  the  Abbot  of  Caml)uskeuueth, 
and  that  tlie  Bishop  of  St.  Audrews  had  ofteu  beeu  urged  Ijy  Sir 
Eobert,  aud  King  David  Bruce  at  his  iustance,  to  grant  the  church 
itself  to  the  Abbey.  The  Bishop,  in  cousideratiou  of  the  devotion  of 
the  grauter,  the  urgeucy  of  the  Prince,  aud  the  poverty  aud  ruinous 
condition  of  the  Abbey,  which  had  suflfered  by  war,  and  had  also 
been  struck  by  lightuiug,  iuvested  the  Abbot  aud  Convent  with  the 
Church  of  Kiunoull  by  delivering  his  riug  in  token  of  possession.' 
Abbot  Gilbert  died  before  the  year  1390,  when  William  of  Blackburn 
was  Abbot. 

XVI.  WiLLiAM  OF  Blackburn,  Sixteenth  Abbot,  1389-1400. 

WiLLiAM  of  Blackburn  was  Abbot  iu  the  ycar  1389.  lu  that 
year  he  was  involved  iu  a  disjjute  with  William  of  Fentouue, 
younger,  which  led  to  a  remarkable  decree  by  the  arbiters  appointed 
for  the  settlement  of  the  coutroversy,  dated  at  the  Kirk  of  Perth,  on 
13th  Fcbruary  1389,  whereby  it  was  ordaiued  that  Feutoune  should 

1  Infra,  p.  225,  No.  I6L 


TIIE  ADBOTS.  Ivii 

restore  to  tlie  Abbots  men  of  Kintulacli  ten  oxen  and  five  cows 
wliicli  liacl  been  wrongously  taken  from  them.  By  another  findino- 
of  tlie  arbiters,  Fentoune,  for  liaving  spoken  "  dispituisly"  of  the 
Abbot  and  his  court,  was  ordained  to  come  to  the  Abbey  on  Ladyday, 
hoodless,  hoseless,  hatless,  shoeless,  beltless  and  knifeless,  during  the 
celebration  of  high  mass,  with  a  wax  candle  of  two  pounds  weight 
in  his  hand,  and  there,  in  preseuce  of  the  people,  upon  his  knees, 
to  ask  forgiveness  from  the  Abl)0t  aud  Convent/ 

On  the  ISth  of  August  1390,  a  precept  was  grauted  at  Scone  by 
King  Rol)ert  the  Third,  after  his  coronatiou,  in  favour  of  AVilliam, 
Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  in  reference  to  the  hiuds  of  Kettlestou  in 
the  county  of  Linlithgow.^  As  has  akeady  been  described,  the 
Abbot,  in  the  year  1392,  brought  down  the  sentence  of  excom- 
muuication  upon  the  head  of  Robert  Sinclair,  Bishop  of  Dunkeld, 
for  the  removal  of  certain  animals  belonging  to  the  Abbot.  The 
feuds  between  the  Bishop  of  Duukeld  and  the  Abbot  of  Cambus- 
kemieth  did  not  ccase  with  the  excommunication  of  Bishop  Robert 
Sinclair.  Robert  Cardny,  who  succeeded  him,  did  much  iujury  to 
the  Abbot  by  making  a  very  expensive  visitation  to  the  churches  of 
Lecropt  and  Alva,  and  also  by  ordering  the  fruits  of  these  churches, 
which  belonged  to  the  Abbot,  to  be  accounted  for  to  the  Bishop, 
under  pain  of  excommunication.  The  Abbot  appealed  to  the  Pope 
for  redi-ess.' 

1  Infra,  p.  259,  No.  181.  3  /,,,-,.„,  p.  26,  No.  17. 

-  The  Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  215. 


l^iii  INTRODUCTIOX. 

No  notice  is  takeu  hy  Abbot  j\Iylue,  iu  liis  Lives  of  tbe  Bisbops 
of  Duukeld,  of  tbe  excommuuicatiou  of  Bisbop  Siuclair.  Botb  Abbot 
IMylue  and  Bisbop  Keitb,  in  tbeir  Catalogue  of  Bisbops,  pass  bim 
over  in  tbeir  enumeratiou  of  tbe  Bisbops  of  Dunkeld.  Tbey  con- 
found  bim  witb  bis  successor,  wbose  Cbristiau  name  was  also  Robert, 
but  wbose  suruame  was  Cardny,  being  a  son  of  Cardny  of  tbat  Ilk. 
Sinclair  was  excommuuicated  in  tbe  year  139.3,  and  could  not  bave 
afterwards  continued  in  office.  But  Bisbop  Carduy  beld  tbe  See  of 
DuukeM  till  tbe  year  1436. 

Bisbojj  Keitb  in  bis  Catalogue  of  Bisbops  says, — "Tbougb  it 
migbt  reasouably  be  expected  tbat  Abbot  Mill  would  bave  given  us 
a  rigbt  exact  series  of  tbe  Bisbops  of  tbis  See,  yet  upon  perusal  we 
liud  tbe  case  to  be  very  far  otlierwise,  tbere  beiug  no  greater  cou- 
fusion  to  be  met  witb  in  auy  otber  of  tbe  episcopal  sees."  ' 

William  of  Bbxckburu  died  before  or  in  tbe  year  1400,  wbeu 
Patrick  was  Abbot. 

XVII.  Patrick,  Seventeenth  Abbot,  1400-1440. 
Patrick:  appears  to  bave  succeeded  iu  tbe  year  1400.  In  a  judi- 
cial  proceeding  about  tbe  lauds  of  Dunipace,  in  tbe  year  1426,  it  is 
said  tbat  be  bad  possessed  tbem  for  tweuty-six  years.  lu  bis  time 
au  important  privilege  was  granted  hj  tbe  Pope.  Ou  15tb  May 
1401,  Abbot  Patrick  received  a  uotarial  iustrumeut  in  tbe  cbapter- 
bouse  of  Cambuskeunetb  iu  refereuce  to  tbe  supply  of  divine  service 

1  Catalogue,  edition  of  1824,  p.  73. 


THE  ABBOTS.  lix 

in  tlie  chapel  of  Alloa/  wliicli  Sir  Thomas  Erskinc,  knight,  h;ird  of  tliat 
Ilk,  decLared  should  be  perfornied  for  the  chapel  by  the  Aljljot  as 
perpetual  vicar  of  Clackmannan.  In  the  year  1406,  Pope  Beuodict 
the  Thirteenth,  in  the  twelfth  year  of  his  Pontificate,  grauted  a  liull 
conferring  on  Patrick  and  his  succcssors  as  Abbots  the  right  frccly  to 
use  the  mitre,  seal-riug,  aud  other  poutifical  insignia,  and  also  to  pro- 
nounce  the  solemn  benediction  after  morning  and  eveuing  mass  iu 
the  churches  of  the  Abbey  and  of  the  priories  subject  to  thcm,  and 
in  parochial  and  other  churches  though  notfuUy  suhject  to  thcm  wlien 
no  bishop  or  legate  of  the  Apostolic  See  was  present." 

In  the  year  1412,  Abbot  Patrick  eutered  into  au  iudcnture  with 
John  Scougall,  rehitive  to  a  tenemeut  in  tlie  burgh  of  Stirling,  iu  tlie 
Hill  Wynd,  leading  to  the  bridge  of  the  Forth.' 

At  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth,  12th  February  1413-14, 
Abbot  Patrick  grauted  a  discharge  to  the  Abbot  of  Cupar  for  £1(1 
Scots  for  the  yearly  peusion  of  the  Church  of  Glenisla.^ 

He  was  a  witness  to  au  iustrument  expede  iu  a  geueral  couucil 
held  at  Perth,  on  iVthMarch  1415,  containinga  copy  of  the  rcnuncia- 
tion  by  King  Edward  the  Third  of  the  Crown  of  Scotland,  dated 
Ist  March  1327. 

An  arrangement  was  made,  iu  the  chapter-house  of  Dunferm- 
line,  on  23d  May  1422,  between  Abbot  Patrick  of  Cambuskenneth 
and  William  Abbot  of  Dunfermline,  respecting  the  arrears  of  four 

1  /rt/ra,  11.  .32,  No.  21.  '  Iii/m,  p.  29S,  No.  210. 

■-  Infni,  i>.  52,  No.  32.  ■•  /«/;•<,,  p.  141,  No.  1(17. 


IXTEODUGTIOX. 


chalders  of  oatmeal,  as  annual  pension  payable  by  the  latter  to  the 
former/ 

Fom-  years  thereafter,  iu  1426,  another  arrangement  was  made 
by  Abbot  Patrick,  iu  the  cemetery  of  the  parish  church  of  Duuipace, 
regarding  the  Al»bey  hmds  iu  the  town  of  Dunipace.^ 

This  Abbot  was  one  of  the  commissioners  nominated  l:>y  ]\Iur- 
doch  Duke  of  Albany  to  proceed  to  Eugland  in  1423,  to  negotiate 
for  the  rausom  of  Kiug  James  the  First.  In  that  mission  the  com- 
missioners  were  successful,  the  treaty  haviug  been  coucluded  at  York 
on  the  lOth  of  September  1423. 

Au  impression  of  the  seal  of  this  Abliot  is  preserved  in  the 
Public  Record  OfHce,  Londou,  from  which  au 
engraviug  has  been  made  for  this  work.  It 
represents  the  Vu-gin  Mary  and  the  iufaut  Jesus 
sitting  withiu  a  Gothic  niche,  and  beueath  which 
is  the  figure  of  a  monk  in  an  attitude  of 
prayer. 

Abbot  Patrick  died  before   the   year  1440, 
wheu  David  was  Abbot. 


XVIII.  David  White,  Eighteenth  Abbot,  1440-1445. 
David  was  Abbot  in  the  year  1440,  when,  under  the  designation 
of  Abbot  of  Cambuskenueth,  he  appeared  at  LiuHthgow  as  procurator 
of  John  of  Aunand,  cauou  of  the  Abbey,  ou  the  22d  of  Augnst  that 

'  Infra,  p.  134,  No.  103.  -  Iiifm,  p.  112,  No.  87. 


TUE  ABBOTS.  Ixi 


year,  and  obtained  possession  for  the  Abbey  of  a  tenement  iu  the 
burgh.^  This  Abbot  was  oue  of  the  Auditors  of  the  Exchequer 
Accouuts  of  Kiug  James  the  Secoud  at  Stu-liug,  ou  IGth  Juue  1-441." 

Abbot  Da^^id  aud  liis  Couveut  eutered  iuto  au  agreemeut,  on  Ist 
AprU  1443,  with  Clemeut  of  Faruile  of  Gogar,  burgess  of  Ediulnu-gii, 
with  cousent  of  Su-  Johu  Forester,  Lord  of  Corstorphiue,  kuight, 
whereby  Clement  grauted  to  the  Aljljot  aud  Couveut  authoiity,  at 
their  own  expeuse,  to  break,  build  aud  agaiu  raise  the  stone  gable  Ije- 
tweeu their forehouse  aud Clemeuts  forehouse  at  the west  coruer  thereof, 
— the  Abbot  makiug  to  Ciemeut  ou  his  side  a  chimney  of  stone.' 

This  Abbot  appears  to  have  held  office  only  for  a  few  years.  In 
a  notarial  iustrumeut  expeile  by  his  successor,  also  uamed  David, 
dated  5th  January  1445-6,  Abbot  David  "White,  of  good  memory,  is 
mentioned  as  the  constructor  of  oue  of  the  many  gardens  whicli  sur- 
rounded  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenueth.'' 

XIX.  David  (Celle),  Nineteexth  Abbot,  1445-1463. 

This  Abbot  appears  to  have  succeeded  the  former  of  the  same 
Christiau  uame  in  the  year  1445. 

On  the  17th  June  of  that  year,  either  this  Abbotor  hisimmediate 
predecessor  obtained  possessiou  of  a  certaiu  laud  in  the  burgh  of 
Edinburgh,  at  the  back  part  of  the  house  belonging  to  the  Abbot  of 
Cambuskenneth.'* 

1  Infra,  p.  272,  Xo.  187.  ^  Infra,  p.  126,  'So.  95. 

2  Acoouiits  of  the  Great  CLamberlain,  vol.  iii.  p.  400. 

'^lnfra,  p.  307,  No.  214.  ^  Infra,  p.  129,  No.  97. 


Ixii  INTEODUCTION. 

Anotlier  instrviment  in  wbicli  this  Abbot  David  is  mentioned  is 
of  some  interest.  It  bears  that,  with  consent  of  the  Convent,  he  gave 
for  the  repair  and  maintenance  of  the  private  altars  of  their  Abbey 
church  the  small  annualrents  of  their  lands  of  the  town  of  Stirling, 
which  were  to  be  annexed,  united,  and  proportionally  divided  among 
them  as  follows  :  to  the  altar  of  St.  Andrew  the  Apostle  an  annual- 
rent  from  the  lands  of  Schakelok  of  6s.  8d.  ;  to  that  of  St.  John  the 
Evangelist  and  St.  John  the  Baptist,  an  annuah"ent  of  4s.  from  the  land 
of  Robert  Bonar  ;  an  annuah-ent  of  Is.  8d.  from  the  Land  of  John 
Darach  of  the  Cross,  and  another  of  Is.  from  the  land  of  John  Tuch  ; 
to  that  of  St.  Laurence  the  ]\Iartyr  an  annualrent  of  3s.  from  Croft- 
magra,  and  two  others  of  6s.  8d. ;  and  to  the  altars  of  St.  NichoLas, 
St.  Ninian,  St.  Catherine  and  All  Saints  the  annuah-ents  specified. 

This  instrument  was  made  in  the  chapter-house  of  the  Abbey  of 
Cambuskenneth,  on  Epiphany  Eve,  (5th  January)  1445  ;  and  it  is 
subscribed  l^y  the  Aljbot,  the  Prior  and  the  Convent,  in  all  nineteen 
persons.^ 

David  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth  appeared  in  the  barony  Court  of 
Harbertshire,  hekl  at  Dunipace  on  the  28th  of  ]\Iay  1462,  and  suc- 
cessfuUy  maintained  his  right  to  four  oxgates  of  Land  in  the  town  of 
Dunipace,  which  were  cLaimed  by  John  Keir.^ 

Abbot  David  hekl  office  for  many  years.  He  died  before  the 
year  1465,  when  John  was  Abbot. 

1  Infra,  p.  307,  No.  214.  ^  /„y,.a_  p.  joi^  Xo.  91. 


THE  ABBOTS.  Ixiii 


XX.    JOHN,  TWENTIETH  AbBOT,  1463-1473. 

JoHN  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth  was  witness  to  au  instrumeut 
regardiug  tlie  teiuds  of  Petlour,  dated  18th  July  1465.^  This  Abbot 
was  a  member  of  the  Parliameut  of  Kiug  James  the  Thii-d,  held  at 
Ediuburgh  on  12th  October  1467."  He  was  also  a  member  of  the 
Parliameut  held  at  Stirling  on  12th  Jauuary  1467. 

The  same  Abbot  was  present  as  a  member  of  the  Parliament 
which  was  opeued  at  Edinburgh,  20th  November  1469.  An  Act  of 
this  Parliament,  which  had  a  refereuce  to  the  Abbey  of  Camljusken- 
neth  aud  other  mouasteries,  may  here  be  uoticed.  The  Pope  had 
granted  a  perpetual  privilege  and  indult  to  the  Bishops  of  St.  Ancbews 
to  confirm  such  as  shoidd  be  chosen  by  convents  to  be  abbots  or 
priors  within  the  diocese  of  St.  Audrews.  It  was  therefore  statute  by 
tliis  Parliament  that  the  said  iudult  and  privilege  should  be  observed 
by  the  King,  his  successors  and  lieges,  in  time  to  come,  aud  that  none 
of  his  subjects,  of  whatsoever  condition,  should  iu  auy  way  violate  it, 
nor  procure  any  vacaut  abbacies  or  priories  withiu  the  diocese  of  St. 
Andrews  in  time  coming,  without  tlie  coufirmation  of  the  Bishop  of 
St.  Ancbews  for  the  time,  under  the  pain  of  perpetual  Ijauishment  and 
proscription,  and  under  the  highest  peualty  of  treason. 

It  was  also  ordaiued  that  the  abbacies  aud  priories  within  tlie 
diocese  of  St.  Ancbews,  of  which  many,  iucludiug  the  Abbey  of  Cam- 
buskenneth,  are  meutioned,  should   have  this  Act  and  Statute   of 

1  Chai-tulary  of   the   Abbey   of   Arbroath,  "  The  Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotlaiid, 

vol.  ii.  p.  145.  vol.  ii.  p.  87. 


Ixiv  IXTEODUCTION. 

Parliament  with  the  saicl  inJult  fully  inserted  uncler  the  Kiug's  Great 
Seal,  if  required,  in  perpetual  memory  of  the  said  Act  of  Parhament, 
for  the  conservation  of  the  common  good  of  the  realm,  and  that  the 
King  and  his  successors,  with  the  Three  Estates  of  the  realm,  shouhl 
defend  the  said  privilege  and  indult,  and  execute  the  penalty  of 
proscription  and  treason  upon  its  violators  in  the  most  rigorous 
manner.' 

Alibot  John  also  sat  as  a  meml^er  of  the  Parliament  hekl  at 
Edinburgh  6th  May  1471." 

No  other  notice  has  l^een  found  of  this  Abbot,  ^vho  ceased  to  hold 
ofiice  before  the  year  1473,  when  Henry  was  Abbot. 

XXI.  Henry  Aexot,  Tv<^enty-fie.st  Abbot,  1473-1504. 

Henry  Arnot  was  Abbot  in  the  year  1473,  when,  under  the  de- 
signation  of  Abbot  of  Cambuslienneth,  he,  with  other  meu  of  influence 
and  position,  was  sent  on  an  embassy  from  the  Court  of  Scotland  to 
the  Court  of  England.  In  that  capacity  he  obtained  a  safe-conduct 
from  King  Edward  the  Fourth. 

The  Abbot  of  Camljuskenneth  was  a  member  of  the  Parliament 
held  at  Ediuburgh,  in  1475,  in  the  reign  of  King  James  the  Third, 
which,  on  Ist  Dccember,  passed  sentence  of  forfeiture  of  life  and 
possessions  upon  John  Earl  of  Ross  and  Lord  of  the  Isles,  for  his 
treasonable  communiug  with  his  sovereign  Lord's  enemies  of  Eng- 

'  The  Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  9S. 
2  md.  voL  ii.  p.  98. 


THE  ABBOTS:  HENEY  AENOT,  LOED  TEEASUEEE.  Ixv 

land,  and  with    the  traitor  Sir  James  Douglas,  some  time  Earl  of 
Douglas,  and  other  acts  of  treason.^ 

Abbot  Henry  obtained  possession  of  tenements  iu  Stirling  on  behalf 
of  the  Abbey  by  a  peculiar  legal  process.  On  20th  Juue  1481,  the 
procurator  for  the  Abbot  and  Couvent  compeared  before  tlie  Provost, 
bailies  and  Council  of  Stirling,  and  made  process  iu  their  four  chief 
Courts  successively,  respecting  a  teuement  in  St.  IMarys  Vennel, 
Stirling,  some  time  belouging  to  Johu  Wilsou,  ou  accouut  of  failure 
for  several  years  to  pay  an  annuakent  of  five  shillings  to  the  Abbot. 

The  procurator  weut  to  the  tenement,  and  found  nothing  that 
could  be  distrained  for  the  said  annuab-ent,  except  the  earth  and 
stones  ;  on  this  beiug  represented  to  the  Provost,  bailies  aud  Council, 
they  adjudged  possession  of  the  tenemeut  to  the  Abbot  and  Couvent.^ 
The  same  Abbot  was  a  momber  of  the  Parhameuts  which  were 
held  at  Edinburgh  18th  March  1481,  2d  December  1482,  Ist  March 
1482-3.=* 

He  was  also  a  member  of  the  Parliament  which  met  at  Edin- 
burgh  27th  Juue  1483.  This  Parliament  was  famous  for  the  process 
of  forfeiture  for  treasou  which  had  been  raised  agaiust  Alexander 
Duke  of  Albany,  the  Kiugs  brother,  who  seems  to  have  aspired  to 
the  Crown,  and  who  had  iutrigued  with  Edward  the  Fourth,  Kiug  of 
England,  agaiust  his  brother,  the  Kiug  of  Scotlaud.     The  process. 


'  The  Acts  of  tlie  Parliatneuts  of  Scotlaud,  ^  The  Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotlaud, 

voL  ii.  pp.  lOS,  109.  vol.  ii.  pp.  136,  142-145. 

^lnfra,  p.  303,  No.  212. 


Ixvi  INTEODUCTION. 

from  tlie  leniency  of  tlie  King,  was  prorogued  from  day  to  day,  but 
at  its  conclusion  senteuce  of  forfeiture  was  pronounced  against  the 
Duke.' 

The  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth  was  one  of  the  Lords  to  whom 
was  committed,  iu  this  Parliament,  the  power  to  unite  and  annex 
perpetually  to  the  Crown  such  lordships  and  lands  as  they  should 
thiuk  expedient  of  the  hxnds  coming  iuto  the  hands  of  the  King  by 
the  forfeiture  of  the  Duke  of  Albany  and  Sir  James  of  Liddale,  so 
that  thereafter  the  King  might  be  advised  how  he  should  dispose  of 
the  remainder  iu  the  way  of  rewarding  his  true  lieges,  who  had  in 
times  bygone  done,  and  should  in  time  to  come  do,  his  Highness 
good  and  true  service." 

The  same  Abbot  was  a  member  of  the  Parliament  which 
assembled  at  Edinburgh  IGth  Febi-uary  1483  4;  a  Parliameut 
chiefly  remarkable  for  the  forfeiture  of  William  Lord  Crichtoun, 
John  of  Liddale,  eldest  son  of  Sir  James  of  Liddale,  hxte  of  Halkers- 
toun,  knight,  David  Pun^es,  aud  others,  as  beiug  art  and  part  in  the 
treason  committed  by  Alexander,  formerly  Duke  of  Albauy,  the 
King's  brother,  against  the  King  and  his  realm.^  He  was  also 
a  member  of  the  Parliaments  which  met  at  Edinljm-gh  on  the 
I7th  May  and  21st  March  1484.' 

He  was  again  a  member  of  the  Parliament  which  met  Ist 
October  1487,  and  Ijy  which  certain  of  the  lordships  and  lands  that 

1  The  Acts  o£  the  rarliaments  of  Scotland,  '  Ihid.  vol.  ii.  pp.  153-156. 

vol.  ii.  \>\>.  146,  147.  -  Ihid.  vol.  ii.  p.  146.  ■•  Ibid.  \ol.  ii.  pp.  16C,  167. 


THE  ABBOTS:  HENKY  ARNOT,  LOED  TEEASURER.  Ixvii 

fell  into  the  hands  of  the  King  by  the  forfeiture  of  Alesander  Duke 
of  Albany,  and  Sir  James  of  Liddalc  of  Halkerstoun,  were  united  and 
annexed  perpetually  to  the  Crown,  that  thereafter  the  Kiug  might 
be  advised  bow  he  would  dispose  of  the  remainder  in  reward  of  his 
true  lieges,  who  had  donc  his  Highness  good  and  true  service.  In 
witness  of  all  and  sundry  the  premisses  the  King's  Great  Seal,  and  the 
seals  of  the  venerable  aud  reverend  fathers  iu  Christ,  bishops,  abbots, 
priors,  together  with  the  seals  of  earls,  lords,  barons,  free-holders, 
and  commissioners  of  burghs,  were  hung  and  ajapended  thercto.' 

Henry  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth  was  the  frrst-named  witness 
in  a  bond  of  manrent  by  William  of  Stirling  of  the  Keir  to  Thomas 
Lord  Erskine,  dated  22d  August  1487." 

During  the  time  of  this  Abbot,  Margaret  of  Denmark,  Qucen  of 
James  the  Third,  in  February  1486-7,  aud  that  monarch  himself, 
in  1488,  were  interred  at  tlie  high  altar  in  the  Abbey  of  Cam- 
buskenneth ;  and  the  funeral  solemnities  were  no  doubt  performed 
by  Abbot  Henry.  As  a  tribute  to  the  memory  of  these  illustrious 
ancestors,  a  monument  with  an  appropriate  inscription  was  erected 
by  her  Majesty  Queen  Victoria,  in  1865,  as  is  afterwards  more  fuUy 
described. 

Henry,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  was  a  member  of  the  first 
Parliament  of  King  James  the  Fourth,  which  was  held  at  Edin- 
burgh,  6th  October  1488.    This  Parliament  applied  themselves  to 

'  The  Acts  of  the  Parliaments  o£  Scotland,  -  Inveutory  at  Glenalmond  CoUege  of  the 

vol.  ii.  p.  179.  Earl  of  Mar'3  Writs. 


Ixviii  IXTEODUCTIOX. 

the  investigation  of  the  causes  of  the  late  rebellion.  The  whole 
blame,  as  might  have  beeu  expected  from  such  partial  judges, 
■whose  object  was  to  secure  theu-  own  safety,  was  thi'own  upou 
the  late  Eang  and  his  wicked  counsellors.  After  full  examination, 
the  Three  Estates  were  unanimouslj  of  opinion  that  the  slaughter 
committed  in  the  field  of  StirHng,  where  the  Krng's  father  was  slain, 
together  with  divers  of  his  barons  and  lieges,  was  wholly  to  be  attri- 
buted  to  the  offences  and  coloured  deceit  practised  by  him  and  liis 
perverse  counsellors  divers  times  before  the  said  field.  The  acquittal 
of  King  James  the  Fourth  and  his  advisers  was  explicit,  declaring 
that  our  sovereign  lord,  that  now  is,  and  the  true  lords  and  barous 
that  were  with  him  iu  the  same  field,  were  innocent,  quit  and  free  of 
the  said  slaughter.^ 

In  this  Parliament  also,  iu  regard  to  the  proclamatiou  made  at 
Scone,  it  was  statute  aud  ordaiued  that  all  alienatious  of  lands,  heri- 
tages,  long-tacks,  feu-farms,  ofiices,  tailzies,  biench-farms,  and  creations 
of  new  dignities,  grauted  to  any  persons  of  whatever  estate,  degree  or 
conditiou,  since  the  2d  day  of  Feliruary  hxst  bjq^ast,  by  the  late  King 
his  ]\Iajesty's  father,  which  might  be  prejudicial  to  the  King  and 
the  Crown,  were  aunulled,  because  such  alienations,  gifts  and  privi- 
leges  were  granted  since  the  said  time,  for  the  assistance  of  the  j^er- 
verse  council  that  were  contrary  to  the  common  good  of  the  realm, 
and  cause  of  the  slaughter  of  the  said  sovereign  Lord.  This  Parlia- 
ment  being  adjom-ned  to  the  14th  of  January,  the  Abbot  of  Cambus- 

'  Tlie  Acts  of  the  Parliameiits  of  Scotlaiifl,  vol.  ii.  ji.  210. 


THE  ABBOTS:  HENRY  ARNOT,  LORD  TREASURER.  Ixix 

kenneth  was  appointecl  to  act  iu  tlae  meantime  as  one  of  a  committee 
of  Parliameut.^ 

The  Abbot  of  Cambuskeuueth  was  a  member  of  the  Parliament 
which  was  held  on  14th  January  1488,  and  was  chosen  oue  of  the 
Lords  of  Causes.^  It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  by  this  Parliameut  the 
See  of  Glasgow  was  erected  iuto  an  Archbishopric. 

The  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth  was  also  a  member  of  thc  ParUa- 
ments  hekl  at  Edinburgh,  3d  February  1489-90  ;  28th  April  1491  ; 
6th  February  1491-2  ;  and  he  was  one  of  the  persous  to  whom  the 
whole  power  of  ParUameut  was  committed  by  the  Lord  Commis- 
siouers  of  the  last-mentioned  Parliament,  on  20th  February.^ 

In  a  ParUament  hekl  at  Edinburoh  on  23d  June  1496,  Kins 
James  the  Foui'th  confirmed  to  Hemy  the  Abbot  and  the  Convent  of 
Cambuskenneth  the  graut  which  he  had  formerly  made  of  the  Chm-ch 
of  Kippen  for  Diviue  services  for  ever  to  be  performed  for  the  souls 
of  the  Kings  father  and  mother,  James  the  Third  and  JMargaret 
his  spouse,  whose  ashes  rested  in  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth,  as 
appears  from  the  charter  referred  to  in  this  instrument.  A  notarial 
instrumeut  on  this  confirmation  was  made  in  the  Parliament  House 
at  Ediuburgh.  The  King's  brother,  James  Duke  of  Ross,  and  the 
Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews  and  Glasgow,  etc,  were  witnesses.'' 

Alibot  Henry  obtaincd  the  office  of  Lord  High  Treasurer  of  Scot- 

i  The  Acts  of  the  Parliameuts  of  Scotlaud,  3  xhe  Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotlaud, 

vol.  ii.  p.  211.  vol.  ii.  pp.  216,  223,  229-231. 

■  Ibkl.  vol.  ii.  p.  212.  4  Infra,  p.  174,  No.  131. 

/.: 


Ixx  INTRODUCTION. 

land  before  the  5th  of  December  1492,  on  which  date  he  is  so 
designated  iu  a  judicial  proceeding.'  lu  this  office  he  succeeded  Sir 
William  Knollis,  preceptor  of  Torphicheu,  commouly  called  Lorcl 
Saint  John.  On  retiring  from  it,  he  obtained  from  the  King  letters 
of  acquittance  for  all  his  intromissious  as  treasurcr,  aud  for  the  King's 
jewels,  precious  stones,  gold  aud  silver,  etc,  which  had  been  com- 
mitted  to  his  custody  as  treasm-er.' 

Heury,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  was  a  member  of  the  Parliament 
held  at  Edinburgh  on  llth  March  1503-4,^  and  was  chosen  one  of  the 
Lords  to  sit  on  the  Session  on  the  19th  ]\Larch.  He  ceased  to  be 
Abbot  before  1505. 

Subjoined  are  facsimiles  of  two  signatures  of  Abbot  Henry,  one 
as  treasurer  in  1492,  and  the  other  adhibited  to  the  Compromise 
with  the  burgli  of  Stii-liug,  dated  31st  March  1501,  before  quoted.'' 


l^W-*  \^  i^^j^ 


s 


^  Kegistrum  Moraviense,  p.  24".  ^  The  Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotland, 

^  In/ra,  p.  31,  No.  20.  vol.  ii.  pp.  239,  249.  *  Sujjra,  p.  xxxiii. 


THE  ABBOTS.  Ixxi 


XXII.  David,  Twenty-second  Abbot,  1504-1508. 

Tho  carliest  notices  of  David,  Abbot  of  Camljuskeuueth,  are  iu 
the  Records  of  Parliameut  in  November  aud  December  1505,  aud 
in  February  1505-6.^  Ou  the  6th  of  March  1505-6,  a  perambulation 
and  division  of  forty  acres  of  the  laud  of  Chxckmauuan  was  niade 
between  him  and  Da\dd  Bruce  of  Clackmannan.'- 

He  was  a  Lord  of  the  Privy  Couucil  on  9th  December  150  7.^ 
He  was  auditor  of  tbe  accounts  of  the  Lord  High  Treasurer  iu  1500, 
aud  a  facsimile  of  Iiis  signature  appeuded  to  them  in  this  capacity  is 
here  given.    He  died  before  1510. 

XXIII.  AnDREW,  TWENTY-THIED  AbBOT,  1508-1510. 

Andrew  was  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth  in  the  year  1510.  On  the 
Ist  of  April  of  that  year  he  obtaiued  from  James  Bishoja  of  Duublaue 
letters  respectiug  an  agxeemeut  with  him  anent  the  Church  of  Kippen, 
to  which  both  claimed  ]'ight.  The  Abbot  claimed  the  church  by 
virtue  of  a  gift  from  King  James  the  Fourth,  whilst  the  Bishojj 

'  The  Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotland,        -  Infra,  p.  85,  No.  64. 
vol.  ii.  pp.  258,  260,  262,  265,  266.  ^  Pather  Hay'3  MS.,  Macfarlane,  p.  318. 


Ixxii  IXTEODUCTION. 

mamtained  that  it  was  a  prebend  or  canonry  of  tlie  catliedral 
Church  of  Dunblane,  and  could  not,  therefore,  be  l^estowed  by  the 
King  as  a  gift ;  and  that  as  the  Abbot  was  already  a  canon  of  that 
cathedral  church  by  holding  the  Church  of  Kincardine,  he  could  not 
legally  enjoy  two  canonries  or  prcbends  of  the  same  church.  An 
amicable  arrangement  was,  however,  arrived  at  between  the  Bishop 
and  Abbot  with  consent  of  the  King.^ 

On  the  21st  of  July  following,  Abbot  Andrew  was  instituted  in 
the  rectory  of  the  parish  of  Kippen  by  the  deUvery  of  the  book, 
chalice,  and  other  ornaments  of  the  high  altar  of  the  church  into  his 
hands.-  He  held  office  only  for  a  few  years,  and  was  succceded  by 
Pati-ick  Pantar. 

XXIV.  Pateick  Pantae,  Twenty-fourth  Abbot,  1510-1517. 

Patrick  Pantar  succeeded  Abbot  Andrew  about  the  year  1510, 
and  continued  in  office  till  the  year  1517,  when  he  resigned  in  favour 
of  Alexander  Mylne. 

Pantar  was  born  about  the  year  1470,  at  Montrose,  or  rather  at 
the  family-seat  of  Newmanswalls,  close  to  that  town  where  his 
ancestors  from  the  time  of  King  Eol^ert  the  Third  had  held  a 
distinguished  position.  Having  accjuired  much  reputation  for  his 
attainments  in  polite  letters  in  his  native  countr}',  he  went  to  France, 
and  there  studied  imder  the  most  eminent  professors  in  the  celebrated 
University  of  Paris.     He  returned  home  nearly  at  the  same  time  as 

1  Infra,  p.  170,  No.  130.  ^  /„y,.„^  p.  jg^,  No.  128. 


THE  ABBOTS:  PATRICK  PANTAB,  SECRETAEY,  1510-1517.     Ixxiii 

liis  countiymen  Hector  Boece  aud  George  Duudas,  liis  fellow-students 
in  the  College  of  Moutaigue — that  is,  as  Euddimau  conjectures,  shortly 
before  the  year  1500. 

Not  long  after  he  took  holy  ordcrs,  and  was  appointed  first  to  the 
rectory  of  the  Church  of  Fetteresso,  iu  the  Mearns,  and  afterwards  to 
the  preceptory  of  the  Church  of  Brechiu.^ 

From  his  acknowledged  emLuence  as  a  schoLar,  Pautar  was 
appointed  tutor  to  Alexander  Stewart,  the  natural  sou  of  King 
James  the  Fourth  by  Margaret,  daughter  of  Archibakl  Boyd  of 
Bonshaw,  who,  being  a  youth  of  great  promise,  was  educated  for  the 
church.  Not  long  after,  according  to  Ruddimau,  in  the  year  1505, 
from  his  great  wisdom  as  well  as  learning  he  was  called  to  the  Court, 
aud  appointed  chief  secretary  to  the  King,  whose  correspondence 
with  foreign  goverumeuts  Iie  thereafter  conducted  iu  Latin.  His 
pupil,  Alexander  Stewart,  after  going  through  a  course  of  classical  ancl 
other  studies  at  home,  was  seut  to  the  Continent  to  finish  his  educa- 
tion,  under  the  guidance  of  Sir  Thomas  Halkerton,  his  preceptor  aud 
governor.  Ha\dng  travelled  through  France,  he  weut  to  Italy  aud 
settled  at  Padua,  where,  under  the  superiutendence  of  the  illustrious 
masters  of  that  celebrated  University,  he  pursiied  his  studies  with 
great  application  aud  success.  Pantar  kept  up  a  correspoudence 
with  Stewart  during  his  residence  abroad,  and  some  of  the  letters  that 
passed  between  them  have  been  preserved. 

Young   Stewart   was    iuvested   with    the   archbishopric    of    St. 

'  Rudclinian  in  Epistolce  Eegiim  Scotorniu. 


Lxxiv  INTEODUCTION. 

Andrews  by  Pope  Julius  tlie  Second  in  tlie  year  1509,  in  compliance 
with  the  desire  of  his  father  King  James  the  Fourth,  aud  returned  to 
Scotland  in  1510.  Upon  his  elevation  to  this  dignity,  Pantar,  in  a 
letter  to  him  written  veiy  soon  after,  expresses  his  adniii-ation 
of  the  letters  which  he  received  from  the  treasurer,  and  which 
pleased  the  King  much.  He  expects  from  St.  Audi-ews,  as  Alexander 
Stewart  is  Primate,  the  primacy  in  letters  and  in  viitue.  He  equally 
praises  him  for  his  eminence  in  pulpit  aud  in  synod.  "  Biduus  labor 
setemo  cedet  honori. '  The  matter  is  not  for  gaining  an  abbey  or 
preserving  jurisdiction.  If  the  youthful  Archbishop  is  watchful  and 
active,  all  is  safe.^ 

Stewart,  in  a  letter  to  Pantar,  dated  Padua,  Tth  Calends  of  April 
(26th  March)  [1509-10  ?],  says  that  he  had  little  to  write  about,  since 
Pantar  knew  all  the  views  touching  the  Emperor.  If  any  bad  iusinu- 
ations  came  to  the  ears  of  King  James  in  reference  to  him,  he  hoped 
Pantar  would  do  his  best  to  remove  them.  He  thanked  him  for  his 
continuous  efforts  in  behaLf  of  his  tutor,  to  whom  he  felt  himself  most 
deeply  iudebted.  He  had  heard  from  Piobert  the  services  ^vhich  Pantar 
had  done  him." 

This  promising  ecclesiastical  dignitary  fell  at  the  battle  of  Flodden 
Fielcl,  9th  September  1513,  whilst  still  in  his  21st  year.  His  former 
master  wrote  an  elegant  tribute  to  his  memory,  in  which  he  cele- 
brated  his  genius  and  ratues. 

Pantar  endeavoured  to  obtain   the   office   of  preceptor   of  the 

1  3G18  E.  MS.  13.  B.  ii.  04,  British  Museum.  -  Ep.  Eeg.  Scot.  voL  i.  i).  178. 


THE  ABBOTS:  PJTBICK  PANTAB,  SECBETABY,  1510-1517.      Ixxv 

institution  of  tlie  Knights  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem  at  Torphicheu, 
in  the  shire  of  West  Lothian,  founded  by  King  David  the  First. 
In  order  to  the  adniission  of  any  man  to  this  order,  it  was  essential 
that  he  should,  hj  charters  or  other  authentic  documents,  prove  the 
nobility  of  his  descent  both  on  the  father  and  mothers  side  for  four 
generations.  In  a  letter  written  in  June,  the  year  not  given,  to  the 
Grand  INIaster  of  Rhodes,  Pantar  refers  to  his  being  a  candidate  for  this 
office  ;  and  after  mentioning  that  he  had  received  the  Grand  Master's 
letter,  dated  Blois,  20th  April,  says  that  he  had  not  sought  the 
Scotch  preceptory  of  Ehodes  through  greed ;  that  he  was  already 
weU  provided  for,  for  which  he  had  to  thank  the  King ;  but  his  jeer- 
ing  adversary  had  compelled  Htigation.  If  he  Avas  made  one  of  the 
knights,  he  hoped  that  he  would  satisfy  the  Society.  He  would  give 
the  requisite  bonds  on  the  merchants  of  Florence,  and  revive  the  de- 
cayed  endowments  of  the  order.^ 

Pantar,  in  a  letter  to  the  Papal  pronotary,  informs  the  Latter 
that  liis  letters,  dated  Ancona,  24th  May,  had  Ijeen  received  and 
read  by  the  King.  He  continues  in  his  resj^ect  for  the  Clhurch 
of  Eome.  In  reference  to  the  suit  raised  l:)y  Pantar  coucerning 
the  Preceptory  of  Ehodes,  to  which  he  had  beeu  collated  on  the 
death   of  Dominus   Detiden,    contrary   to    the   ancieut   custom   of 

'  3277  R.  MS.  13,  B.  ii.    77,  Britisli   Mu-  ception   of  pUgrims  who    came   to  visit  tlie 

seum.     The  Knights  of  St.  Johu  of  Jerusalem  Holy  Land,  and  their  subsequent  removal  suc- 

were  designated  of  Rhodes,  because  after  their  cessively  to  different  places,  they  at  last  re- 

original    establishment  at  Jerusalem,    where  tired  to  Rhodes,  where  they  were  at  thia  tirae 

they  built  a  church  and  monastery  for  the  re-  settled. 


Ixxvi  INTRODUCTION. 

Ehocles,  he  begs  that  the  prouotary  ^vould  write  to  the  Catholic 
King  in  his  favour.'  The  influence  of  the  Papal  court  was  not 
used  to  advance  the  interests  of  Pantar.  Spiuelly,  iii  a  letter  to 
[Henry  the  Eighth],  infonus  him  that  the  Secretary  [Pantar]  had 
lost  his  cause  at  Rome  in  the  matter  of  the  commandiy  of  St. 
Johu's  in  Scotland,  througli  the  influence  of  the  Cardiual  of  York 
[Bainbridge],  at  which  he  was  very  augiy ;  aud  adds,  that  the 
Bishop  of  JMurray  and  the  secretaiy  were  omnipoteut  with  the  Kiug 
of  Scotland.^ 

In  the  summer  of  1510,  Pantar,  secretary  of  Iviug  James 
the  Fourth,  along  with  William  Earl  of  ErroII,  Johu,  Prior  of  St. 
Andrews,  George,  Abbot  of  Holyrood,  Gawin  Duubar,  Archdeacon 
of  St.  Andrews,  Clerk  of  the  RoUs,  Robert  Forman,  pronotary,  Dean 
of  Glasgow  aud  ChanceUor  of  Morray,  with  their  horses,  their  servauts 
and  others  in  their  compauy,  Scotsmeu,  Italians,  or  Frenchmen,  had 
occasion  to  pass  through  Eugiaud  for  the  Coutinent,  probaljly  on 
their  way  to  France  to  arrange  some  public  business  with  the  Govern- 
ment  of  that  countiy.  Kiug  James,  therefore,  in  a  letter  to  King 
Henry  the  Eighth,  dated  Edinburgh,  8th  July  1510,  begged  a  safe- 
couduct  for  them.^ 

After  his  appointment  as  Abbot  of  Cambuskenueth,  Pautar  cou- 
tinued  to  hold  the  office  of  secretary  and  to  eujoy  the  confidence  of 
the  King. 

1  3G'20    E.    MS.    13,    B.   ii.    71,     Britisli  3  ^o.    1170,    Calig.   B.   iii.    139,     Britisli 
Museum.                                                                       Museum ;    Pinkerton's    History,    toI.    ii.    p. 

2  3651  Galba,  B.  iii.  9G,  Britisli  Museum.         451. 


TIIE  ABBOTS:  PATRICK  PANTAR,  SECRETARY,  1510-1517.     Ixxvii 

After  tbe  death  of  James,  Pantar  at  first  took  tlie  part  of  Queeii 
Margaret,  who  tlien  managed  tbe  kingdom,  under  tbe  name  of  testa- 
mentary  guardian  to  ber  sou,  and  in  cousequence  incurred  tbe  displea- 
sure  of  Jobn  Duke  of  Albany ;  and  soon  after  be,  on  12tb  July  1515, 
was  made  Eegent  by  tbe  Estates  of  Parbament,  vritb  tbe  support  of 
tbe  more  powerful  faction  opposed  to  tbe  Queen-motber.  Tbe  Abbot 
was,  by  bis  orders,  arrested,  pillaged  of  bis  goods,  and  imprisoned  in 
Incbgarvey,  a  small  isle  opposite  to  Queensferry,  wbere  be  was  cou- 
fined  in  a  tower  wbicb  bad  been  built  by  Kiug  James  tbe  Fourtli 
towards  tbe  end  of  bis  reign  for  tbe  protectiou  of  bis  nav}-.^ 

He  soon,  bowever,  regained  tbe  fovour  of  tbe  Duke  of  Albany, 
wbo  restored  bim  to  bis  origLual  bonours,  and  reckoned  bim  to  tbe 
last  among  bis  cbief  friends. 

As  secretary  to  King  James  tbe  Fiftb,  tbeu  under  tbe  Eegency  of 
Albany,  Patrick,  Abbot  of  Cambuskennetb,  wituessed  two  cbarters  by 
tbe  King,  dated  respectively  18tb  November,  15tb,  16th,  and  26tb 
Marcb  1517.'  Tbese  cbartei-s  sbow  tbat  Pantar  still  held  the  offices 
of  Abbot  of  Cambuskenuetb  and  secretary  to  the  King. 

In  tbe  year  1517,  Pantar  was  despatched,  along  witb  Gavin 
Douglas,  who  had  tben  been  presented  to  the  See  of  Dunkeld,  on  an 
embassy  to  Francis  tbe  First,  King  of  France,  in  order  to  assist  tbe 
Bishop  of  Eoss,  tbe  former  ambassador  tbere,  in  forming  a  lasting 
league  between  France  and  Scotland.     He  remained  at  the  Frencb 

'  Pinkerton's  History,  vol.  ii.  p.  14.3. 
^  Tiie  .Stirling.s  of  Keir,  by  WiUiam  Fraser,  [ip.  310-312. 
/ 


Ixxviii  INTBODUCTIOX. 

Court  for  some  time,  taking  charge  of  the  interests  of  Scotland  ;  and 
the  Duke  of  Albany,  who,  from  the  desperate  condition  to  which  his 
affairs  were  reduced  in  Scotlaud,  had  taken  refuge  in  France  in  the 
year  1516,  found  him  very  usefuL  In  order  to  secure  the  support 
of  the  Freuch  King,  the  Duke  adopted  the  unprincipled  ex^pe- 
dient  of  seuding  a  letter  to  Pope  Leo  the  Tenth,  iu  the  name  of  the 
Three  Estates  of  Scotkand,  dated  at  Edinburgh,  Ijeseeching  the  Pontiff 
to  intercede  for  them  with  Francis  the  King  of  France,  that  the  Duke 
might  be  permitted  to  return  to  Scotland  and  to  assume  the 
Regency.^  Pantar  so  far  forgot  his  dignity  as  to  wiite  the  letter 
for  him. 

Previous  to  his  departure  for  France,  Pantar,  from  affeetion  for  his 
native  town  and  from  motives  of  religion,  rebuilt  the  okl  Mouastery 
of  Montrose  on  a  new  site,  restored  to  it  its  original  endowments,  which 
had  been  alienated,  and  conferred  upon  it  various  benefactions. 

The  old  Monastery  was  originally  built  and  founded  in  the  year 
1213,  by  Alan  Durward  or  Hostiarius,  a  courtier  in  the  reign  of 
King  Alexander  the  Second,  of  much  daring  and  power.  Some 
notices  occur  of  certain  annualrents  which  the  Monastery  of  Mon- 
trose  received  out  of  the  hxnds  of  Eossie  and  otliers  in  the  years 
1245  and  1370  ;-  but  all  traces  of  its  site  have  long  siuce  disappeared. 
It  was  dedicated  to  the  Virgin  Mary,  and  it  is  supposed  that  it  stood 
on  that  portion  of  the  common  Links  of  Montrose  wliich  still  bears 

'  PinIierton's  History,  vnl.  ii.  p.  17J. 

-  Reg.  Vet.  de  Aberb.  ji.  .337  ;  Cbamberlain  Rolls,  vol   i.  pp.  541-5. 


THE  ABBOTS:  PATHIVK  FAXTAH,  SECnETARV,  1510-1517.     Ixxi 


the  name  of  St.  Mary,  situated  a  little  to  tbe  east  of  Victoria  Bridge, 
which  crosses  the  railway. 

On  14th  November  1516,  an  Act  of  Parliament  was  passed  com- 
mittiug  "to  the  venerable  father,  Patrick,  Abbot  of  Cambuskeuneth, 
our  Secretaiy,"  power  aud  autliority  of  wholly  alteriug  aud  changiug 
the  ancient  foundation  of  the  house  of  the  Bk'ssed  Virgin  ]\Iary  near 
the  burgh  of  Montrose  (in  the  diocese  of  Brechin),  of  which  he  is 
designated  Master  aud  possessor,  aud  for  the  erection  of  a  new 
foundation  of  the  same  in  favour  of  the  Order  of  the  Preaching 
Friars. 

That  Monaster}',  as  the  Act  records,  had  been  eudowed  by  the 
predecessors  of  King  James  the  Fourth  with  the  Lands  of  Spittale- 
scheUs,  Denside ;  with  oue  chakler  of  meal  in  place  of  an  auuual- 
reut,  aud  a  caue  from  the  lands  of  Balandro,  in  the  shire  of  Kiu- 
cardine  ;  the  lauds  of  Newmaiuis  Wallis  and  croft  of  Balkely,  in 
the  shire  of  Forfar ;  the  lands  of  Cla^^sched  and  Saudhauch,  on  the 
north  side  of  the  said  burgh  in  thc  same  shii'e,  with  all  the  tithes, 
predial,  personal,  natural  and  individual  of  the  same  lands,  oblatious 
aud  emoluments  fi-om  the  pious  gifts  of  the  faithfid  who  resorted 
thither  ;  with  one  fishing  of  the  water  of  Northesk,  commonly  called 
the  net  of  the  glorious  Virgin,  together  with  the  tithes  of  the  fishing. 
But  in  the  course  of  time,  from  the  negligence  of  Masters,  the  whole 
hospitality  had  ceased,  the  building  had  fallen  into  ruin,  and  the  fore- 
said  lands  had  been  alienated  by  the  Masters  and  given  in  feu  to  the 
nobihty  of  the  couutry  at  a  small  valuation. 


Ixxx  INTBODUCTION. 


Pantar  compassionating  tlie  condition  of  tbe  IMonastery,  and  in- 
spired  by  sentiments  of  devotion  towards  the  blessed  Virgin,  it  is 
further  narrated,  had  redeemed  and  restored  the  above-mentioned 
lands  which  had  been  alienated  to  the  nobles,  having  obtained  decrees 
thereupon  of  the  Lords  of  the  King's  Council,  and  had  restored  and 
erected  this  same  house  and  church  at  great  expense  from  the 
foundations.  As  the  fruits  and  emoluments  of  the  house  and  church 
were  small,  he  had  also  incorporated  and  obtained  to  be  mortified  in 
favour  thereof,  an  annuah-ent  of  twenty  merks  Scots  from  the  lands 
of  Dunhasny  (Dalhesney),  Dabley  (Dovly),  Shannack  (Shanno),  and 
Corniscorun  (Corneskcorn),  in  the  barony  and  lordship  of  Glenesk  in 
the  shire  of  Forfar,  which  had  been  alienated  and  sold  by  John  Earl  of 
Crawford  ;  an  annuak-ent  of  five  merks  out  of  the  lands  of  the  barony 
of  Ferue  in  tlie  same  county  ;  an  annuah-ent  of  six  merks  out  of  the 
lands  of  Cukestoun  in  the  barony  of  Reskoby,  within  the  regality  of 
the  archbishop  of  St.  Andrews  ;  an  annuah^ent  of  six  merks  from 
the  lands  of  Ballindoch  in  the  barony  of  Inverkeillor  iu  the  shirc  of 
Forfar ;  and  also  the  grant  of  indulgences  to  those  visitiug  the  said 
church,  and  sepulture  therein  to  pilgrims  dyiug  on  their  journey 
to  or  departure  from  it,  if  they  choose.^ 

Pautar,  superior  of  tlie  house  and  church,  with  the  consent  and 
authority  of  Parhament,  disponed  by  gift  the  jjreceding  Lands  and 
grants  to  John  Adamsou,  provincial  of  the  Order  of  Preachers,  and 
to  the  prior  and  successors  of  the  same  order.     The  charter  Ijy  which 

1  The  Acts  of  the  Parliameiits  of  Scotlaud,  vol.  ii.  pp.  389-91. 


THE  ABBOTS :  PATFJCK  PAXTAB,  SECBETARY,  1510-1517.     Ixxxi 

this  disposition  was  made  is  dated  at  Ediuburgii,  9th  3Iay  1517.  To 
it  Alexander  Mylne,  cauon  and  official  of  Dimkeld,  who  succeeded 
Pantar  as  Abbot  of  Camljuslvenneth,  was  a  wituess. 

The  inmates  of  the  IMouastery  of  Montrose,  dissatisfied  with  its 
removal,  preseuted  a  few  years  after  a  petition  to  Parliament,  praying 
to  be  allowed  to  return  to  their  old  resideuce,  coraplaining  that  their 
devotions  were  distui'bed  by  the  nearness  of  the  uew  establishment  to 
the  public  road.^  The  prayer  of  this  petitiou,  Spottiswoode  says,  was 
granted." 

Till  a  recent  period  traces  of  the  hospital  established  by  Pantar 
were  to  be  seen  in  the  Sandhaugh,  about  a  mile  nearer  to  the  town  of 
Montrose  than  the  field  of  St.  Mary  before  mentioned. 

The  city  of  ]\liddleburgh,  being  desirous  to  have  assigued  to  them 
an  agency  aud  powers  to  act  ou  behalf  of  the  Scottish  nation,  by 
their  consul,  M.  Petrus,  spontaneously  ofiered  to  fulfil  the  wishes  of 
the  Duke  of  Albany  in  every  particular. 

As  secretary  of  King  James  the  Fifth,  Pantar  couducted,  under 
the  Duke  of  Albany,  the  correspondence  of  the  Scottish  Government 
on  this  subject.  The  Duke  not  beiug  inclined  to  grant  the  desires 
of  the  city  of  Middlebm'gh,  Pantar  and  the  consul  wrote  to  them 
to  that  effect.  The  city  in  theii-  answer,  dated  16th  August  1518, 
to  Pantar,  express  themselves  in  these  complimentary  terms  : — "  We 
salute  thy  excellency  most  earnestly,  0  most  eloquent  mau !     ]\I. 

^  The  Acts  of  the  Parliameuts  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  395. 
^  History  of  Eeligious  Houses. 


Ixxxii  IXTRODUCTIOX. 

Petrus,  our  cxcellent  coiisul,  whom  lately  \ve  sent  as  ambassador  to 
liis  Higbness  tbe  most  illustrious  Duke  of  Alban}-,  baving  returnecl, 
has  brougbt  back  to  us  your  letters,  which  are  most  pleasant  and  full 
of  cloqueuce  aud  courtesy  to  us,  and  at  tbc  same  time  be  bas  told  us 
tbc  wbole  circumstances  that  took  pbxce  during  his  commission,  and 
your  remarkable  kindness,  favour  and  patronage  towards  himself, 
whicb  you  bave  bestowed  on  bim  during  his  emljassy  and  on  our 
account.  Wliercfore  we  return  to  your  excellency  great  thanks." 
They  tben  express  tbeii'  regret  at  the  unfavourable  cbaracter  of  his 
answer  as  to  tbe  matter  in  cjuestion.  "  Tbis,"  tbey  write,  "  was  so 
bitter  to  us  tbat  notliing  could  bappen  more  disagrecable."  Tbey  bad 
heard  that  tbe  privUeges  of  wbicb  tbey  were  so  desirous  bad  been 
conferred  by  the  Government  of  Scotlaud  on  tbe  townships  of  the 
Verenses  in  preference  to  tbem  ;  tbougb,  as  they  atiirni,  tbe  advau- 
tages  to  Scotbiud  would  have  been  much  greater  by  acting  tbe  otber 
way.  "  AVe  advise  afresb,"  tbey  add,  "  that  tbe  most  illustrious 
Duke  of  Albauy  sbould  tako  into  cousideratiou  our  letters,  in  wliicb 
we  have  appealed  to  bis  generosity,  tbat  be  may  bring  tbe  matter  to 
tbe  wisbed-for  end,  conceruing  wbich  we  also  bave  agreed  to  inform 
yoiu"  excellcncy,  that  you  may  bestow  upou  us  in  tbis  cause  your 
patrouage,  and  tbat  you  may  commend  us  to  the  Duke  tbat  tbe 
result  may  come  about  according  to  om'  wisbes,  otberwise  we  utterly 
despair  of  tbe  matter."  Tben  follows  au  offer  of  a  well-secured 
bribe,  to  induce  Pantar  to  promote  tbe  object  upon  wbich  tbe  city 
of  ]\Iiddleburgb  was  so  intent  :    "  It  is  no  secret  to  us  that  your 


riJE  ABBOTS :  PATFJCK  PAXTAB,  SECRETARV,  1510-151".    Ixxxiii 

excellency  enjoys  great  autliority  and  influenee  with  tlie  illustrious 
Duke.  And  something  would  be  owiug  to  him  who  would  work 
earnestly  in  the  finishing  of  this  business.  Wherefore,  by  the  tenour 
of  these  presents,  we  come  under  an  obligation  to  your  excellency, 
that  if  the  result  correspouds  with  our  wishes,  that  those  three 
hundred  golden  crowus  which  our  said  ambassador  has  promised  to 
your  excellency  shall  be  paid  without  any  delay,  and  that  we  will 
hold  the  same  promise  of  his  agreeable  and  binding  under  sccurity 
of  the  state  of  Middleljurgh.  Fare  thee  well,  Oh !  most  faithful  df 
friends."^ 

Pantars  answer  to  the  above  letter,  which  is  preserved  in  the 
same  collection,  translated  from  the  original  Latin,  is  as  follows  : — 

MoST  HONOURABLE  SiRS, — We  greet  you  weU.  We  have  received  yoiir 
letters,  from  which  I  see  tliat  you  have  felt  aggrieved,  and  have  had  your  suspicions 
excited  iu  consequence  of  your  envoy  having  returned  home  without  accomplishing 
the  object  of  his  mission ;  and  that  you  have  felt  this  untoward  circimistance  tlie 
more,  as  the  report  has  reached  you  that  your  neighbours  have  obtained  the  advan- 
tage  which  you  solicited,  and  this  has  excited  your  envy  and  indignation ;  when 
you  hoped  that  the  matter  woukl  be  arranged  with  the  Duke  of  Albany  conform- 
ably  to  your  wishes,  and  considered  that  besides  that,  no  further  authority  was 
required  to  conclude  it  in  your  name,  and  that  nothing  was  wanting  for  the  con- 
clusion  of  the  contract.  But  during  that  period  I  was  suffering  from  an  attack  of 
fever;  nor  did  I  understand  what  was  going  on,  until  the  negotiations  had  made 
considerable  progress  ;  afterwards  I  well  knew  everything  that  had  beeu  treated 
of.  Your  worships  should  not  wonder  nor  be  annoyed,  if,  taking  into  accouut  the 
uncertainty  of  human  affairs,  the  issues  of  any  business  should  be  doubtful,  especially 
when  a  number  of  men  are  soliciting  the  same  object,  aud  pursue  it  keenly,  eaoli 

'  Epistola'  Regum  Seotorum,  vol.  ii.  p.  276. 


Ixxxiv  INTnODUCTION. 

one  for  liimself.  You  liarl  an  opportunity  of  pressing  your  suit  witli  the  Eegent  all 
the  winter  without  any  molestation  from  competiug  parties  ;  but  you  lost  the  oppor- 
tunity  by  delay,  so  that  your  opponents  were  the  first  to  approach  him  on  the 
subject,  and  they  coutended  both  with  the  influence  of  friends  and  with  money,  pro- 
secuting  their  cause,  not  like  you,  with  the  view  of  obtaining  the  position,  but  of 
retaining  it.  It  is  sufiiciently  evident,  that  the  town  of  your  opponeuts  is  far  iuferior 
to  yours  as  an  emporium,  and  not  at  all  to  be  compared  with  it.  But  since  our  mer- 
chants,  during  a  niimber  of  years,  have  been  accustomed  to  their  town,  and  it  has 
largely  increased  by  the  wealth  derived  from  their  trade  with  our  nation,  the 
inhabitants  there  vigilantly  attended  to  the  retention  of  a  source  of  so  much  gain, 
and  treated  our  merchants  \\\\.\\  extraordinary  kindness,  lest  a  prize  of  so  much 
value  should  be  snatclied  from  their  grasp.  Your  envoy  certainly  conducted  his 
case  with  a  prudence  and  energy  tliat  could  not  be  surpassed ;  aud  suffered  only 
too  much  mental  anxiety  on  account  of  the  untoward  turn  which  the  business 
took ;  and  on  both  sides,  in  fact,  much  zeal  was  manifested.  But  I  let  you  know 
the  whole  state  of  the  affair,  and  pledge  my  word  for  the  truth  of  my  statement, 
which  will  be  further  confirmed  by  what  Jolm  Moffet  tells  you.  He  is  fully 
acquaiuted  w-ith  each  detail,  and  your  Lordships  may  place  entire  confidence  in  his 
veracity.     Farewell.     At  Paris,  on  the  Kalends  of  1518.' 

While  in  France,  Pantar  fell  iuto  Ijad  healtb,  aud  after  struggiing 
agaiust  it  for  uearly  two  years,  becomiug  weaker  every  day,  he  at 
leugth  closed  his  life  at  Paris  in  the  year  1519.^ 

Pautar,  had  his  life  beeu  prolonged,  iutended,  as  we  learn  from  a 
letter  of  his  successor,  Alexander  Mylue,  to  the  Abbot  of  St.  Victor  at 
Paris,  to  have  uudertaken  tlie  task  of  reforming  the  abuses  which 
prevailed  at  Caml^uskenneth  as  in  other  monasteries,  aud  of  restoriug 
it  to  its  primitive  zeal  in  the  cultivatiou  of  piety  aud  letters,  aud 
IDurity  of  manners. 

1  Epist.  Rcg.  Scofc.  vol.  i.  p.  284.  ^  Buddiman. 


THE  ABBOTS:  PATRICK  PANTAR,  SECHETAEY,  1510-1.-)17.       Ixxxv 

Thomas  Dempster,  iii  liis  Hi.storica  Eeclesiastica,  notices  Abbot 
Patrick  iu  these  terms  : — "  Patricius  Pauetarius  tloctriuEe  hiude  et 
professione  Parisieusi  inclytus,  sed  multo  magis  pruclentia^  dotibus 
celebris  ;  quo  nomine  in  arcani  concilii  secretum  admissus  a  Jacobo  IV. 
rege,  edidit  ad  eum  Politicas  observationes." ' 

A  monument  of  the  ability  and  schohxrship  of  Pantar  still  remaius 
in  the  first  volume  of  "  Epistola^  Regum  Scotorum,"  most  of  whicli 
were  composed  by  him.  Tlie  learned  ]\Ir.  Thomas  Euddiman,  under 
whose  editorship  this  volume  was  published  in  the  year  1722,  pro- 
nounces  the  followang  eulogium  on  the  learniug  and  worth  of 
Pantar.  "  Throughout  these  letters,"  he  says,  "  there  appears  not 
only  so  great  eloquence  suited  to  the  subject-matter  and  persons,  but 
also  such  neatness  and  elegance  of  words  and  phrases,  (considering 
the  time  when  they  were  written,)  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  in 
all  Europe  others  written  in  a  more  vigorous  style.  In  this  age,  indeed, 
in  which  the  love  and  pursuitof  Belles  Lettres  began  to  revive,  King 
James  the  Fom-th  added  to  the  other  most  splendid  glories  of  his 
reign,  this  also  that  he  held  learned  men  in  esteem,  and  honourcd 
them  with  distinguished  rewards. 

"  His  founding  the  University  of  Aberdeen  abundantly  testifies  to 
this,  as  well  as  the  public  euactments  ordaining  that  the  children  of 
the  wealthier  classes  should  be  instructed  in  the  liberal  arts  ;  and 
lastly,  these  letters  themselves,  most  elegantly  composed  for  the  times, 

'  Tom.  ii.  ji.  5.39,  EJinburgli,  1S29.     This       — [Nimmo's  Hiatory  of  Stirlingsliire,  vol.   i. 
work  by  Patrick  Pantar  ia  said  to  be  now  lost.      p.  123.] 


Ixxxvi 


IXTRODUCTION. 


for  wliicli  ol)ject  it  is  reasonable  to  believe  that  the  Kiiig  sought  out 
some  man  of  surpassiug  excellence  and  eminent  wisdom  among  his 
sul)jects,  the  most  fit  for  discharging  this  duty,  aud  uot  more  distin- 
guished  by  the  excellence  of  his  charactur  and  political  sagacity  thau 
by  his  learning.  That  mau  was  Patrick  Pantar,  iu  regard  to  whom, 
since  this  first  volume  of  letters  is  chiefly  iudebted  for  its  grace  and 
beauty  to  him,  we  could  uot,  without  mauifest  iugratitude,  refraiu 
from  sultjoining  somethiug  here  at  the  close,  conceruing  his  birth  and 
mauner  of  life."' 

Subjoined  is  au  engraving  of  the  seal  of  Abbot  Pantar  from  an 
original  impression  iu  the  Pulilic  Record 
( )fEce,  London.     The  seal    shows  a  fuU- 
length  figure  of  the  Virgin  ]\Iary  and  the 
ii '^-x^i^m^^^tA-W:    x  infaut   Jesus,  standing   under   a   canopy 

'/  ■ -^  WiA  /iTT'  -1  I:-?a\  supported  by  columus.  The  background 
is  oruamented  with  foliage.  In  the  base 
of  the  seal  is  a  shield  with  the  armorial 
beariugs  of  tlie  family  of  Pautar,  ou  a  fess 
between  three  mullets  as  many  rouudles. 
The  inscription  is  "S  ofiicii  Patrii  Pautr 
Abbat  de  Cabuskyuet." 

Subjoined  is  a  facsimile  of  the  siguature 
of  King  James  the  Fourth  froni  a  letter  to  Ferdiuaud,  Kiug  of  both 
the  Aragous,  dated  the  kalends  of  July  (ist  July)  1512,  referriug  to 
the  ardent  desires  aud  streuuous  efi"orts  of  the  Scottish  monarch   to 


THE  ABBOrS:  rATRICK  PANTAR,  SECBETAnY,  1510-1517.     Ixxxv 

terminate    tlie   hateful   -war   wliieh   distracted   Christendom    by    tli 
establishment  of  a  hxsting  peace. 


This    letter    is    countersigned     "J     Secrctario    Panitar," — ]>y 
Secretary  Panitar. 


/1    $<n^^ 


r 


:A 


<U«4^<*.)' 


1  British  Museum,  Additioual  Charters,  No. 
616,  Egerton  MSS.  The  handwriting  of 
the  vohime  of  Transcripts  of  Royal  Letters 
ia  the  reign  of  King  Jaines  the  Fifth,  dated 
between  1536  and  1544,  is  very  siniilar  to  the 
writing  of  Patrick  Pantar,  and  was  probably 
an  imitation  of  it.     The  volume  was  in  the 


family  of  the  Lords  Elphinstone  for  niaii\- 
generations ;  and  the  )iresent  Lord,  in  the 
year  1865,  geuerously  presented  the  volunie 
to  the  Lord  Clerk-Register,  to  be  preserveil 
amongst  the  Xational  Records  in  H.M. 
General  Register  House,  Ediubur"h. 


Ixxxviii  IXTHODUCTIOX. 


XXV.  Alexaxder  Mylne,  the  Twenty-fifth  Abbot,  1517-154S. 

Alexaj^der  Mylne  was  educated  at  the  Uuiversity  of  St.  Andrews, 
in  which  he  was  a  Determiuant  iu  the  year  1494,  aud  took  orders 
within  a  few  years  after  that  date.  In  the  year  1505  he  was  Eector 
of  Luudeif.  He  was  also  a  prebend  of  the  cathedral  of  Dunkekl, 
and  Ijecame  official  of  the  diocese  ;  aud,  wheu  it  was  divided  iuto 
the  four  deaueries  of  Athole,  Angus,  Fife  and  Strathearn,  he  was 
appoiuted  Dean  of  Angus. 

On  the   28th  of  October  1516,  Johu  Duke  of  Albany,  Eegeut 

of  Scothiud,  wrote  to  Pope  Leo  the  Teuth  a  k^tter  in  Latiu,  of  which 

the  foUowiug  is  a  tran.slation  : — 

MosT  BLESSED  Father, — AVe  present  our  service  by  kissing  thy  feet.  Since 
our  friend  and  the  King's  secretary,  Patrick,  Abbot  of  the  Monastery  commonly 
called  Cambuskenneth,  belonging  to  the  Order  of  Augustine,  and  to  the  diocese  of 
St.  Andrews,  proposcs  and  intends  to  give  up  or  resign  this  abbacy  into  the  hands 
of  your  Holiness,  we  beseech  that,  when  the  aforesaid  abbacy  shaU  have  become 
vacant  by  the  free  resignation  of  the  said  secretary,  your  Holiness  may  be  jjleased 
to  adjudge  and  confer  the  adniinistration  of  the  same  for  life  on  our  beloved  Mr. 
Alexander  Mylne,  official  of  Dunkeld,  a  man  of  approved  worth,  and  to  appoint  the 
said  Alexander  Abbot  of  the  said  Monastery,  to  intrust  to  him  the  care,  rule  and 
administration  of  the  same,  and  to  reserve,  constitute  and  assign  to  Patrick,  on  his 
resignation,  a  pension  which  he  .should  deem  proper,  namely,  the  lands  and  churches 
of  the  said  Monastery,  with  their  pertinents,  at  the  same  time  with  right  of  regress 
to  the  same  abbacy  when  it  may  happen  to  be  vacant  through  resignation  or 
decease  in  the  person  of  Alexander,  or  even  of  another,  or  in  any  other  way  ;  and 
may  your  Holiness  reign  long  and  happily  over  the  Church. 

From  Edinburgh,  on  the  twenty-eiglith  day  of  the  montli  of  October,  in  the 
year  sixteen.^ 

'  Epistol*  Regum  Scotorum,  vol.  i.  p.  275,  Xo.  xU-ii. 


TIIE  ABBOTS:  ALEXAXDEB  MYLXE,  LORD  PEESIDEXT.  Ixxxix 

In  terms  of  this  letter,  Mylne  was  appointed  Abbot  of  Cambus- 
kenneth  in  the  year  1517.  Aftor  his  appoiutment  as  Abbot,  Alexauder 
Mylne  showed  a  commendable  concern  in  the  affairs  of  thc  Aljbey, 
both  spii'itual  and  temjsoraL  He  was  himself  a  cultivator  of  learuiug  ; 
and  his  fii-st  endeavour  was  to  effect  au  im^irovement  in  the  education 
of  the  religious  order  with  whieh  he  was  now  connected,  lest  tlie  study 
of  letters,  abeady  almost  forgotteu  amongst  them,  sliould  utterly  perish. 
In  a  letter,  dated  loth  January  1522,  to  the  Abbot  and  canons  of  St. 
Victor  of  the  Order  of  St.  Augustine  at  Paris,  which  had  become  famous 
for  the  reforms  which  they  had  successfuUy  introduced  into  their 
establishments,  Mylne  explains  his  views  and  wishes  on  that  important 
subject.  He  prays  them  to  second  him  iu  his  efforts  to  restore  a  strict 
adherence  to  the  religious  obsei-vances  of  his  order,  which  Iiad  fallen 
into  desuetude  from  thc  negligence  of  his  predecessors,  and  to  revive 
the  study  of  letters,  the  knowledge  of  which  was  in  danger  of  be- 
coming  extinct.  After  paying  a  tribute  to  the  memory  of  his  prede- 
cessor,  Patrick  Pautar,  who  had  been  prevented  only  by  his  deatli 
from  reforming  the  convent  of  Cambuskeuueth,  JMylne,  to  secure  a  class 
of  learned  men  for  his  Monastery,  with  whom  it  formerly  aljounded, 
but  who  liad  now  almost  disappeai'ed,  purposed  to  send  some  of  the 
most  promising  of  its  novices  to  the  Universities  of  Paris  for  the  ^ro- 
secution  of  the  study  of  sacred  literature,  that  they  might  be  fitted  to 
give  iustruction  to  others,  and  discharge  the  sacred  ofHces  of  their  order. 

The  letter  is  written  iu  the  Latin  hmguage,  aud  translated  is  in 
the  following  terms  : — 


IXTRODUCTIOX. 


Alexander,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  to  tlie  Abbot  of  the  Monastery  of 
St.  Victor  at  Paris,  and  the  Monks  of  the  same. 

To  the  reverend  father  in  Christ,  the  Lord  Abbot  of  the  Monastery  of  St.  Yictur, 
of  the  Order  of  St.  Augustine,  at  Paris,  and  to  the  canonical  monks  of  the  same, 
Alexander,  the  unworthy  Abbot  of  the  Monastery  of  the  blessed  Virgin  of  Cambus- 
kennetli,  of  tlie  same  order,  in  the  kingdom  of  Scotland,  sends  mutual  and  sincere 
charity  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ.  Seeing  that  we  would  well  consult  our 
welfare  if,  according  to  the  rule  of  the  teacher  and  founder  of  our  order,  and  the 
apostolic  precept,  we  were  always  to  be  of  one  heart  and  mind,  and  were  to  bear 
each  otliers  burdens,  we  have  thouglit  proper  to  entreat  your  fraternity,  (for  we  have 
heard  that  you  plentifully  abound  in  rendering  aid,)  tliat  you  would  be  pleased,  to  the 
extent  of  your  power,  to  second  us  in  the  eflbrts  we  are  making  in  the  fear  of  the 
Most  High  and  of  His  most  holy  mother  the  Virgin,  our  patroness,  to  resume  a  strict 
adherence  to  the  rules  of  our  order  in  whatever  particulars  we  may  have  fallen  from 
the  observance  of  the  same  tlrrough  the  sloth  and  negligence  of  our  predecessors  ; 
for,  as  I  say,  through  the  carelessness  of  others,  many  things  pertaining  to  the 
reUgious  rites  and  ornament  of  our  Monastery  have  fallen  into  desuetude,  so  the 
study  of  literature,  which  in  an  especial  manner  is  the  province  of  us  ecclesiastics, 
has  been  quite  forgotten,  and  unless  it  be  promoted,  will  cease  to  exist.  And 
since  with  you,  according  to  report,  the  reformation  of  our  rule,  ■which  for  some 
time  past  has  been  less  and  less  rigidly  observed,  happily  succeeded,  and  through 
the  aid  of  the  Most  High,  daily  flourishes  more  and  more,  and  on  that  account  the 
late  Patrick  Paniter,  a  man  of  the  strongest  judgment,  Secretary  of  State  to  the 
King  of  Scotland,  our  predecessor  in  the  ofEce  of  Abbot,  who  lately  died  while  in 
the  discharge  of  Iiis  duties  as  ambassador  to  the  most  Christian  King,  intended,  if 
death  had  not  carried  him  oif,  to  have  reformed  our  brethren  after  the  model  of 
your  institutions,  we,  animated  with  a  zeal  and  vigilance  not  inferior  to  his,  and 
though  undeserving,  liaving,  by  the  appointment  of  the  Supreme  Pontiff",  succeeded 
immediately  to  such  a  man  in  the  government  of  our  house,  are  endeavouring  to  cariy 
out  his  intentions  without  alteration.  For  which  purposc  nothing  is  more  want- 
ing  than  a  number  of  learned  men — a  class  which,  although  at  one  time  abounding 
among  us,  is  now  almost  extinct  and  cannot  readily  be  called  into  existence,  unless 
we  send  forth  some  of  our  novices  of  the  most  promising  parts  to  universities 
where  the  prosecution  of  the  study  of  literature  is  most  active.     Nor  do  we  think 


TIIE  ABBOTS :  ALEXANDER  MYLXE,  LORD  PBESIDEXT.        xci 

that  we  should  have  ma(h.>  sufficieiit  provisioii  iu  the  matter  were  they  to  devote 
themselves  merely  to  secular  studies.  Hence  it  is  that  we  desire  that  some  of  our 
novices  should  be  educated  in  your  college,  that  they  may  be  imbued  with  the 
morals  and  observances  of  your  most  perfect  rule,  and  may  derive  a  fiimiliar  know- 
ledge  of  sacred  literature  ;  and  having  attained  to  proficiency  tliercin,  may  show  to 
otliers  the  light,  and  a  good  example  to  be  followed  in  the  strictest  observance  of 
religion  ;  and  not  confining  themselves  to  this,  may,  as  having  made  a  profession 
as  students,  discliarge  the  other  sacred  offices  like  other  members  of  the  order. 
Wherefore,  if  you,  brother  Abbot,  deign  to  extend  mutual  charity  to  us  in  this 
matter,  be  so  good  as  to  inform  us  by  this  messenger  wliat  your  sentiments  on  the 
subject  are,  and  what  maj''  be  required  for  the  maintenance  and  clothing  and  other 
expenses  of  an  ecclesiastic  ^jcr  aiinum,  that  we  may  repay  you  the  same  at  certain 
terms,  according  to  agreement,  and  we  bid  you,  brother  Abbot,  farewell  in  Christ 
who  is  our  salvation.  From  our  Monastery  of  Cambuskenneth,  the  15th  of  June, 
tlie  year  of  our  Lord  1522.^ 

To  tliis  appeal  tlie  Abbot  aurl  Cauon  of  St.  Yictor  respouded 
favourably,  as  luay  be  coucluded  froui  the  kuowu  fact  that  soou  after 
Scottish  uovices  were  seut  to  Paris  for  their  educatiou.  To  Abljot 
^lylue  was  dcdicated  au  Exegesis  by  Robert  Eichardsou,  tlieu  a  cauou 
of  the  Abl)ey  of  St.  Victor,  published  at  Paris  in  the  year  1530. 

lu  illustration  of  Alibot  j\Iylue's  anxiety  to  restore  his  Monastery 
to  its  original  piuity  aud  piety,  an  auecdote  is  recorded  of  hiui  by 
Richardson.  By  a  cauon  of  the  Council  of  Toledo,  it  was  required 
that,  in  monasteries  of  the  Order  of  St.  Augustiue,  the  Scriptures 
shoukl  be  read  to  the  mouks  duriug  the  time  of  diuuer.  This 
pious  custom  had  falleu  iuto  desuetude,  but  was  re^ived  by  Abbot 
]\Iylue  in  the  Mouastery  with  which  he  was  counected.  On  the 
days  wheu  the  monks  were  wout  to  eat  fish,  lie  caused  soniethiug 

'  Epist.  Reg.  .Scot.  vol.  i.  p.  .335. 


xcii  IXTRODUCriOX. 

to  be  read  during  the  wliole  time  of  dinner,  and  on  other  days,  before 
and  after  that  meal.  When  present  himself,  as  he  almost  always 
was,  especially  on  the  Sabbath,  he  used  to  deliver  a  discourse  in  the 
middle  of  dinuer;  and  to  excite  the  interest  of  the  brethren  of  the 
convent  in  this  exercise,  he  would  sometimes  call  on  one  of  them  to 
give  au  extempore  address.  Eichardsou  adds  that,  although  unworthy, 
he  was  himself  often  one  of  those  who  were  thus  calied  on  to  exercise 
their  gifts.^  An  abbot  Ijearing  tlie  high  character  accorded  to  Mylne, 
had,  as  might  have  been  anticipated,  a  very  beneficial  influence  on 
the  Abbey  as  a  large  religious  establishment. 

Duriug  his  tenure  of  the  Abbacy  he  effected  many  improvements 
connected  with  the  Abbey.  Under  him  the  great  altar  and  chapter- 
house  were  rebuilt  ;  and  two  new  cemeteries  were  formed.  At  his 
instance,  in  the  year  1521,  James,  Bishop  of  Dunkekl,  dedicated  the 
Abbey  Church  of  Cambuskenneth  and  the  two  cemeteries  at  the 
east  and  west  end,  with  the  chapter-house  and  enclosure,  and  like- 
wise,  with  the  assistance  of  his  archdeacon  and  the  prel)ondaries  of 
Kippen  and  Gleudovan,  consecrated  the  great  altar  thereof.^ 

Abbot  Mylue  found  a  wider  fiehl  for  the  exercise  of  his  aljilities  than 
the  affairs  of  his  Abbey,  which  could  not  have  occupied  the  whole  time 
of  so  active  an  administrator.  In  the  year  1524,  he  was  sent  on  an 
embassy  to  England,  to  negotiate  a  marriage  between  King  James 
the  Fifth  aud  the  Priucess  Mary,  daughter  of  Kiug  Heury  the  Eighth. 

•  Exegesis  iu  Canonem  ilivi  Augnstiui,  per  fratrem  Eobertum  Eichardinum.     Paris,  1530, 
pp.  102,  103.  '^lnfra,  p.  122,  No.  92. 


THE  ABBOTS:  ALEXANDER  MYLXE,  LORD  PRESIDEXT.     xciii 

lu  the  following  year  he  was  appointed  Ijy  the  Parliament  of  Scot- 
land,  along  with  others,  to  have  the  care  of  King  James  the  Fifth/ 

On  17th  May  1532  Kiug  James  the  Fifth  and  his  Parliameut 
instituted  the  College  of  Justice  for  the  decision  of  civil  causes.  It 
was  to  cousist  of  fifteen  Judges,  seveu  to  be  chosen  from  the  temporal 
estate,  aud  eight  from  the  spiritual  order,  of  whom  one  was  to  l)e 
President  of  the  Court.  By  the  Act  of  Parhameut  which  iustituted 
"  aue  college  of  cunniug  aud  wise  men,"  as  now  described,  it  was 
provided  that  the  processes,  sentences  and  decreets  should  have  the 
same  strength,  force  and  effect  as  the  decreets  of  the  Lords  of  Sessiou 
formerly  had. 

Abbot  Mylue  was  appointed  the  fii-st  President,  and  the  new 
Court  commenced  its  sittings  iu  the  presence  of  the  King,  on  the  27th 
of  May  1532.  It  then  consisted  of  sixteen  Lords,  iucluding  the  Lord 
Chaucellor  and  the  Lord  President.  Although  at  that  time  the  duties 
of  the  President  of  the  CoUege  of  Justice,  or  Court  of  Session,  could 
uot  have  been  so  onerous  as  they  have  now  become,  yet  even 
then  the  ofiice  was  a  very  respousible  one,  and  much  of  the  labour  of 
organizing  a  new  Supreme  Civil  Court  devolved  upon  the  President 
during  the  sixteen  years  (1532-1548)  that  he  held  that  high  ofiice. 

Soon  after  his  appoiutmeut  as  Presideut  of  the  CoIIege  of  Justice, 
Abbot  Mylne  performed  the  good  service  of  haviug  the  ]\Iuuiments 
of  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskeuneth  trauscril^ed,  as  has  been  already 
related. 

^  The  Acts  of  tlie  Parliameuts  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  295. 


INTEODUCTION. 


During  several  years  after  his  appointment  as  President  of  the 
Session  he  was  elected  one  of  the  Lords  of  the  Ai"ticles  in  Parliament ; 
and  he  was  appointed  by  King  James  the  Fifth  to  be  administrator 
of  the  revenues  of  the  Abbey  of  Holyrood  and  of  the  Priory  of  St. 
Andrews,  which  were  provided  to  the  two  natural  sous  of  the  King.^ 
From  the  esteem  in  which  he  was  held  by  his  Sovereign  he  might 
have  been  elevated  to  a  bishopric,  had  his  inclination  for  such  laiu 
in  that  direction. 

Abbot  Mylnes  last  attendance  as  Lord  President  of  the  Court 
of  Session  was  on  the  20th  of  February  1548.  He  probably 
died  soou  after,  as  he  was  succeeded  in  the  ofEce  of  President 
of  the  Session  by  the  Bishop  pf  Orliuey,  on  the  24th  of  February 
1549.^ 

In  his  younger  days  Mylne  must  have  passed  much  of  his  time 
in  a  Scriptorium ;  and  there  acquired  the  taste  for  ornamental 
penmanship  whieh  adhered  to  him  after  his  elevation  to  high  offices, 
and  contributed  to  the  elegance  and  profuse  illumination  of  tlie 
Register  of  Cambuskenneth.  While  he  was  Ptector  of  Lundeif, 
he  also  held  the  office  of  scribe  to  the  chapter  of  the  church 
of  Dunlveld.  This  appears  from  a  lease  by  George,  Bishop  of 
Dunkeld,  to  George  Master  of  Angus,  und  the  Lady  Elizabeth 
Drummond,  his  spouse,  of  the  teinds  of  Boncle  and  Preston,  dated 
Cth  August  1505,  to  which  Alexander  Mylue  is  a  witness,  and  in 
which  he  is  designated  Eector  of  Lundeif,  scribe  of  the  chapter  of 

1  Epistul*  Regum  Scotorum,  vol.  ii.  p.  72.  ^  Acta  Dominorum  Concilii  et  Sessionis. 


r 


w^'<*».»«4,'  ,&o  /2X-A  vsft^  c^i^^cf"»».^!^/^  ,^»»*^ 


■jX^^-^K   < 


/ 


«9 


TIIE  ABBOTB :  ALEXANDER  MYLNE,  LORD  PRESIDENT.      xcv 


the  Catliedral  of  Dunkeld,  aud  uotary  in  the  premises.^     He  was  a 
prebendaiy  of  the  Cathedral  of  Duukeld." 

The  subjoined  facsimile  of  the  siguature  of  Abbot  Mylne,  ou 
loth  AprU  1524,  coutaiuiug  the  elaborately  formed  letter  A,  shows 
that  his  early  traiuiug  loug  adhered  to  him. 


[i^^Q^^ 


lu  his  latter  years  he  appears  to  have  devoted  his  leisure  time  to 
literature,  aud  his  couuexiou  ^vith  the  see  of  Diuikeld  led  to  his 
writing  a  history,  in  the  Latin  tougue,  of  the  livcs  of  the  Bishops  of 
Dunkeld,  from  the  year  1127  to  1515.  It  is  dedicated  to  Gavin 
Douglas,  Bishop  of  Duukeld,  of  whose  hfe  it  gives  au  interestiug 
narrative.  It  is  eugi'0ssed  iu  a  distiuct  hand,  aud  is  oruamented  by  au 
iUumiuated  froutispiece,  coutaiuing  the  royal  arms  of  Scotlaud,  with 
the  arms  of  Bishoj)  Gaviu  Douglas,  etc,  all  beariug  evideuce,  like 
the  Register  of  Cambuskenneth,  to  the  taste  of  the  author.''  The 
origiual  mauuscript  of  this  work,  or  an  early  copy,  is  iu  the  Library 
of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates  at  Ediuburgh. 

1  Original  Lease  in  Douglas  Cliarter-chest.         Club,   under  the  editorsLip   of  Mr.   Thomas 
^  Vitje  E]iiscoporum  Dunkeldensium,   edit.       Thomson,    then   the  Vice-President   o£   that 

1823,  4to,  p.  2.  Club.     The  volume    extended   to    77    pages 

2  The  •«•ork  Wcas  fir.-st  printed  iu  the  year       quarto.     Another   edition   -n-as    pi-inted,    by 
182.3.   for  the    members    of   the    Banu:ityne       subscriptiou,  in  the  year  1S31. 


xcv-i  INTEODUCTION. 

Abbot  Mylne  is  said  to  have  been  succeeded  in  his  office  by 
George  Lockhart.  The  only  authority  for  this  statement  is  the  MS.  at 
the  end  of  ]\Iacfariane's  Transcript  of  the  Register  of  Cambuskenneth. 
But  Lockhart  died  before  Mylne,  and  the  mistake  appears  to  have 
arisen  from  misreading  a  statement  iu  Knox's  History,  under  the  dates 
of  1530-1.534,  where  it  is  said  that  among  the  auditors  of  the  sermou 
of  Friar  William  Arth,  in  the  parish  church  of  St.  Anclrews,  which, 
from  its  alleged  heretical  character,  had  created  much  excitement, 
were  "  Maister  George  Lockhart,  the  Ab1)ot  of  Cambuskenneth,"  and 
others.  Lockhart  and  the  Abbot  of  Cambuskenueth  are  here  two 
cbstinct  persons.  Lockhart  was  for  some  time  Provost  of  the  Col- 
legiate  Church  of  Crichton,  iu  ]\Iidlothian,  and  afterwards  Rector 
of  the  University  of  St.  Andrews,  from  1521-1525.  He  was  sub- 
sec|uently  Dean  of  Glasgow,  where  he  died,  ou  22d  June  1547.— 
(Registrum  Episcopatus  Glasguensis,  Obituary,  vol.  ii.  p.  614.) 

Subjoined  are  facsimiles  of  two  signaturcs  of  Abbot  Mylne, — 
the  originals  of  which  wcre  adhibited  by  him  as  au  auditor  of  the 
accounts  of  the  Lord  Treasurer  in  the  year  1531-32. 

Xj 


THE  ABBOTS .-  JOHN  EESKINE. 


XXVI.  JoHX  Eeskine,  afterwaeds  Lord  Erskine  and  Earl  of 
Mar,  the  Twenty-sixth  Abbot,  c.  1550. 

This  Alibot  was  tlie  thircl-born  sou  of  John,  fourth  Lord  Erskine, 
and  his  ^nia,  Lady  Margaret  Ccimpbell,  eldest  daughter  of  Archibald 
second  Earl  of  Argyll.  John  Erskiue  is  said  to  have  been  Commen- 
dator  of  Cambuskeuueth,  aud  also  of  the  Abbey  of  Dryl^urgh  and  of 
the  Priory  of  Inchmahome  at  the  same  time.  There  is  evidence  that 
he  held  the  two  last  offices,  aud  it  is  probaljle  that  he  also  held  the 
fii'st,  although  there  is  no  coutemporary  evidence  of  the  fact.  If 
he  did,  it  could  have  been  only  for  a  sliort  time,  as  he  succeeded 
to  the  title  of  Lord  Erskine  ou  the  death  of  his  father,  in  the  year 
1552.  His  two  elder  brothers,  Robert  aud  Thomas,  who  were  succes- 
sively  Masters  of  Erskiue,  both  died  without  lawful  issue.  The 
former  was  kUIed  at  the  battle  of  Pinkie,  on  the  lOth  of  September 
1547,  and  the  latter  died  iu  the  year  1551.  Robert  Master  of 
Erskine,  the  eldest  brother,  had  a  natm-al  son,  David,  who  was 
appoiuted  Commendator  of  Dryburgh,  and  Thomas  Master  of 
Erskine,  the  second  brother,  had  also  a  uatural  son,  Adam,  who  be- 
came  Commendator  of  Cambuslveuneth,  as  wiU  be  afterwards  shown. 

On  the  succession  of  John  Lord  Erskine  to  the  title  and  estates 
of  Erskiue,  it  is  presumed  that  he  ceased  to  be  Commendator  of 
Cambuskeuneth. 


xcviii  INTEODUCTION. 

XXVII.  David  Pantar,  Twenty-seventh  Abbot,  1552-1558. 

This  Abbot,  who  was  eminent  both  as  a  statesman  and  as  a  scholar, 
was  son  of  David  Pautar,  the  elder  brother  of  Patrick  Pautar,  who 
has  been  uoticed  as  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  aud  Margaret  Crich- 
toun,  his  wife  formerly  Countess  of  Eothes. 

David  Pantar's  first  preferment  in  the  Church  was  to  the 
vicarage  of  Carstaii's,  in  the  diocese  of  Ghxsgow.  This  appears  from 
a  letter  whicb  he  wrote  iu  Latin  to  Gaviu  Duubar,  Archbishop  of 
Glasgow,  aud  Lord  Chaucellor  of  Scotlaud,  of  which  the  foUowiug  is 
a  translation  : — 

David  Pantar  to  Gavin,  Archbishop  of  Glasgow,  Chancellor  of  Scotland. 

If  you  are  not  aware,  most  excellent  Prelate,  or  if  you  have  not  yet  distinctly 
understood,  by  what  right  the  vicarage  of  Carstairs  is  due  to  me,  you  may  very 
easily  asceitain  it  from  the  Apostolic  letter,  which  I  (herewith)  send  to  your  Eever- 
ence,  whereby  it  clearly  appears  that  the  Supreme  Pontiff  duly  appointed  me  to  that 
sacred  office  two  years  ago,  ou  the  resignation  of  Alexauder  Paniter,  the  then  in- 
cumbent.  When,  therefore,  you  shall  have  been  conviuced  of  this,  I  beseech  you, 
most  reverend  Prelate,  by  your  dignity,  which  is  the  pillar  of  justice,  by  blood  rela- 
tionship,  which  should  be  a  common  pledge  of  good-will  between  us ;  in  fine,  by 
that  unbroken  good  faith  and  friendship  which  you  have  ever  found  in  me,  that 
you  \n\\  yield  to  equity.  For,  in  the  judgment  of  all  men,  you  have  always  been 
distinguished  by  a  remarkable  zeal  for  what  is  just  and  good,  by  a  hatred  of 
injustice  uot  less  keen  tlian  steadfast ;  and  lastly,  by  what  is  added  as  a  crown  to 
your  other  virtues,  whicli  are  certainly  very  great,  I  mean  by  an  incredible  affec- 
tion  towards  the  votaries  of  learning.  Wherefore,  see  to  it  that  you  may  not  seem 
in  so  small  a  matter  to  have  lost,  both  your  former  fame  and  reputation,  and 
tliose  mental  qualities  which  you  have  hitherto  displayed  to  a  nicety,  or,  as  they 
say,  ad  unguen,  in  the  most  important  affairs  of  the  State.  And  that  (object)  will 
be  most  surely  attaiued  if  you  consider  that,  to  commit  au  injury,  as  it  is  iiTecon- 


THE  ABBOTS:  DAVID  PANTAB,  BISIIOP  OF  BOSS.  xcix 

cilable  witli  the  duty  of  a  great  man,  so  it  is  not  eveu  allowed  to  the  Suprcme 
Pontiff  with  imjiunity.  In  fine,  I  pray  that  your  Reverence  will  so  do  as  you 
would  wish  to  be  done  to  you,  if  you  were  in  my  place.  May  God  grant  to  your 
Reverence  what  He  sees  to  be  good.    Farewell.     Paris,  24th  January  1541.' 

David  Pantar  was  afterwards  made  Prior  of  St.  ]\Iary's  Isle  iu 
Galloway.^  In  February  1541-2,  he  was  in  France,  but  in  wbat 
capacity  does  not  appear.^ 

Two  years  subsequently  be  olitained  tbe  ofSce  of  Principal  Secretary 
of  State.  On  account  of  his  great  learning  and  prudence  be  was  sent 
to  France,  along  "witb  Sir  Jobu  Campbell  of  Lundie,  in  j\barch  1543,'' 
and  in  tbe  end  of  the  same  year  he  was  commissioued  by  tbe  Regeut 
Arran  to  return  to  tbe  Emperor  Cbarles  tbe  Fifth  the  ensigns  of  the 
Knightbood  of  the  Gokleu  Fleece,  accordiug  to  tbe  practice  observed.^ 

John  Knox,  in  his  History  of  the  Reformation,  under  the  date 
1543,  notices  the  return  of  John  Hamilton,  Abbot  of  Paisley,  from 
France  to  Scotlaud,  and  witb  bim  of  J\lr.  David  Pantai-,  wbo  was  after- 
wards  made  Bisbop  of  Ross  : — "  Tbe  brut  of  the  learnyng  of  these  two, 
and  tbare  liouest  lyifF,"  be  adds,  "  aud  of  tbare  fervencye  and  upryclit- 
nes  in  religiouu,  was  sucb  tbat  great  espearance  tbare  was,  tbat  tbare 
presence  should  haif  bene  confortable  to  the  Kirk  of  God.  For  it  was 
constandlye  aifirmed  of  some,  tbat,  witbout  delay,  tbe  oue  aud  tbe 
Dther  wald  occupy  tbe  pulpete  and  trewly  preach  Jesus  Christ.  But 
few  dayis  disclosed  tbair  bypochrisye  ;   for  wbat  terrouris,  wbat  pro- 

1  Eiiistolae  Regum  Scotonim,  vol.  ii.  pp.  136,  ^  Ejiistolje  Regiim  Scotonuu,  vol.  ii.  p.  137. 

7,  xcix.  4  Ibid.  p.  195. 

-  Hollinshed,  p.  404.  5  /^;,/_  p  030. 


c  INTRODUCTIOX. 

misses,  or  what  enchautiug  boxis  tliei  lirouglit  £i'a  France,  the  com- 
moun  people  kuew  not."  ^ 

Pantai-,  who  was  a  Privy  Councillor  of  Regeut  Arrau,  was  employed 
by  Maiy  of  Lorraine,  the  Queen-mother,  to  deal  -wdth  Ai-rau  to  resigu 
the  ofSce  of  Regeut  to  her,  which  he  did  on  lOth  AprU  1554,  in  pre- 
seuce  of  the  Parliameut. 

In  the  year  1544,  Pantar  was  again  sent  as  ambassador  to  Frauee. 
In  the  Treasixrer's  accouuts  for  that  year  there  is  the  foUowing 
entry: — "  Item,  the  third  day  of  Aprile,  geviu  for  vj'=  (GOO)  crowuis 
of  the  Sonu  of  fynauce  dehverit  in  Frauce  to  JMaister  David  Panyter, 
Secretar  Ambassatour  thair,  the  sowme  of  viii''  xlib"  (£810).^ 

He  was  again  seut  abroad  on  State  aifairs  in  the  year  1545,  as 
appears  from  a  letter  from  the  Regent  to  the  Emperor  Charles  the 
Fifth  aud  to  Mary  Queeu  of  Huugary.^ 

About  the  same  time,  ou  the  death  of  Robert  Cairucross,  Bishop 
of  Ross,  David  Pantar  became  elect  of  that  See.  On  his  returu  from 
Frauce,  says  Ruddimau,  where  he  spent  many  years  as  ambassador, 
he  came  to  Jedburgh,  where,  after  he  had  declared  to  the  Governor, 
in  a  full  assemltly  of  the  nobles,  the  reason,  manner  and  order  of  all 
thiugs  which  he  had  trausacted  iu  that  capacity,  ha\ang  been  highly 
commeudcd  by  all  for  the  diligent,  wise  and  upright  mauner  iu  which 
he  had  filled  so  arduous  a  post,  he  was  solemuly  designated  Bishop 
of  Ross  iu  prescuce  of  the  nobility.* 

1  Knox's   History,    Wodrow    Soc.    edition,  ^  Epistolaj  Kegum    Scotorum,    vol.   ii.    p. 
vol.  i.  p.  105.                                                                 248. 

2  Accounts  o£  the  Lord  Treasurer.  ^  Ibld.  Preface. 


THE  ABBOTS:  DAVID  PANTAB,  BISIIOP  OF  ROSS.  ci 

In  the  year  1550,  wheu  peace  was  concliuled  at  Boulogne 
betweeu  the  Scotch,  Freuch  aud  Euglish,  Pantar  conducted  the 
negotiatious  ou  behalf  of  his  own  country/  lu  the  year  1552  he  is 
stated  to  have  beeu  consecrated  Bishop  of  Eoss  iu  a  proviucial 
syuod  of  the  clergy  held  at  LiuUthgow.  -  He  retaiued  the  See  of 
Eoss  till  his  death,  aud  held  at  the  sauie  time  the  office  of  Com- 
meudator  of  Cambuskeuueth,  to  which  he  was  probably  appoiuted 
soou  after  the  resignatiou  of  John  Erskine,  on  his  succeeding  to  the 
title  of  Lord  Erskiue  iu  the  year  1552.  This  appears  from  a  precept 
already  referred  to,  which  was  granted  by  him  as  Commendator,  for 
iufefting  William  Murray  of  Polmaise  in  the  Knoll.  The  granter  of 
this  precept  is  desigued  David,  Bishop  of  Eoss,  and  perpetual  Com 
mendator  of  the  Monastery  of  the  Virgiu  Mary  of  Cambuskeuueth,  aud 
convent  of  the  same,  of  the  Order  of  St.  Augustine,  in  the  diocese  of 
St.  Andrews.  The  precept,  which  bears  to  be  granted  at  the  Mouas- 
tery  of  Cambuskenneth  ou  the  12th  of  April  1557,  is  subscribed  by 
David,  Bishop  of  Eoss,  Commendator  of  Cambuskenueth,  and  thirteen 
members  of  the  couvent,  whose  names  have  beeu  given  in  the  previ- 
ous  uotice  of  this  precept.  Between  the  end  of  it  and  the  begiuning 
of  the  signatures,  the  Bishop  wrote  in  his  owu  holograph  the  following 
reservation  :  "Eeseruand  to  ws  our  actioun  of  nonentres  apoun  the 
landis  aboune  expremit  of  sa  mony  zeris  as  the  samyu  hes  beine  in 
nonentres,  and  in  our  handis  as  Superiour." 

"  Dauid  Bischop  of  Eoss,  Commendatour  of  Cambus." 

^  Annals  of  Scotland,  by  Sir  Jamea  Balfour,  vol.  i.  p.  296.  -  Ibid.  p.  299. 


cii  INTEODUCTION. 

As  the  precept  is  written  in  Latin,  and  the  Commcndator 
was  an  elegant  and  ready  writer  of  that  language,  it  is  somewhat 
remarkaljle  that  he  made  this  addition  in  Scotch.'  A  facsimile  of 
reservation  and  the  signature  of  the  Commendator  are  here  en- 
graved. 

It  is  mentioned  by  Knox,  under  the  year  1557,  that  when  the 
Roman  Catholic  clergy  boasted  that  they  would  dispute  with  the 
Protestants,  ]\Ir.  David  Pantar,  wdio  then  dwelt  at  Eestah-ig,  dis 
suaded  them  from  attempting  anythiug  of  the  kind,  affirming  "  that 
yf  ever  thei  disputed,  but  whare  thame  selfis  war  bayth  judge  and 
party,  and  whare  that  fyre  and  sw^erd  should  obey  thare  decrie,  that 
then  thare  caus  was  wi-acked  for  ever.  Thei  will  call  yow  to  your 
compte  booke,  and  that  is  to  the  Bible  ;  and  by  it  ye  will  no  more  be 
found  the  men  that  ye  ar  called,  then  the  Devill  wilbe  approvin  to  be 
God.     And  therefor,  yf  ye  love  your  selfis,  enter  never  in  dLsputa- 

'  Original  Precept  at  Polmaise. 


TIIE  ABBOTS :  DAVID  PANTAE,  BlSIIOr  OF  UOSS.  ciii 

tioun  ;  uether  yitt  call  ye  tlie  mater  in  questiouu  ;  but  defend  your 
possessioun,  or  ellis  all  is  lost."  Kuos  adds,  "Cayaplias  could  uot 
give  aue  better  couusall  to  bis  companizeous.' 

Pautar  died  of  a  lingering  illuess  at  Stirliug,  ou  tlie  Ist  of  October 
1558.'  Joliu  Kuox  haviug  referred  to  the  death  of  Andrew  Durie, 
Bishop  of  Galloway  in  that  year,  says,  that  "  after  hmi  followed  that 
bellygod  Maister  David  Pantar,  called  Bishop  of  Eoss,"  who  "departed 
eatting  aud  dryuking,  which  togitther  with  the  rest  that  tharupon 
depeudis,  was  the  pastyme  of  his  lyef."^  This  is  scarcely  cousisteut 
with  the  honest  life  and  fervency  of  religiou  which  Kuox  ascribed 
to  Pantar  wheu  he  had  hopes  of  his  preaching  truly.  AVhilst  the 
value  of  the  Eeformers  History  of  the  Eeformatiou  iu  Scotland  is 
aclwuowledged,  it  must  be  allowed  that  there  is  a  toue  of  exaggera 
tiou  in  the  pictures  which  he  draws  of  the  Eomau  Catholic  clergy, 
which  is  perhaps  uatural  in  oue  so  violeutly  opposed  to  them.  But 
the  criticism  in  this  case  does  uot  come  well  from  the  great  Eeformer, 
who  in  his  hist  illness  iusisted  that  Johu  Durie,  one  of  the  ministers 
of  Leith,  and  Archibald  Steward,  who  had  come  to  visit  him,  should 
stay  diuner,  ordered  a  hogshead  of  wiue  which  was  in  his  cellar  to  be 
pierced  for  them,  and  desired  Steward  to  seud  for  some  of  it  as  long 
as  it  lasted,  for  he  woukl  uot  tarry  until  it  was  all  di'auk.^ 

To   David   Pantar  we  are   indebted  for  the   secoud  volume    (if 

'  Kuox's  History,  vol.  i.  266.  stigmatizes   tlie   cbaracter  of  tlie  Bislioij   iii 

-  Holinshed,  p.  487.  strong  language. 

^  Knox's  History,  vol.  i.  p.  262.     Sir  James  ■*  M'Crie'3  Life  of  Knox,  eilit.  1831,  vol.  ii. 

Ealfour  in  his  Amials  of  Scotlanil  (vol.  i.  p.  312)  p.  221. 


civ  INTEODUCriON. 

"EpistolaeRegum  Scotorura,"  the  fii-st  volume  of  which  was  written  by 
his  uncle,  Patrick  Pantar.  In  the  Preface  to  that  work,  which  was 
pubHshed  in  the  j^ears  1722  and  1724,  in  two  vols.  8vo,  Thomas 
Ruddiman,  the  editor,  praises  the  learning  and  accomplishments  of 
David  Pantar,  by  whom  many  of  these  letters  were  written  in  the 
capacity  of  Secretaiy  of  State.  The  distinguished  abilities  which 
Pantar  possessed,  says  Ruddiman,  these  letters  abvmdantly  show, 
being  such  as  could  have  proceeded  only  from  a  man  who  was 
imbued  with  elegant  learning,  and  also  trained  ia  the  maxims  of 
political  wisdom. 

Sulyoined  is  a  facsimile  of  the  signature  of  David  Pantar  as 
Secretary,  ia  the  capacity  of  an  auditor  of  the  accouuts  of  the  Lord 
Treasurer,  in  October  1546.  He  was  then  described  as  Postulate 
of  Ross. 


THE  ABBOTS:  ADAM  ERSKIXE. 


XXVIII.  Adam  Erskine,  Twenty-eighth  Abbot  or 

COMMENDATOR,  15613-1608. 

JoHN  LoED  Erskine  obtained  from  Mary  of  Lorraine,  Queen 
Dowager,  Regent  of  Scotland,  a  gift  of  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth, 
with  power  to  appoint  to  it  an  Abbot  or  Commendator.  To  give 
effect  to  what  her  mothor  had  thus  done,  Queen  ]\Iary  made  a  grant 
to  him  of  the  Abbey,  dated  oOth  June  1562.  By  the  same  grant 
she  appointed,  in  his  uame,  and  at  his  desu-e,  his  nephew,  Adam 
Erskine,  Chancellor  of  Glasgow,  to  the  otiice  of  Abbot  or  Commen- 
dator  of  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth,  with  the  same  right  as  if  the 
appointment  had  Iteen  made  by  the  cuurt  of  Rome.  This  graut, 
from  the  light  which  it  throws  on  the  transference  of  the  Abbey  to 
the  Erskine  family,  is  here  given  entire  : — • 

"  Marie,  be  the  grace  of  God  Quene  of  Scottis,  to  all  and  sindrie  the  fewaris, 
tennentis,  occupiaris  and  inhabitantis  of  the  abbacy  vnder^vrittiu,  landis,  niylnis 
and  fischeingis  pertening  thairto,  and  all  vtheris  oure  liegis  and  subdittis  quhome 
it  efferis  quhais  knawlege  thir  oure  lettres  salcum,  greting  :  fforsamekle  as  we, 
being  rememberit  that  vmquhile  oure  derrest  moder,  and  Regent  of  oure  realme, 
having  respect  and  regard  to  the  gude,  trew  and  thaukfuU  seruice  done  to  ws  and 
oure  said  vmquhile  derrest  moder  be  oure  traist  cousing,  Johnne  Lord  Erskin,  gaif 
and  disponit  to  him,  and  in  his  favouris,  the  Abbacy  of  Cambuskynneth,  with  the 
haill  landis,  fruitis  and  proffittis  pertening  thairto,  and  he  to  nominat  and  put 
sic  qualifyt  persone  as  he  plesit  to  be  Abbot  or  Commendatar  to  the  samin,  and 
directit  oure  supplicatouris  to  the  Courte  of  Eome  for  obtening  of  prouisioun 
thairupoun  as  vse  wes  tlian  :  And  now  we  being  of  will  and  mynd  to  performe  the 
foirsaid  gift  and  dispositioun  maid  be  oure  said  vmquhile  derrest  moder,  as  said  is  : 
Thairfore,  and  for  the  gude,  trew  and  thankfuU  seruice  done  and  to  be  done  to  ws 


IXTRODUCTIOX. 


be  oure  said  traist  cousing,  haue  gevin,  grantit  and  disponit,  and  be  thir  oure 
lettres  gevis,  grantis  and  disponis  to  the  said  Johnne  Lord  Erskin,  the  said  haill 
Abbacy  of  Cambuskynneth,  with  the  landis,  mylnis,  fischeingis,  kirkis,  teyndis, 
fruitis  and  proffittis  pertening  thairto,  and,  in  his  name  and  desyre,  hes  nominatit, 
providit  and  promovit,  like  as  bethetennour  of  thir  oure  present  lettres  nominatis, 
providis  and  promovis  Maister  Adame  Erskin,  Chancellare  of  Glasgw,  In  Abbot 
or  Commendatar  of  the  said  Abbay,  during  all  the  dayis  of  his  lyftyme,  and  will 
and  grantis  that  this  present  nominatioun,  promotioun  and  dispositioun  is  and 
salbe  as  vailzeable,  and  of  als  grat  force,  strentli  and  effect,  to  the  said  Maister 
Adame  during  his  liftyme,  as  and  he  wer  providit  be  provisiouu  hade  thairto  in 
the  Courte  of  Rome  thairupoun,  with  power  to  him,  his  chahnerlanis,  factouris 
and  seruandis,  to  intromet  with  the  said  Abbacy  landis,  mylnis,  fischeingis,  kirkis, 
niailes,  finnes,  fruitis,  proffittis  and  de^viteis  pertening  thairto,  and  to  dispone 
thairupoun,  sicHke  and  als  freUe  as  onye  abbot  or  commendatar  dois  and  vsis 
within  oure  realme  during  the  space  foirsaid,  butt  onye  reuocatioun,  impediment, 
obstacle,  or  agane  calling  quhatsumeuir,  quharefore  we  charge  straitlie  and  com- 
mandis  zow,  all  and  sindrie,  the  saidis  fewaris,  tennentis,  occupiaris  and  inhabi- 
tantis  of  the  Abbacy  foirsaidis  Landis,  mylnis  and  fischeingis  pertening  thauto,  and 
all  vtheris  oure  liegis  and  subdittis  foirsaidis,  tliat  ze,  and  Ukane  of  zow,  reddilie 
answer,  iutend,  obey  and  mak  pajonent  to  the  said  Maister  Adame,  his  chahner- 
lanis,  factouris  and  seruandis  in  his  name,  present  and  to  cum,  off  all  and  sindrie 
uiailes,  fermes,  dewittis,  teyndis,  fruitis  and  proffittis  pertening  to  the  said  Abbaey, 
and  to  nane  vtheris  during  his  Uftyme,  vnder  aU  hieast,  pane,  charge  and  offence, 
that  ze,  and  ilkane  of  zou,  may  commit  and  inrin  aganis  oure  Maiestie  in  that 
behalf.  Gevin  vnder  oure  Priue  Seale  at  StriuUing,  the  last  daye  of  Junii,  tlie  zeir 
of  God  i™v"^lxii  zeris,  and  of  oure  regnne  the  twenty  zeir." 
"  Per  Signaturam."  ' 

In  virtue  of  this  grant,  Adain  Erskine  was  soon  put  in  possession 
of  the  Abbey,  and  ou  the  ISth  and  19th  of  January  following  gave 
to  Duncan  Nairn  a  lease  of  the  teind-sheaves  of  the  Lands  of  Torbrex 
and  Graysteal  in  the  shire  of  Stiiding,'-  to  which  the  common  seal 

'  Regist.  Secreti  Sigilli,  vol.  xxxi.  1561-1563,  p.  '2.5.  -  Origiiial  Lease  at  Polniaise. 


THE  ABDOTS:  ADAM  ERSKIXE. 


of  the  Abbey  is  still  appended.  The  seal  contains  a  design  of  two 
compavtments  :  The  npper  one  is  a  Gothic  niche,  with  a  half  length 
figure  of  the  Yirgiu  audiufant  Saviour. 
The  lower  compartment  coutaius  a 
group  of  six  moulvs  kueeling  in  prayer. 
The  legend  i.s,  "Sigill'  conveutvs  sce 
Marie  de  KambvskiueL"  Au  engrav- 
iug  of  the  seal  is  here  giveu. 

At  tlie  time  of  his  appointment, 
Adam  Er,slvine  was  a  youug  mau. 
Till  he  was  of  age,  or  able  to  mauage 
the  busiuess  of  Commeudator  himself, 
he  had  a  substitute  in  the  management 
of  the  affairs  of  the  Abbey  iu  Andrew 
Hagy,  a  coufideutial  secretary  or  ser 
vant  of  Lord  Erskine,  who  acted  as 
Iconimus  aud  proeurator  of  the  Abbey. 

In  the  record  of  the  seisin  giveu  to  John  Lord  Erskine  of  a 
tenement  of  land  and  garden  in  the  "bak  raw"  of  Stu'Iing,  upou 
26th  January  1561,  he  is  uamed  "  Dominus  Andreas  Heygy,  Icouimus 
de  Cambuskynueth."' 

The  oftice  of  leonimus  haviug  termiuated,  a  discharge  was  granted 
by  Adam,  Commeudator  of  Cambuskeuneth,  with  cousent  of  the 
Conveut,  iu  favour  of  his  well-beloved  servitor,  Andrew  Hagy,  dated 

'  Recnrds  of  the  Town  of  Stirliiig,  vol.  loGO  to  1564,  iii  Towii-Clerk's  Office. 


cviii  INTEODUCTION. 

in  the  year  1562.  It  narrates  that,  by  demission  and  provision  of 
the  late  Queen  Dowager  Mary,  the  Regent,  Hagy  was  appointed  to 
the  office  of  "  Yconimus  "  and  procurator  of  the  Abbey,  during  the  time 
that  it  was  vacant  and  uuprovided  to  Adam  as  Commendator,  and 
that  he  had  intromitted  with  all  fruits,  profits  and  emoluments  of  the 
Abbey,  and  thereupon  had  made  sufficient  reckoning  of  his  intromis- 
sions  to  Adam  as  Commendator  aud  his  auditors,  from  whom  he  had 
power  to  that  efiect,  showing  clearly  how  they  had  been  expended 
for  the  benefit  of  the  Commendator  and  his  Abbey.  Adam,  therefore, 
discharged  Hagy  of  his  wliolc  intromissions.'  By  the  21st  of  April 
1563,  Adam  Erskine  had  himself  assumed  the  management  of  the 
aSairs  of  his  Abbey.  On  that  date,  as  Commendator  and  parson 
of  the  parish  of  Campsy,  he  granted  a  discharge  to  William  Living- 
ston  of  Kilsyth,  for  two  hundred  merks  Scots,  in  payment  of  the 
teinds  of  Kilsyth  for  the  year  1563." 

After  the  Reformation  the  monks  of  Cambuskenneth  continued  to 
receive  pajTuents  of  grain  from  the  Abbey  lands.  Dene  Patrick  Panter 
received  yearly  fourteen  bolLs  of  bear  from  William  IMailler,  tenant  in 
the  toun  of  Cambuskenneth,  at  the  desire  of  Adam  the  Commendator ; 
and  that  pa}Tiient  was  to  coutinue  yearly  during  the  lifctime  of  the 
Dene,  in  satisfaction  of  one  part  of  his  j^ortion,  besides  £20  yearly, 
which  was  provided  in  satisfaction  of  another  part  of  his  portion. 
The  obligation  for  these  payments  is  dated  6th  October  1563.^ 

'  Original   Discliarge  iu  the  Mar  Charter-  ^  Kecords   of   the   Town   of   Stirling,  vol. 

chest.  1560  to  1564.  '  Ibkl. 


(l^^J^Ct      j>A^r(\y     ^-»r^-    ji 


t- 


«i^^j^t^ 


^ 

^ 


I^J    ^,^      C^      gJ^    Qr^^>^^        f  ^/^r^       A  ^(7^1 


2    //t<<»-V<-     a^^/n^C— 


TIIE  ABBOTS :  ADAM  ERSKINE.  cix 

During  tlie  earlier  years  of  tlie  iucurabency  of  Adam  Erskine  as 
Commendator,  his  chief,  John  Earl  of  Mar,  Lord  Erskine,  built  his 
palace  at  the  head  of  the  High  Street  of  Stirliug  with  the  stones  of 
the  Abbey  of  Cambuskeuueth.  Part  of  this  building  still  remains, 
and  a  description  of  it  will  afterwards  be  given. 

Adam  Erskine  was  sometimes  employed  in  public  afFairs.  An 
official  letter  from  him  to  the  Laird  of  Dun,  younger,  requesting 
him  to  urge  his  father,  John  Erskine,  Superintendent  of  Angus  and 
Mearns,  to  be  present  on  the  loth  of  June  1579,  at  the  Castle  of 
Stii-ling,  at  the  trial  of  the  cause  of  the  Earl  of  AthoU  before  the 
whole  Council,  is  here  given  as  a  specimen  of  a  missive  letter  in  the 
sixteenth  century  : — 

Treist  Freind, — Eftir  inaist  hairtlie  commendatioune  :  ye  sall  wit  tliat  tlie 
Kingis  Grace  lies  dii'eeted  this  missiue  to  the  Laird  your  fatliair  to  be  heir  vpone  the 
fiftene  day  of  this  instant,  and  that  for  tryell  of  my  Lord  of  AthoUis  pursseuing,  and 
to  that  eflect  theKing  hes  ordanit  his  haill  coinsall  to  be  heir  present  at  the  said  day : 
Thaiiifoir  ze  sall  do  at  ze  can  at  your  fatheris  hand,  to  forder  him  heir  with  dili- 
genss,  for  my  Ladie  Athoill,  togidder  with  sincbie  of  my  Loird  of  Athoilis  freiudis, 
is  to  be  heir  at  the  said  day.  I  dout  nocht  bot  ze  will  do  thairin  as  ze  tendir  the 
Kingis  estait,  and  my  Lord  of  Mars  weill  and  honour,  for  thair  is  sindrie  gret 
materis  to  be  intrettit  at  the  said  day,  the  c^uhilkes  giff  thay  be  weill  handillit  at 
this  tyme,  it  sall  put  my  Loird  to  the  gretter  rest.  As  for  newis,  I  haiff  nane  bot 
sic  as  zour  fathair  sall  lat  yow  wndirstand.  The  King  nor  my  loirdis  freiudis  can 
be  conteut  of  ane  excuis  at  this  tyme.  The  rest  referris  to  meting  :  Committis 
yow  to  God.     Frome  Striueliug  Castell,  the  tent  day  of  Junij  1579. 

Be  youris  assurit, 

A.  Cambuskyneth. 
To  his  maist  assurit  friead,  the  Larde  of  Doue,  Yongar.^ 

1  Original  Letter  at  Dim.    Lithographed  for  this  work. 
P 


cx  INTRODUCTION. 

Tbe  Laird  of  Dun,  younger,  to  wliom  this  letter  was  addressed, 
was  apparently  Robert  Erskine,  the  eldest  son  of  John  Erskine  of 
Dun,  who  had  been  appointed  to  the  office  of  Superintendent  of 
Angus  and  Mearns  in  the  year  1560.  John  Knox  had  a  great 
respect  for  the  Superintendent,  whom  he  describes  as  a  person 
marvellously  illuminated  with  religion ;  and  with  whom  he  had  re- 
mained  a  month  at  Dun  daily  exercising  in  doctrine.* 

In  the  year  1582,  Adam,  Commendator  of  Camljuskenneth,  took 
part  with  his  chief,  John  Earl  of  Mar,  in  the  Raid  of  Ruthveu.  But, 
on  the  29th  November,  in  the  following  year,  he  and  three  of  his 
domestic  servants  obtained  a  remission  of  that  crirae.^ 

Adam  Erskine  was  involved  in  pecuniary  difficulties,  and,  at 
the  instance  of  his  creditors,  was  denounced  "  rebel "  and  put 
"  to  the  horn."  By  this  proceeding  his  property  was  escheated 
to  the  Crown,  and  a  gift  of  his  escheated  goods,  dated  13th 
September  1593,  was  made  by  King  James  the  Sixth  to  John 
Earl  of  Mar.^ 

On  the  15th  of  November  1602,  the  Magistrates  of  Stirling 
ordained  the  Masters  of  the  Hospital  to  borrow  two  hundred  merks 
until  AVhitsunday  next,  that  therewith  the  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth 
might  be  satisfied  of  the  arrears  of  maills  cLaimed  by  him  from  the 
town,  and  for  a  perpetual  right  thereof  to  the  poor  of  the  Hospital  in 
time  coming,  conform  to  the  decreet-arbitral  pronounced  betwixt  the 

1  Knox's  History,  vol.  i.  pp.  59-249.  ^  Regist.    Secreti    Sigilli,   \5^Z-\^^i,   vol. 

-  Kegist.  Secreti  Sigilli,  15S3-1584,  vol.  L.  p.  4.      l.xvi.  p.  206. 


TUE  ABBOTS :  ADAM  EUSKIXE.  cxi 

Abbot  and  the  Town  Chamberlain.^  The  claim  here  referred  to  on 
the  part  of  the  Abbot  was  probably  iu  viitue  of  the  grants  niade  Ijy 
King  David  the  First,  and  subsequent  sovereigns,  to  the  Abbey, 
fi'om  the  town  of  Stirliiig,  aud  which  had  beeu  paid  for  many  years, 
as  appears  from  the  Chamberhiin  Eolls." 

Two  years  later,  on  Ist  Juue  1604,  the  Magistrates  of  Stirling 
directed  that  the  ford  at  the  back  of  the  Abbey,  and  beside  the 
Blackwilly,  be  red  aud  cleaned  of  the  stones  thereiu,  which  stopped 
the  passage  of  the  same.' 

Haviug  embraced  the  Eeformed  faith,  Adam  Erskiue  married 
Margaret  Drummoud,  who  was  living  as  his  wife  iu  the  year  1601.* 

He  died  iu  or  shortly  before  the  year  1608,  having  held  office  for 
more  than  forty  years,  during  which  he  grauted  many  charters  ancl 
leases  of  lauds  belonging  to  the  Abbey.  Among  the  last  of  these 
was  a  lease  granted  in  the  year  1605  to  Eobert  Naii-ne,  Advocate, 
of  the  teiuds  of  Torbrex.^ 

To  the  close  of  his  life  Erskine  sufFered  from  pecuniary  embarrass- 
ments.  Shortly  before  his  death  he  was  declared  rebel,  aud  put  to 
the  Kings  horn  ;  aud  after  that  event  attempts  were  made  by  various 
parties  to  obtaiu  the  gift  of  the  escheat  of  his  goods.     King  James 

'  Records  of  the  To^vn    of    Stirling,    toI.  320,    326,    *371,    »373,  p(  se^. ;    vol.    iii.    \>. 

1597  to  1619.     Inthe  Macfarlane  Museuni  at  165,  el  seq. 

Stirling  there  is  a  piece  of  wood  labelled —  ^  Kecords  of   the   Town   of   Stirliiig,   vol. 

"  Warranted  a  genuine  piece  of  the  old  oak  1597  to  1619. 

of  Cambuskenneth  Abbey."  ^  Inventory  of  Jlar  Writs  at  Glenalnioiid 

2  Vol.   i.  pp.  54,  65,   184,  2(19,  228,   233,  CoUege,  Perthshire. 

236,  329  ;  vol.  ii.  pp.  150,  159,  185,  24G,  253,  ^  Original  Lease  at  Pohnaise. 


INTRODUCTION. 


the  Sixtb,   therefore,  in   a  letter  to   Sir  Gideon  Murray,  Deputy- 
Treasurer,  orderecl  him  to  disi^ose  of  this  escheat  only  to  Sir  James 

Erskine.    The  letter  is  as  follows  : — 


Trusty  and  welbeloued  Counsellour,  wee  greete  yow  well.  Whereas  the  late 
CommenJatour  of  Cambuskeneth  deceased  our  rebelle  and  at  our  home,  and  that 
wee  are  crediblie  enformed  that  diuers  persons  for  diuers  intentes  do  go  aboute  to 
obteyne  the  guifte  of  his  escheate,  wee  haue  for  diuers  good  reasons  mouing  vs 
thereunto,  thought  good  by  these  presentes  to  wille  and  require  you  not  to  dispose 
nor  expede  his  said  escheate  to  any  other  sauing  to  our  seruant,  Sir  James  Ares- 
kine  ;  and  this  most  earnestlie  recommending  to  your  specile  care,  wee  bid  you 
farewell.     At  Eoy.ston,  the  27  of  October  1613. 

To  our  trusty  and  welbeloued  Counsellour,  Sir  Gideon   Murray  of  Elybauke 
kuiglit,  Deputy  Treasurer  of  our  Kiugdome  of  Scotlande.^ 


'  Original  Letter  in  tlie  Mar  Cliarter-chest. 


TIIE  ABBOTS :  ALEXANDER  EESKINE. 


XXIX.  The  Honoueable  Alexandee  Erskine,  Twenty-ninth 
(titular)  Abbot  or  Commendator,  1608-1640. 

On  the  31st  of  May  1608,  the  Honoiu'able  Alexander  Erskine, 
thLrd  son  of  John  Earl  of  Mar,  Lord  Treasurer,  was  appointed  l^y 
the  King  Commendator  of  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth.^  In 
an  ecclesiastical  sense  this  appointment  was  a  mere  formality, 
for  all  duties  attached  to  the  office  had  been  previously  aboHshed 
by  law. 

The  grant  was  only  intended  to  secure  the  temporalities  which 
remained  connected  with  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth,  and  the  title 
to  them  did  not  long  continue  to  rest  on  it.  John  Earl  of  l\Iar 
obtained  from  King  James  the  Sixth  a  grant  of  the  Abbeys  of  Cam- 
buskenneth  aud  Dryburgh,  and  of  the  Priory  of  Inchmahome,  all 
which  were  erected  into  the  temporal  lordship  of  Cardross.  Under 
this  grant  the  Earl  had  the  power  of  assigning  the  subjects  included 
in  it,  and  he  bestowed  on  his  fourth  son,  the  Honourable  Alexander 
Erskine,  the  lands  of  Cambuskenneth,  by  a  charter,  dated  23d 
August  1617,  which  is  afterwards  quoted  in  the  account  of  the  lord- 
ship  of  Cardross. 

Although  appointed  to  a  nominally  ecclesiastical  office,  Alexander 
Erskine  was  by  profession  a  soldier ;  and  rose  to  the  rank  of  a  colonel 
in  the  army.  His  cleath  was  caused  by  an  accident,  through  which 
mauy  others  were  killed  at  the  same  time.     A^Hien  stationed  with 

>  Rec;.  Mas.  Sig.,  Lib.  xiv.  No.  195. 


cxiv  INTRODUCTIOX. 

tlie  army  of  the  Coveiianters  iu  tlie  Castle  of  Dunglas,  iu  East 
Lothiau,  he  and  Thomas,  second  Earl  of  Haddingtou,  who  was 
married  to  his  youugest  sister,  Lady  Catherine  Erskiue,  aud  niany 
others,  kuights,  l)arons  and  geutlemen,  were  killed  l^y  au  explosiou 
of  gunpowder  on  the  afteruoou  of  the  30th  of  August  1640.  This 
exjjlosiou,  accordiug  to  traditiou,  was  caused  by  an  Engiish  page  of 
the  Earl  of  Haddiugtou,  who,  haviug  beeu  tauuted  by  the  Scottish 
soldiers  with  the  cowardice  showu  by  his  couutrymen  at  the  battle 
of  Newlniru,  iu  reveuge  tlii-ust  a  red-hot  iron  iuto  the  powder 
mngazine,  himself  shariug  the  fate  of  his  mockers. 

Ou  the  Ist  of  September,  Colonel  Alexauder  Erskiuc  aud  the 
Earl  of  Haddington,  with  his  two  brothers,  Eobert  and  Mr.  Patrick 
Hamilton,  were  Ijuried  at  Tyniugham.' 

Colouel  Erskiue  died  without  issue,  aud  was  succeeded  by  his 
next  brother,  tbe  Houourable  Sir  Charles  Erskiue  of  Cambuskenueth 
aud  Alva,  kuight.  Sir  Charles  died  at  Ediuburgh  ou  8th  July  1663, 
and  was  succeeded  in  Cambuskeuueth  by  his  eldest  son,  Thomas 
Erskine.  Tliomas  died,  without  issue,  before  the  3d  of  April  1672, 
ou  which  date  his  next  surviviug  brother,  Sir  Charles  Erskiue  of 
Alva,  kniglit-barouet,  was  served  heir  to  him  iu  the  lauds  of  Cam- 
buskenueth,  in  the  couuties  of  Clackmauuau,  Fife,  aud  Perth.^  The 
instrument  of  sasine  iu  favour  of  Sir  Charles,  as  heir  to  his  brother 

1  Eecords  of  the  parish  of  Tyningliani,  in  The   death    of  Colonel    Alexander  Areskine 

whicli   the   event  is  described  as  "that  un-  is  specially  noticed. 
happie  and  lamentable  exigenceof  theblowing  ^  Inq.  Retor.,  xxxi.  158. 

up  of  the  house    of    Dunglaas  by    powder." 


TIIE  ABBOTS:  ALEXANDER  EESKINE.  cxv 

in  these  lands,  is  datcd  16tii,  and  was  registered  in  the  Geueral 
Register  of  Sasines,  22d  April  1673/ 

Sir  Charles  Erskine  of  Cambuskcnncth  was  created  a  baronet  on 
30th  April  1666,  and  died  before  24th  February  1696,  when  his 
second-born,  but  eklest  surviviug  son,  John,  was  scrved  heir  to  his 
father,  Sir  Charles,  and  was  infeft  in  the  hmds  of  Cambuskennetli 
on  the  2d  of  November  same  year. 

The  gift  of  a  convicted  thief  to  Sii'  John  Erskiue  of  Al va  is  a  curious 
illustration  of  the  state  of  the  criminal  law  in  his  time.  A  brass 
collar  was,  some  years  ago,  dragged  up  by  a  fishing-net  from  the  river 
Forth,  opposite  to  Chamberlain's  lands  in  the  parish  of  Logie,  of 
which  Sir  John  Erskine  was  the  superior  ;  and  on  this  coUar  is  tlie 
foUowing  inscription  : — "  Alex!'  Steuart,  found  guilty  of  death  for 
theft,  at  Perth,  the  5th  of  December  1701,  and  gifted  by  the  Justiciars 
as  a  perpetual  servent  to  S'"  John  Areskin  of  Alva."^ 

The  foUowing  account  is  given  of  the  criminal  AJexander  Steuart, 
and  other  three  criminals  who  were  condemned  at  the  same  time  : 
"AtPerth,  the  5th  day  of  December  1701,  the  Commissioners  of 
Justiciary  of  the  south  district,  for  securing  the  peace  in  the  High- 
lands,  considering  that  Donald  Eobertson,  Alexander  Stewart,  Johu 
Eobertson  and  Donald  Macdonald,  prisoners  within  the  Tolbooth,  and 
indicted  and  tried  at  this  Court,  and  by  virtue  of  the  inquest  returned 
guLlty  of  death,  and  the  Commissioners  have  changed  theii-  punish- 

'  Original   Sasine  amongst   Muuimeuts  of  -  Original   engraved    Brass   Collar   iii    the 

Cowan'3  Hospital  in  Stirling.  Museum  of  the  Antiquaries  of  Scotlaml. 


cxvi  INTEODUCTION. 

ment  of  cleath  to  perpetual  servitude,  and  tliat  the  said  pannels  are  at 
the  Court's  disposal :  Therefore  the  said  Commissioners  have  given 
and  gifted,  and  hereby  give  and  gift  the  said  Donald  Macdonald,  one 
of  tlie  said  prisoners,  as  a  perpetual  servant  to  the  Eight  Honourable 
John  Earl  of  Tullibardine,  recommending  to  his  Lordship  to  cause  pro- 
vide  an  collar  of  brass,  iron  or  copj^er,  which  by  his  sentence  or  doom, 
whereof  an  extract  is  delivered  to  the  Magistrates  of  the  said  burgh 
of  Perth,  is  to  be  upon  his  neck  with  this  inscription  :  '  Donald  Mac- 
donald,  found  guilty  of  death  for  theft  at  Perth,  December  5th  1701, 
and  gifted  as  a  perpetual  servant  to  John  Earl  of  Tullibardine.'  And 
recommending  also  to  his  Lordship  to  transport  him  from  the  said 
prison  once  the  next  week ;  and  the  said  Commissioners  have  or- 
dained,  and  hereby  ordain  the  Magistrates  of  Perth,  and  keeper  of 
their  Tolbooth,  to  deliver  the  said  Donakl  Macdonakl  to  the  said  Earl 
of  Tullibardine,  having  the  said  coUar  and  inscription  conform  to  the 
sentence  and  cloom  aforesaid."^ 

The  lands  of  Cambuskenneth  were  afterwards  disposed  of  by  Sir 
John  Erskine  to  the  Masters  of  Cowan's  Hospital  in  Stirling.  Thc  con- 
tract  of  sale  entered  iuto  betweenthcm  is  dated  29th  of  Aujrust  1709.^ 


^  Original  Statistical  Account  of  the  Parisli  jirice  wa3  fourteen  thousand  merks,  "  and  two 

of  Alloa,  vol.  viii.  jjp.  599,  60U.  hundred  merks  were  to  be  given  to  the  Lady 

^  .\bout  twenty  years  previous  to  tUis  pur-  in  lieu  of  her  gowu,  being  ordinary  in  such 

chase,  the  Magistrates  of  Stirling,  as  Masters  bargaius."     No  trace  of  the  "  lady's  gown  " 

of  the  Nether  Hospital,  purchased,  in  the  year  appears  in  the  sale  of  the  lands  of  Cambus- 

1681,  from  Sir  John  Stirhng  of  Keir,  his  hands  keuneth. — [Muuiraeuts  of  the  Town  of  Stir- 

of   Southfield,  which  lie    contiguous   to   the  hng.] 
town  of  Stirling  on  the  south-west  side.     The 


TIIE  ABBOTS:  ALEXANDER  ERSKINE.  cxvii 

After  this  sale  a  claim  to  the  lands  of  Cambuskenneth  was 
macle  on  the  part  of  William  Erskine  at  Otterston,  in  the  county  of 
Fife.  He  appears  to  have  been  the  ouly  survi^-ing  son  of  tlie 
Honoiu'able  John  Erskine,  who  was  the  fifth  son  of  John  Earl  of 
Mar,  Lord  Treasurer,  and  of  ]\Iargaret  Inglis,  heiress  of  Otterston. 
On  22d  of  June  1711,  WLlham  Erskine  expede  a  special  service  as 
heir  of  his  uncle,  Colouel  Alexander  Erskine  of  Cambuskenueth  ; 
and  he  was  infefted  in  the  lauds  of  Cambuskenneth  on  the  14th 
of  the  foUcniug  mouth.' 

As  William  Erskiue  was  a  degree  further  removed  from  Colonel 
Alexander  Erskine  of  Cambuskenueth  than  the  Erskines  of  Alva,  v<'\\o 
made  up  a  feudal  title  as  heii-  to  the  Colonel  iu  the  lands  of  Cam- 
buskenneth,  no  attentiou  appears  to  have  been  paid  to  his  claim. 

The  disposition  of  the  lands  of  Cambuskenneth  obtained  Ijy  the 
Masters  of  Cowans  Hospital,  was  granted  by  Sir  Johu  Erskine  of 
Alva,  and  others,  and  is  dated  23d  and  26th  December  1709. 
In  this  deed  the  lands  conveyed  to  them  are  described  as  compre- 
hending  the  lands  and  teinds,  parsouage  aud  vicarage,  of  the 
barony  of  Cambuskeuneth  underwritten,  vizt.,  the  manor-place, 
tower  and  habitation  of  Cambuskenneth,  with  the  yard,  orchyard, 
dovecot,  houses,  biggings  and  pertinents,  aikers  and  tower,  and  lands 
commonly  called  the  Hood  of  Cambuskenneth,  the  Waird  Damside, 
aud  lauds  of  Craigie,  aud  dovecoat,  with  the  miln,  miln  lands,  mul- 

'  Original  Retour  aud  Sasine  araongst  the  ilunimeuts  of  Cowan's  Hospital  ;  also  Eecord 
of  Eetours,  printed  in  1863,  p.  9. 

1 


cxviii  IXTEODUCTIOX. 

tnu-es,  sequels  and  pertineuts  of  the  same,  tlie  salmon  fishings  of  the 
water  of  Forth  lielouging  to  thc  lauds  disponed,  and  ferry  boat  of 
Hood,  li])erty  aud  privilege  of  keeping  the  same,  and  the  right  of 
exacting  the  dues,  rents  and  casualties  thereof,  as  had  been  in  use  for 
several  years  bypast,  witli  the  teinds,  parsonage  and  vicarage,  of  the 
said  Linds  iuckided,  aud  the  pertinents  Ipng,  by  annexation,  within 
the  lordsliip  of  Cardross  and  shire  of  Clackmannan.' 

The  Masters  of  Cowan's  Hospital  have  siuce  coutinued  to  be  the 
owners  of  the  barony  of  Cambuskenneth.  The  alterations  which 
were  made  by  them  on  the  Tower  of  the  Abbey  for  its  preservation 
will  be  afterwards  noticed. 

'  Original    Disposition   among   papers   be-  the  shore  or  harbour  of  Stirling,  as  far  down 

longing   to    Cowan's    Hospital,   Stirling.     In  as  the  Ruddery  Pow,  about  a  mile  below  the 

a  recent  question  as  to  the   salmon-fishings  shore  of  Stirling.     The  farm  of  Hood  begins 

in  the  Forth,  it  is  explained  that  the  lands  within   the    upper   march  mentioned  at  the 

contained  in  that  disposition  are  situated  on  point  marked  "Ferry,"  on  the  map  referred 

the  left  bank  of  the  Forth,  aud  extend  from  to,  and  runs  down  near  to  the  Ruddery  Pow 

a  considerable  distance,  at  least  a  mile  above  along  the  rirer  side  all  the  way. 


ERECTION  OF  LORDSHIP  OF  CARDROSS. 


THE  ABBEY  OF  CAMBUSKENNETH  AS  PAET  OF  THE 
LORDSHIP  OF  CARDROSS. 

The  lordship  and  barouy  of  Cardr-oss  was  erected  by  Kiug  James 
the  Sixth  iu  favour  of  Johu,  secoud  Earl  of  Mar  of  the  house  of 
Erskine,  by  a  charter  dated  27th  March  1604.  It  iucluded,  as  fully 
described  iu  the  charter,  all  the  lands,  baronies,  castles,  towers, 
patrouages,  mauor-places,  mills,  multui'es,  saknou  and  other  fishiugs, 
woods,  parks,  meadows,  forests,  teiuds,  teind-sheaves,  anuuakeuts,  etc, 
which  formerly  belonged  to  the  Priory  of  Inchmahome,  and  the  Abbeys 
of  Drybiu-gh  and  Cambuskenneth,  with  their  right  of  patronage  of  the 
parish  kirks,  both  parsouage  aud  vicarage,  of  the  said  monasteries.^ 

This  grant  was  made  to  enable  that  Earl  the  better  to  provide  for 
his  younger  sons  by  his  second  Countess,  Lady  Mary  Stewart,  a  cousiu 
of  the  King,  of  whom  his  Majesty  took  great  care.^  There  is  a  tradition 
amongst  her  descendants  that  Lady  Mary  was  in  the  practice  of  mak- 
iug  giievous  complaiuts  to  King  James  the  Sixth  as  to  the  state  of 
dependence  iu  which  her  second  son,  Harry  Erskine,  would  be  placed, 
as  compared  with  his  two  elder  brothers,  one  of  whom,  by  the  first 
marriage  of  his  father,  would  succeed  as  Earl  of  Mar,  and  the  other, 
the  eldest  son  of  Lady  Mary,  was  Earl  of  Buchan  thi-ough  the  heiress 
of  that  earldom  ;  and  that  the  King  assm-ed  her  that  he  would  i3ro- 

'  Recited  in  Act  o£  Parliament.     The  Acts  property  of  David  Erskine,  Esq.,  a  descendaut 

of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  343.  of  Johu  Earl  of  Mar. 
Cardross   ia   situated  in  the    parish  of    Port  -  Crawford's  OflBces  of  State,  p.  404. 

Menteith  aud  couuty  ofPerth.     It  is  now  the 


cxx  INTRODUCTION. 

vide  for  her  secoud  son,  Harry  Erskine  ;  and  his  grant  of  the  lordship 
of  Cardross,  it  is  said,  was  in  fiilfilment  of  that  promise/ 

In  reference  to  the  marriage  of  John  Earl  of  Mar  and  the  Lady 
Mary  Stewart,  their  descendant,  David  Earl  of  Buchan,  has  recorded 
a  tradition,  that,  accordiug  to  the  superstitious  customs  of  the  times, 
the  Earl  of  Mar  had  listened  to  the  nonsense  of  an  Italian  conjuror, 
who  showed  him  a  limuing  of  a  lady  which,  he  said,  ]\Iar's  fiitm^e 
sweetheart  and  wife  resembled,  and  Mar  imagiued  that  he  recoguised 
the  same  features  in  the  daughter  of  the  Duke  of  Lemiox.  He  heard 
that  she  was  destined  liy  the  King  for  auother  husband,  and  wrote 
a  plaintive  letter  to  James,  saying  that  his  health  had  eveu  liegun  to 
suffer  from  the  fear  of  disappoiutment.  The  King  visited  ]\Iar  and 
assured  him,  "  Ye  shauna  dee,  Jock,  for  ouy  lass  in  a'  the  land ;" 
and  forthwith  arranged  the  marriage. 

An  Act  of  Parliament  was  passed  ou  9th  July  1606,  for  the  erec- 
tion  of  the  Abbeys  of  Cambuskeuueth  aud  Dryburgh,  and  the  Priory 
of  Inchmahome,  iuto  a  temporal  lordship,  to  be  called  the  LoRD- 
SHIP  OF  Cardross,  in  favour  of  John  Earl  of  Mar.  The  Act  narrates 
that  this  was  doue  in  consideration  of  the  good,  true  and  thankful 
services  done  by  John  Earl  of  Mar  and  his  predecessors  in  theu-  gi-eat 
care,  vigihxnce,  aud  faithfuluess  in  all  things  that  tended  to  the  ad- 
vaucement  of  his  Majesty's  honourable  alfairs,  whereof  the  Eaii  aud  his 

1  The  Editor  was  informed  by  the  late  Mr.       which   was  descended  from  the  marriage  of 
Thomas  Erskine  of  Liulathen   that  the  tra-       Johu  Earl  of  Mar  aud  Lady  Mary  Stewart. 
dition  had  been  handed  dowu  in  his  family. 


ERECTION  OF  LOEDSHIP  OF  CARDEOSS.  cxxi 

late  fatlier  gave  manifest  proof  in  tlie  worthy,  memorable  and  accept- 
able  pains  taken  by  them  iu  the  education  of  his  Majesty's  most  loyal 
persou  from  his  birth  to  his  perfect  age,  and  the  like  notable  service 
doue  by  the  said  Earl  himself,  in  the  education  of  his  Majesty's 
dearest  sou,  the  Priuce,  his  Majesty  also  remembering  the  prosperous 
jourueys  aud  expeditious  which  the  saicl  Earl  had  takeu  iu  embassies 
from  his  Highuess,  which  he  had  discharged  dutifully  and  speedily  to 
his  Highuess's  great  conteutment. 

This  Act  refers  to  "  The  samyu  monastereis  and  superstitiounis 
thereof  being  uow  abolishit,  aud  the  kirk  Landis  of  the  samiu  uow 
anuexit  to  his  Hienes  Crowue."  The  Act  also  uarrates  that  the  said 
monasteries  have  beeu  iu  all  time  heretofore  commouly  dispoued  by 
his  Majesty's  predecessors,  "  to  sum  that  wer  cum  of  the  House  of 
Erskejme."  The  Act  also  ratifies  the  charter  dated  27th  March  1604, 
while  it  dissolves  from  the  Act  of  Auuexation  of  all  kirk  hiuds 
withiu  the  realm  to  the  Crown,  the  lands,  barouies,  castles,  etc, 
of  the  Priory  of  luchmahome,  aud  the  Abbacies  of  Dryljurgh  and 
Camljuskeuneth,  and  of  new  grants  to  Jolm  Earl  of  Mar,  aud  his 
"  airis  maUI  and  assignayis  heretablie,"  the  lauds,  barouies,  etc, 
therein  specified,  which  before  belonged  to  the  said  religious  houses. 
The  Act  erects  the  whole  into  the  Loedship  and  Barony  of  Caed- 
Ross,  ordaining  the  mauor-place  of  Cardross  to  be  the  principal 
messuage  thereof. 

The  lauds,  barouies,  etc,  which  Ijefore  Ijelonged  to  the  Abbey  of 
Cambuskenueth,  iucluded,  as  stated  in  this  Act,  the  place  aud  mausiou 


cxxii  IXTEODUCTION. 

of  Cambuskenneth,  witli  liouses,  biggings,  orchards,  dovecots  aud 
crofts,  the  town  hxnds,  acres,  and  Huid^  of  Camljuskeuneth,  with 
the  ward,  etc.  The  other  lands,  fishings,  patrouages,  etc,  granted, 
are  specified  in  the  Act  of  Parliament,  aud  have  beeu  abeady  men- 
tioned  among  the  lauds  belouging  to  the  Abbey. 

The  Act  also  "  gives  to  the  said  uoble  Lord,  his  airis  aud  succes- 
souris  that  salhappiu  to  be  provydit  be  him  to  the  said  lordschip 
aud  Ijaronie  of  Cairdr-ois,  the  honour,  estait,  dignitie  and  prehemi- 
nence  of  aue  frie  Lord  of  ParHameut,  to  be  caUit  Lord  of  Cardrois  iu 
all  t}'me  cummiug."" 

The  Act  states  that  the  parish  churches  connected  with  the 
Abbey  of  Cambuskeuneth  aud  the  other  two  Abbeys  were  for  the 
most  part  destitute  of  jjreachiug  aud  comfort  of  the  Word  of  God, 
iu  defiiult  of  sufficieut  pastors  aud  miuisters  for  mauy  years.  The 
King  commends  to  the  Earl  of  Mar  to  provide  the  chm-ches  with 
learned  miuisters  for  instmction  of  the  people  iu  the  true  faith. 

The  Act  coutains  a  reservation  in  favour  of  Adam,  Commeudator 
of  Cambuskeuneth,  of  the  rents,  etc,  of  the  lauds  granted,  duriug  his 
lifetime,  as  freely  as  he  eujoyed  the  same  before  the  date  of  the  Act. 

FoUowiug  upon  this  Act,  a  charter  by  Kiug  James  the  Sixth  was 
granted  in  favour  of  the  Earl  of  Mar,  dated  lOth  June  1610, 
g-ranting-  the  whole  lands,  etc,  to  be  called  the  Lordship  and 
Barony  of  Cardross,  constitutiug  him  and  his  heirs-male,  assignees 

'  This  is  misprinted  "  hinde  "  in  the  Act  of  -  The  Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotland, 

Parliament  (vol.  iv.  p.  345,  coL  17).  vol.  iv.  p.  343. 


Ihonimtvsyc^i^  l^yj  d^scmcc  hefmm^  nitid  to  lam  fhat  i  bmc 
rwii  fbcchtauU  a^jpr  remi^  rmc^  pjfnefcmc  ye  wk 
OmcktiE/rCv  mmwim^cmri<^tmienic  inrosveScfyoure 
hmah^erKc  hueorwofjenficc  0  i\h^d^saMoeheTtuf\fe  iuiJi^ 
kjirvt^hmwttvhcimhmkrert^^^ 


^ne^jorae^dl' 


I 


laJf  trmmm  u  tv  \0na4^  ycu  ^^  ( ^a^uc,  n?* 
(.miM  fi^T  frajfe  S-mnlks  Vt^ujm^ird- 

^^J4l  j^isJEAir  \jj  nic  (li  \rmj.  cJ  m4 

mt  trmm  wy^Wwerijii^^iUmiJiwfitS 

Jdl  k  &^Jifm  di  Um/apd  rllliiJ.a^ful 


^ 


mL^K: 


ERECTION  OF  LORDSHIP  OF  CARDROSS.  csxiii 

and  snccessors  thereiii,  free  lords  and  barons  of  thc  same,  with  the 
honour,  title,  dignity  and  right  to  a  seat  and  vote  in  Parliament.' 
Other  two  charters  of  the  lordship  of  Cardi'0ss  were  grauted  by  the 
Cro^™,  on  lOth  April  1615  aud  14th  July  1634,  both  iu  favour  of 
John  Earl  of  ]\Iar/ 

John  Earl  of  IMar  built  the  iirincipal  suite  of  apartmeuts  in  the 
house  of  Cardross,  to  give  a  suitable  reception  to  his  Majesty,  who 
visited  the  Earl  there.  The  Kiug  aud  the  Earl  haxdng  hoen  educated 
together,  under  the  widow  of  the  Eegeut  Mar,  Aunaliella  Murray, 
there  was  a  life-long  intimacy  and  attachmeut  between  the  Sovereign 
and  the  subject.  The  Kiug,  in  his  juvenile  letters,  familiarly 
addressed  him  as  "  Jhon  Slaitis,"  and  his  mother  was  called  "  Lady 
Minnye.'" 

This  Earl  assigned  the  lordship  and  ^^eerage  of  Carcboss  to 
Henry  Ei-skine,  his  second  son,  by  his  marriage  with  Lady  INLary 
Stewart,  and  to  the  heirs-  male  of  his  body,  reserviug  to  himself  the 
liferent.  He  did  uot,  however,  include  Cambuskenneth  as  part 
of  the  lordship  assigned  to  his  sou  Henry.  It  was  assigned 
to  Alexander  Erskine,  third  son  of  Lady  Mary.  The  assignation 
was  dated  on  30th  January  1617,  and  it  was  confirmed  by  charter 
by  King  James  the  Sixth,  under  the  Great  Seal,  on  13th  March 
follo-wing.     Hemy  Erskine  was  thereafter  styled  "  fear  of  Cardross," 

'  Reg.  Mag.  Sig.,  lib.  xlvi.  No.  262.  3  Original    Letters   in    the    Mar   Charter- 

-  Ibiil.  Lib.  xlvii  No.  490 ;  Lib.  xlviii.  No.       chest.     FacsimOes  of  two  of  these  letters  are 
411,  et  Lib.  Iv.  No.  3.  here  given. 


cxxiv  INTRODUCTION. 

but  liaving  predeceased  liis  fatlier,  in  tbe  year  1628,  be  never  enjoyed 
tbe  peerage  of  Cardross.  Henry's  only  sou,  David  Erskine,  succeeded 
to  tbe  peerage  on  tbe  deatb  of  bis  grandfatber,  Jobn  Earl  of  Mar, 
on  14tb  December  1634;  and  tbe  peerage  of  Cardross  is  now  beld, 
as  a  male  dignity,  by  bis  collateral  beir,  tbe  Earl  of  Bucban. 

Tbe  cbarter  by  tbe  Earl  in  favour  of  Alexander  Erskine,  dated 
23d  August  1617,  grants  tbe  place,  tower  and  mansion  of  Cambus- 
kennetb,  witb  gardens,  etc,  and  tbe  bude  of  Cambuskennetb,  witb 
the  waird,  damside  and  uaket  bmd,  tbe  lands  of  Craig,  witb  milnlands, 
tbeknd  of  Cambus,  witb  milnlands,  tbelands  of  Bandaitb,  Cuikispow, 
and  Muretoun,  witb  tbe  teinds  of  tbe  lauds,  all  lying  by  annexation 
witbin  tbe  lordsbip  of  Cardross  and  couuty  of  Clackmannan.  Tbe 
lifereut  of  part  of  tbe  Lands  is  reserved  to  Lady  Mary  Stewart, 
Couutess  of  Mar.  Tbe  lands  were  to  be  beld  by  Alexander  Erskiue 
and  bis  beirs-male  from  tbe  Earl  of  Mar,  of  tbe  King,  as  superior,  in 
place  of  tbe  Commendator  and  Couvent  of  tbe  Monastery  of  Cam- 
buskenueth,  in  virtue  of  the  Act  of  aunexation  of  all  Churcb  binds  to 
the  Crown.  Tbat  cbarter  was  confirmed  liy  King  James  the  Sixth 
by  a  cbarter,  under  the  Great  Seal,  2d  April  1619.^ 

Colonel  Alexander  Erskine  of  Cambuskennetb  was  killed  at 
Dungkxs  in  tbe  year  1640,  as  previously  stated.  Tbe  successiou  of 
the  Erskines  of  Alva,  as  the  coUateral  male  beirs  of  the  Colouel  in  the 
lands  of  Cambuskeuueth,  has  also  been  described. 

1  Eeg.  Mag.  Sig.,  Lib.  xlix.  No.  216. 


MARS  JFJBK"  IX  STIFLIXG. 


"MAR'S  WAEK"  IN  STIRLING. 

At  the  head  of  the  Broad  Street  of  Stii-ling  are  the  remaius  of  a 
coiispicuous  building,  populaiiy  known  as  "  ^Mars  Wark,"  from  the 
uame  of  the  fouuder,  Johu  Earl  of  Mar,  Lord  Erskiue,  Regent  of 
Scotlaud,  who  built  this  house  about  the  year  1570.  To  thedisciples 
of  the  new  faith  the  monasteries  had  lost  aU  sacredness,  and  the 
usiug  of  the  stones  of  the  Alibey  of  Camljuskeuneth  for  this  uew 
fabric  would  be  regarded  as  profane  aud  sacrilegious  only  by  the 
friends  of  the  old  religion.  The  buildiug  was  jjrobably  left  uufinished. 
It  was  sometimes  occupied  by  the  Earl  of  Mar,  wlio  was  commauder- 
iu-chief  of  the  insurrection  of  1715.  The  front  wall  is  the  only 
portiou  which  remaius.  Above  the  main-eutrauce  door  the  full 
Royal  armorial  beariugs  of  Scotlaud  are  still  entire,  aud  on  the  two 
flanking  towers,  on  either  side  of  the  jjriucipal  entrauce,  are  the 
respective  armorial  beariugs  of  Johu  Earl  of  Mar,  being  quarterly 
Mar  and  Erskiue,  aud  also  those  of  his  Countess,  AnnabeUa  Murray 
of  TuIIibardiue,  being  the  three  stars  of  JMurray.  The  style  of 
architecture  of  this  building  is  very  peculiar,  as  may  be  seeu  from 
the  drawing  of  it  here  given.  It  has  some  resemblance  to  that 
of  the  Castle  of  St.  Andrews.  The  stones  of  "  Mar's  Wark  "  have 
the  appearauce  of  having  been  used  iu  a  building  of  an  earlier  date. 
and  several  of  them  have  an  ecclesiastical  aspect.  There  is  little 
doubt  that  John  Earl  of  Mar,  who  was  the  owner  of  Cambuskeuneth, 
by  the  gTant  from  Queen  j\Iary  before  quoted,  had  used  iu  buUdiug 


cxxvi  ,  IXTHODUCTIOX. 

liis  new  house  the  ready-made  materials  of  the  old  house  of 
Cambuskeimeth.  This  accounts  for  the  entire  disappearance  of 
the  Al.)be3^  buildings,  with  the  exceptiou  of  the  Tower.  There  is 
no  witten  evidence  knowu  of  the  transference  by  Lord  Mar  of  the 
materials  from  the  Abbey  for  liis  new  house  ;  but  about  half  a 
century  Later  it  was  considered  a  laudable  oliject  to  take  away  some 
of  the  remaining  freestones  of  the  Abbey  for  the  purpose  of  repair- 
iug  Cowans  Hospital  in  Stirling.  In  the  accounts  of  that  Hospital 
for  the  year  1637,  the  followiug  entry  occurs  : — "  Speut  with  Sir 
Johu  Erskiue  and  the  Provost,  wlieu  we  were  desiriug  Sir  John  to 
speak  his  mother  for  libertie  to  trausport  some  freestones  from  tlie 
Abey  to  the  Hospitale,  £1,  lOs."^ 

Sir  John  Erskine  here  mentioned  was  prol^ably  the  fiftli  son  of 
John  Earl  of  Mar  and  of  Lady  Mary  Stewart,  his  Countess,  who  would 
be  the  lady  to  be  spoken  to  for  permission  to  transport  the  freestoues, 
as  she  had  the  liferent  of  the  lands  of  Cambuskenneth,  under  the 
cliarter  of  these  lands  in  favour  oi  her  fourrli  son,  Colonel  Alexander 
Erskiue,  already  quoted. 

"  j\L'ir's  Wark  "  forms  part  of  the  entailed  earldom  of  Mar.  The 
late  Earl  of  Mar  and  Kellie,  by  feu-contract,  dated  20th  aud  2.3d 
March  1857,  feued  to  the  Magistrates  of  Stuiing  that  piece  of  ground 
adjoining  the  churchyard  aud  attached  to  the  church  of  Stirling, 
comprehending  the  two  portions  of  ground  known  as  Ladys  Hill  and 
Mar's  Wark  garden,  with  that  great  building  or  tenemeut  in  Stiiiiug 

'  Accrmuts  of  Cowan's  Hospital  iu  tlie  Tuwu-Ck'ik's  Office,  Stirliug. 


^'^"trDrll 


y,"  1 , ,  i , ; 


>  30 

5  o 

>  o 
33  ° 


ri 


C3 

« 


fsg 


?^ 


*^ 


^.^ 

S=^ 


5fe 


^ 


5^ 


m 


-^ 


^^ 


W 


11  sisx 


Cit^Si 


f^. 


3*5 


« 


"  .i/./7?",s'  jrjnK"  IX  STinuxG.  rxxvii 

called  tbe  New  Work,  aud  that  little  buikling  iiear  the  cliurch  (jf 
Stirling,  aud  coutaining,  exclusive  of  the  Nuw  Worli,  oue  acre  thirty 
falls  aud  two  ells  Scotch. 

The  garden  behind  "  Mar's  Wark  "  has  siuce  beeu  tastefuUy  laid 
out  as  a  cemetery;  and  froni  the  Ladys  Hill  spleudid  views  are 
obtaiued  of  the  "beauteous  realuis  of  fair  Menteith,"  and  the  distant 
hills  iu  the  shires  of  Perth  and  Argyll. 

Johu  Earl  of  j\Iar,  by  the  removal  of  the  fabric  of  the  Al_)bey  of 
Cambuskenneth,  to  build  a  new  "  wark  "  for  himself  in  the  time  of 
many  adhereuts  of  the  old  faith,  had  occasioned  remarks  ou  the 
supposed  sacrilege  to  whieh  the  liues  carved  above  the  ih^or  of  his 
new  Iiouse  may  have  some  reference  : — 

The  Moir  I  St.\nd  Un  oppin  Hitht, 
My  F.wltis  Moir  Svbiect  Au  to  sitht. 

I   PR.\Y   Al   LvKARIS    On   ThIS   LVGING, 
VlTH    GeNTIL   E   To    GiF    TH.4.IR    IVGING. 

ESSPY  .  SpEIK  .  Fv^RTH  .  AnD  .  SP.A.IR  .  NoTHT  . 
CONSIDDER  .  VeIL  .  .\ND  .  C.UR  .  NOTHT. 


cxx\-iii  INTRODUCTION. 

EOYAL  AND  EMINENT  PEESONS  BUEIED  AT 
CAMBUSKENNETH. 

In  the  Bull  of  Cleiueut  the  Third,  dated  at  the  Vatieau  ou  the 
13th  May  1195,  aud  addressed  to  Nicholas,  Abbot  of  the  Church  of 
St.  Mary  of  Stirling,  there  was  grauted,  among  other  privileges,  the 
right  of  free  Ijurial  iu  Cambuskeuueth  to  such  as,  from  feelings  of 
devotiou,  should  desii-e  to  be  there  interred. 

The  successive  abbots  aud  monks  of  the  Abbey,  as  well  as  many 
persons  conuected  with  the  district  aronnd  it,  no  doubt  fouud  their  last 
resting-place  within  its  precincts  from  a  very  early  period,  although 
tliere  is  uow  uo  trace  of  a  cemetery  couuected  with  the  Abbey. 

Walter  Earl  of  ]\Ienteith  selected  Cambuskeuueth  as  his  burial 
place  ;  aud  on  6th  April  149G,  at  Stii-Ung,  Kiug  James  the  Fourth 
confirmed,  by  a  charter  to  the  Ahhej,  a  graut  of  the  church  of 
Kippen,  made  to  it  by  the  deceased  Walter  Earl  of  Menteith,  and 
Alexauder,  his  eldest  sou,  aud  Matilda,  his  spouse,  for  their  selected 
burial  places  in  the  Abbey. 

It  is  somewhat  remarkable  that  the  Earl  of  Menteith  should  have 
choseu  Cambuskenneth  for  this  purpose.  His  aucestors  had  founded, 
iu  the  beautiful  lake  of  Menteith,  the  Priory  of  luchmahome,  close 
to  their  mansion  of  Talla,  situated  on  another  islaud  in  the  same 
lake,  and  Walter  Stewart,  Earl  of  Meuteitli,  and  his  s^Jouse,  the 
Countess  of  Menteith,  were  interred  at  the  high  altar  of  the  Priory 
of  ]\Ienteith,  amougthe  ruins  of  which  there  is  stiU  preserved  a  recum- 


EMINENT  PEESOXS  BURIED  AT  CAMBUSKENXETII.       cxxix 

beut  mouumeut  ou  whieh  is  carvecl  the  shield  of  Earl  Walter,  bearing 
the  well-liuowu  beud-cheque  of  the  Stewarts  of  Meuteith.  Thc 
sequestered  aud  sheltered  Priory  of  luchmahome  with  which  they  werc 
so  iutimately  conuected,  seems  a  more  natural  place  of  sepulture  for 
his  descendauts  thau  the  distaut  Aljbey  of  Camliuskenneth. 

It  has  been  surmised  that  the  Earls  of  Menteith,  previous  to  the 
trme  of  Earl  Walter  of  the  house  of  Stewart,  had  their  burial-place 
in  the  church  of  Kippen,  which  is  situated  withiu  tlie  earldom  ;  and 
Earl  Walter  may  have  selected  Cambuskeuueth  in  its  stead,  as  more 
suital)Ie  to  the  dignity  of  his  family. 

lu  the  year  1521,  the  Bishop  of  Duuljlaue,  by  a  commission  from 
the  Prior  of  St.  Andrews,  Vicar-General  during  the  vacancy  of  the 
See,  dedicated  with  due  solemuities  the  Abbey  Church  of  Cambus- 
kenneth  and  the  two  cemeteries  thereof,  at  the  east  and  west  end, 
with  the  chapter-house  and  enclosure.  Johu  Lord  Erskine  aud  other 
persons  of  distinction  were  preseut  ancl  concurred  iu  the  dedicatiou.' 
No  trace  of  the  two  cemeteries  then  consecrated  has  beeu  visible  for 
many  years. 

The  most  distiuguished  persous  who  were  iuterred  at  Cambuskeu- 
neth  were  King  James  the  Third  aud  his  spouse,  Queen  Margaret. 

The  cu-cumstances  counected  with  their  death  and  burial  at  Cam- 
buskeuneth  have  recently  been  iuvestigated  with  much  care  aud 
accuracy.^     Queen  Margaret  died  at  Stirling,  aud  was  buried  in  the 

1  Infra,  p.  122,  No.  92. 

-  Proceediugs  of  the  Soeiety  of  Antiquaries  of  Scotlautl,  vol.  vi.  Part  i.  pp.  14-3,i. 


cxxx  IXTUnii  UCTIOX. 

Abl)(/y    of    Canibuskennetli    on    tlie     27th     ov     29th    of    Febniaiy 
1486-T. 

As  the  Kiug  fled  from  the  field  of  Saueliiebtirn,  his  horse  takiug 
fright  at  the  uoise  caused  by  a  pitcher  dropped  from  the  haud  of  a 
terrified  wonian  wlio  was  takiug  water  from  a  well,  he  was  throwu 
violently  ou  the  grouud,^  aud  was  so  uiuch  injured  by  the  fall  aud 
oppressed  by  the  weight  of  his  armour  that  he  faiuted.  The  miller 
aud  his  wife  rushed  out  of  the  mill,  wliich  was  close  by,  carried  him 
iuto  their  house  and  covered  him  with  a  cloth  to  couceal  him  from 
his  enemies,  who  were  in  hot  pursuit.  Wheu  the  unfortuuate  King 
recovered  his  seuses  he  called  for  a  priest  to  hear  his  confession.  To 
his  rustic  hosts,  who  iuquued  his  uame,  he  replied,  "  I  was  your  Kiug 
this  morning."  Alarmed  at  the  annoiincement,  the  poor  woman  ran 
out  calling  loudly  for  assistauce  to  the  King.  Some  of  the  rebels 
who  happeued  to  pass  at  the  momeut  heard  her  cries,  and,  according 
to  tradition,  one  of  them,  a  follower  of  Lord  Gray,  a  priest  by  pro- 
fession,  exclaimed,  "  I  am  a  priest.  Where  is  the  King  ?"  He  was 
led  into  the  room  where  the  King  hxy  hid,  and  kueeling  down  beside 
hini  asked  if  he  thought  he  might  recover  by  the  help  of  surgery. 
"  I  believe  that  I  might,"  auswereil  James  ;  "  but  let  me  have  a 
priest  to  hear  my  coufessiou  aud  to  briiig  me  the  eucharist."  The 
traitor,  it  is  said,  heard  his  confession,  and  then  basely  stabbed  him 
to  the  lieart. 

'  .James  rode  ou  this  occasiou  a  swift  grey  cbarger,  ■whicb  liad  heeu  preseuted  to  him  Iiy 
Lord  Lindsay  of  the  Byres. 


KMIXEXT  PEn.snXS  llUHIEl)  AT  CAMnUSKHXXETII.         (^xxxi 

Tlie  spot  where  tliis  regicide  wa.s  per]:ietnxteil  is  well  knowii  \\y 
the  iiame  of  Beton's  Mill,  from  the  n;rme  of  tlie  tenaut  who  then 
occupied  it,  and  stands  on  the  east  side  of  Sauchiebm-n.  It  is  now  a 
dwelling-house,  the  lower  part  of  the  walls  only  being  tlie  same  as 
whenthe  King  found  shelter  witliin  them. 


As  his  Queen  had  shortly  Ijefore  been  interred  at  Cambuskcnueth, 
Avhich  was  within  a  few  miles  of  the  scene  of  his  death,  his  body  was 
ccmveyed  to  the  Abbey,  and  his  funeral  obsequies  were  solemnly  ])er 
formed  there  on  the  25th  of  June  1488,  exactly  fourteen  days  after 
the  battle  of  Sauchieburn. 

James  the   Third  had  ajipointed  a  cha]ilain  to  sing  masses  for 
^>ueen  Margaret ;  and,  after  his  deatli,  his  son  a]>];)uinted  a  cha^ihiiii 


INTRODUCTION. 


to  sing  masses  botli  for  his  father  aiid  mother.  These  duties,  as 
appears  from  the  payments  made  to  the  chapLiins  for  their  services, 
continued  to  be  performed  from  the  year  1488  to  the  year  1560, 
■when,  on  the  establishment  of  the  Reformed  faith,  all  such  ceremonies 
were  strictly  forbidden. 

King  James  the  Fomth,  as  he  advanced  in  years,  lamented  the 
fate  of  his  father,  and  smitten,  it  is  said,  with  remorse  for  the  part 
which  he  had  Ijeeu  led  to  take  against  him,  was  in  the  habit  of  wear- 
ing  an  iron  girdle  around  his  body  by  way  of  penance.  He  also 
ordered  masses  to  be  performed  for  his  father.  In  a  charter  granted 
by  Kiug  James  the  Fourth,  on  Gth  April  1496,  in  favour  of  the  Abbey 
of  Camljuskenneth,  the  King  thus  refers  to  the  final  resting-phice  of 
his  parents  : — 

Wc  therefore,  in  h(inour  of  Almighty  God  and  of  the  most 
glorious  Virgin  Mary  his  mother,  and  for  the  welfare  of  the  souls 
of  our  deceased  most  noble  father  and  mother,  James  the  Third  and 
Margaret,  liis  spouse,  of  happy  memory,  whom  God  assoilzie !  whose 
liodies  rest  in  our  said  Monaster}',  and  for  prayers  to  be  ofi"ered  up 
for  thera,  and  for  us  and  our  successors,  for  ever,  approve,  ratify,  and 
confirm  the  gift  conferred  on  the  Abbey.^ 

From  a  feeling  of  reverence  for  the  memory  of  his  jiarents, 
King  James  the  Fourth,  long  after  the  battle  of  Sauchieburu,  intended 
that  his  own  mortal  remains  should  rest  in  the  Abbey  of  Cambus- 
kenneth,  and  between  the  years  1501  aud  1511   employed  workers 

1  Infra,  p.  IGS,  No.  129. 


EMIXEXT  PERSOXS  BUUIED  AT  CAMBUSKEXXETII.       cxxxiii 

iu  stone  aud  mavljle,  jJamters  aud  arti&ts,  to  construct  a  hdr  or 
place  of  burial  in  tlie  Abbey  ;  aud  various  paymeuts  to  them  appear 
in  tlie  accouuts  of  the  Treasurer.^ 

The  iutentions  of  Kiug  James  the  Fourth  were  frustrated  by  the 
fiite  of  war.  After  his  death,  at  Flodden,  iu  September  1513,  his 
body  was  takeu  to  London  ;  where  his  brother-iudaw,  King  Heury  the 
Eighth,  wished  to  pay  royal  honours  to  his  remaius  by  their  iuter- 
meut  iu  St.  Pauls  Cathedral.  But  as  Kiug  James  died  while  uuder 
excommunication  by  the  Pope,  this  houour  was  deuied  him,  aud  he 
was  interred  in  the  Abbey  of  Shene,  or  Richmond. 

Accordiug  to  traditiou,  King  James  the  Third  aud  his  Queen 
were  buried  at  the  high  altar  of  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth.  Tliis 
spot  was  loug  Ijelieved  to  be  indicated  by  a  large  thoru-tree,  which 
has  beeu  specially  meutioued  Ijy  a  traveller  iu  Scotland  as  markiug 
the  royal  graves.  It  was  blown  down  by  a  gale  of  wiud,  after  which 
a  brauch  grew  up  close  to  the  site  of  the  original  thorn. 

This  thorn  served  to  guide  the  excavators  wlio,  ou  the  2d  May 
1864,  began  the  exploratiou  of  the  foundation  of  the  Abbey.  The 
results,  so  far  as  relates  \o  the  discovery  of  the  royal  graves,  are  thus 
recorded  by  Colouel  Sir  James  E.  Alexander  : — "  Betweeu  the  high 
altar  aud  the  thoru-tree  a  slab  of  coarse  blue  marble,  or  mouutain 
limestoue,  lay  uuder  the  soil ;  it  was  in  a  slanting  positiou,  as  if  dis- 
tm-bed  formei-Iy ;  one  corner  of  it  was  broken  off,  and  it  was  also 
cracked  across.     ^\Tiat  remained  of  the  slab  measured  about  five  feet 

'  Treasurei''s  Accounts,  1501-1511,  M.S.,  H.M.  General  Eegister  House,  EcUnburgh. 


INTRODUCTION. 


sqiiare  and  seven  inches  tliick.  It  bad  a  liewu  margiu,  and  was  hewn 
as  a  panel  across  its  rough  face.  This  was  the  usual  royal  tablet 
stoue  seeu  at  Dunfermline,  Dunblane,  etc'  On  close  inspection  bat- 
holes  were  seen  with  lead  in  them  ;  these  had  hekl  the  monumental 
brass  of  which  two  portions  were  fouucl,  the  one  with  the  figure  of  a 
flower  on  it,  thc  other  marked  with  cross  liues ;  the  larger  portion, 
with  the  inscription,  had  been  torn  oft'  and  removed. 

"  It  was  resolved  to  look  for  a  vault  uuder  the  slab.  It  Avas 
accordingly  raised,  aud  ou  digging  down  a  few  feet  a  large  oak 
coffin  was  found,  the  feet  touching  the  enclosure  of  the  high  altar, 
the  head  to  the  west.  Inside  the  coftin  was  a  skeleton,  doubtless  that 
of  King  James  the  Thu-d.  On  Ijeing  exposed  to  the  air  most  of  the 
bones  crumbled  to  dust ;  some  remained,  fragments  of  the  skull  and 
of  the  lower  jaw,  two  molar  teeth,  thigh-bones,  etc.  Moist  clay 
surrouuded  the  coffin,  and  this  doubtless  was  the  cause  of  its  being 
preserved  so  long.  The  pieces  of  the  coftin  which  remained  showed 
the  grain  of  the  wood,  oak,  which  probably  was  o1)tained  from  the 
neighbouring  Torwood.  Ou  the  left  of  the  male  bones  were  those 
of  a  female,  aud  also  those  of  a  child.  The  three  bodies  had  been 
disturbed  before,  perhaps  for  the  purpose  of  plundering  them  of  such 
ornaments  as  had  been  deposited  with  them.  A  small  coftin  orua- 
ment  of  metal  was  fouud,  in  shape  like  a  flower.  The  bones  were 
carefully  laid  aside  for  re-interment." 

1  Lately,  at  tlie  Abbey  Craig,  the  mountain  the  f  reestone  with  which  the  old  ehurches 
limestoue  has  been  found.  And  this  may  be  were  built,  and  which  also  is  being  used  for 
the  quarry  that  produced  the  royal  slabs  and       the  Wallace  Monumeut. 


EMIXEXT  PEESOXS  BURIED  AT  CAMBUSKEXXETII.        cxxxv 

Tlie  attention  of  Queen  Victoria  haviug  been  directed  to  the 
circiimstances  counected  with  the  discovery  of  the  remaius  of  her 
aucestor  King  James  the  Third,  her  Majesty  was  graciously  pleased 
to  command  that  a  suitable  monument  should  be  erected  by  Mr. 
Eobert  ]\Iathesou,  Assistant-Surveyor  of  Works  at  Ediulturgh.  Tlie 
monumeut  having  been  completed,  the  remains  of  King  James 
aud  his  Queen  were  carefully  deposited  in  a  sarcophagus,  and  the 
masou  work  of  the  tomb  fiuished  ou  Saturday  the  23d  of  September 
1865. 

It  is  of  fine  freestoue,  four  and  a  half  feet  in  height,  eight  feet 
in  length,  four  aud  a  half  feet  iu  breadtli  at  the  base,  and  three  fect  at 
the  top.     Ou  the  soutli  side  is  the  followiug  iuscriptiou  : — 

IX  THIS  PLACE,  KEAR  TO  THE  HIGH  ALTAR 

OF  THE  ABBEY    OF    CAMBUSKEXXETH, 

WERE  DEP0.S1TED  THE  REMAIXS  OF 

JAMES    THE    THIED,    KING    OP    SCOTS, 

WHO  DIED  OX  THE  llTH  OF  JUXE  1488, 

AX'D  OF  HIS  QUEEN, 

THE   PRINCESS   MARGAEET   OP   DEXMARK. 

On  the  uorth  side — 

THIS  RESTORATIOX  OF  THE  TOMB  OF  HER  AXCESTORS 

WAS  EXECUTED  BY  COMMAND  OF 

HER   MAJESTY   QUEEN   VICTORIA, 

A.D.  18G5. 


cxxxvi  INTEODUCTION. 

On  the  east  eud  of  tbe  monumeut  are  sculpturcd  tbe  Royal  Arms 
of  Scotland,  the  Red  Lion  on  a  field  of  gold,  surmouuted  l)y  a  crown 
and  supported  by  imicorns,  witb  tbe  motto — In  Defence. 

Ou  tbe  west  end  are  tbe  Royal  Arms  of  Scotbmd  impaled 
with  those  of  Denmark,  surmounted  by  a  crown,  aud  surrounded 
Ly  a  wreath  of  thistles.  On  the  top  there  is  carved  au  anticjue 
cross. 

A  drawing  of  tbe  monument  is  here  given.^ 

Although  King  James  the  Fourtb's  intention  of  beiug  buried  iu 
tbe  Aljbey  was  frustrated  as  already  explained,  it  is  prol^able  tbat 
tbe  costly  sepulture  prepared  for  bim  was  used  for  bis  second 
and  posthumous  sou,  Alexander  Duke  of  Ross.  This  son,  wbo  was 
born  on  the  30th  of  April  1514,  soiue  mouths  after  bis  f;xtlier's  deatb 
at  Flodden,  died  suddenly  at  Stu-ling  Castle  ou  tbe  IStb  of  December 
1515,  and,  according  to  a  MS.  copied  at  the  eud  of  tbe  Transcript  of 
the  Register  of  Cambuskenneth  by  Macfarlane,  was  buried  in  the 
Abbey  Cburcb.  In  that  MS.  he  is  caUed  "  Alexander  Duke  of 
Rothesay"  (a  mistake  for  Ross),  "  brotber  to  James  tbe  Fifth,  a  cbild 
beautiful  to  admiration,  and  deligbtful,  died  at  Stirling,  aud  was 
buried  in  the  Abbey  Cburch  of  Cambuskennetb,  1515." 

It  has  been  supposed  that  Prince  James,  tbe  eldest  son  of  King 
James  tlie  Fourth,  wbo  was  born  at  Holyrood-bouse  on  21st  February 
1506-7,  aud  wbo  died  at  Stirling  ou  27tb  Fi'bruary  1507-8,  was  also 

^  In  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society  of  Anti-       Queeu   Victoria  ;  but  liy  a  mistake   tlie  au- 
quaries  of  Scotland,  vol.  vi.  Part  i.  |>.  32,  a       tique  cross  ou  the  top  has  beeu  reversed. 
drawing   is   given   of   the    torub    erected  by 


EMINENT  PERSONS  BUBIED  AT  CAMBUSKENNETH.      cxxx^ii 

iuterrecl  at  Cambuskeuneth.  Tliore  is  uo  record  that  sue.h  was  the 
fact,  but  it  is  probable  that  the  reuiains  of  the  iufaut  priuce  were 
hiid  bcside  those  of  his  graudfather  and  graudmother  in  tlie  Abbey  of 
Cambuskemieth,  and  in  the  lair  which  his  father  was  then  prepariug 
for  himself. 

In  the  same  MS.  it  is  said  that  "  George,  second  Earle  of  Huutley, 
died  at  Stirling  the  9th  of  June  anno  1581  [?  1501],  aud  was  buried 
at  Cambuskenueth."  This  agrees  with  the  statement  of  the  historiau 
of  the  family,  that  the  Earl  died  at  Stiriing  on  8th  June  1501,  and 
was  buried  at  Cambuskenueth.  His  connexion  with  the  royal  family 
by  his  marriage  "nath  the  Princess  Annabella,  daughter  of  Kiug  James 
the  First,  would  accouut  for  his  being  interred  iu  the  royal  tomb. 
The  Earl  at  the  time  of  his  death  held  the  office  of  Lord  High 
Chancellor  of  Scotlaud. 

A  tradition,  recorded  by  Sir  James  Alexander,  states  that  Perkin 
Warbeck,  the  pretended  Duke  of  York,  who,  in  1496,  by  command  of 
Kiug  James  the  Fourth,  married  Lady  Catheriue  Gordon,  eldest 
daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Huntly  just  mentioned,  was  buried  at  Cam- 
buskenneth.  Sir  James  adds,  that  Warbeck  after  his  departure  was 
not  murdered  by  steel  or  poison  at  Pontefract  Castle,  but  made  his 
escape  from  it,  and  wandered  to  the  Hebrides,where  he  was  eutertaiued 
by  Macdouakl,  Lord  of  the  Isles.  From  thence  he  was  trausferred  to 
Stirling  Castle,  where  he  died  after  a  residence  of  eighteen  years. 
But  for  these  statements  he  gives  uo  authority.  There  is  conclusive 
evideuce  that  Perkin  Warbeck  was  takeu  aud  executed  at  Tyburne, 


INTRODUCTIOX. 


and  it  is  scarcely  probable  tliat  after  tliis  liis  body  sliould  have  been 
conveyed  to  Cambuskenneth. 

The  noble  house  of  Erskine,  who  were  early  benefactors  to 
Cambuskenneth,  had  their  burying-place  in  the  Abbey  at  one  time, 
as  appears  from  the  will  aud  testameut  of  John  Earl  of  ^lar,  Lord 
Erskine,  Eegent  of  Scothxnd,  in  which  he  commends  his  soul  to  the 
mercy  of  God,  assured  of  his  redemption  an<l  salvation  through  Jesus 
Christ,  and  his  body  to  be  buried  at  the  pleasure  of  God  as  becomes 
a  Christian,  iu  the  kii"k  of  Alloa,  where  he  ordained  an  honourable 
sepulture  to  be  made,  "and  the  relicts  of  my  foirbears  that  are  in  the 
Abl>ay  of  Cambuskynnyth  to  l;)e  transportit  thair."^ 

The  west  end  of  the  site  of  the  nave  of  the  Abbey  of  Cambus- 
kenneth  has  long  been  used  as  a  graveyard  l)y  the  iuhabitants  in  the 
village  of  Cambuskenneth  and  the  neighliourhood.  The  entry  to  it  is 
by  the  arch  of  the  original  west  door  of  the  Abbey,  part  of  which  is 
still  entire.  An  engraving  of  the  arch  forms  part  of  the  title-page  of 
the  present  volume. 

With  the  exceptiou  of  this  arch,  and  the  graceful  tower,  no  part 
of  the  buildings  of  Cambuskeuneth  remains  standing.  That  these 
were  extensive,  has  beeu  ascertained  froni  careful  excavatious  executed 
a  few  years  ago  by  ]\Ir.  ]\Iackisou,  then  Superintendent  of  AVorks  at 
Stirling,  by  whom  a  plau  of  the  fouudatious  was  made,  of  which  a 
copy  is  here  givcn.      In  the   course  of  his  researches  mauy  carved 

'  Okl  copy  of  Will  anil  Testament  in  tlie  ilar  Charterchest  at  Alloa.     The  will  was  dated 
at  Stirling,  9th  Autrust  156S. 


EESTOnATION  OF  TIIE  ADBEY  TOJrER. 


stoucs,  wliieli  liad  fornicil  part  of  tlie  building,  were  found,  aud 
dniwiugs  of  some  of  these  have  l>eeu  made  for  the  present  Work. 
Some  years  previously  the  cofler  or  ahns-box,  which  is  represented 
in  the  accompanyiug  drawiug,  ^vas  found  in  the  ruins.  It  is  now  in 
the  possessiou  of  Mr.  Joseph  Patou,  Duufermliue. 


The  Tower  is  uearly  in  the  state  in  whicli  it  was  at  the  time  of 
the  Eeformation,  except  that  the  upper  part  was  considerably  altered 
wheu  the  building  was  repaired  in  the  year  18G5.  An  engraving  of 
it  is  here  given,  made  chiefly  from  the  excellent  drawing  of  Mr. 


cxl  lyTEODUCTIOX. 


Billings,  taken  hefore  tlie  alteration  took  place  ;  and  on  comparing  it 
with  the  restored  building,  although  the  antiquary  may  feel  grateful 
to  those  who  have  done  so  much  to  preserve  this  relic  of  olden  times, 
the  arehitect  will  regret  that  in  doiug  so  more  care  was  not  taken  to 
preserve  its  origiual  character. 

The  Editor  feels  bouud  to  acknowledge  the  great  assistance 
which  he  has  received  from  Mr.  Roger  Montgomerie,  Advocate, 
without  whose  aid  he  could  not,  occupied  as  he  is,  have  completed 
the  Work  within  the  time  required. 

In  conclusion,  the  Editor  takes  the  liberty  of  congratulating  the 
Members  of  the  Grampian  Club  on  the  liberality  of  the  Marquess  of 
Bute  towards  them,  which  is  worthy  of  a  liueal  descendant  of  the 
Royal  Fouuder  of  Cambuskeuueth. 

WILLIAM  FRASER. 


Edixbukgh,  32  Castle  Stkeet, 
V2tli  March  1872. 


C  AM  B  US  K  EN  N  ET  H       TOWER. 


GROINING    OF    THE    TURRET    OF    C AMBUSKENNETH    TOWER 


MONOGRAM      OF       C A M B U S K E N N E T H 


^^^ 


l^.w-^ 


^MHn^tiumw^iiJiatiM^WaWiWMW^ffewiiWiia^J^ 


MOULDINGS,    a?       AT       CAMB  USKENNETH. 


^'^4j 


CARVINGS     AT       C  A  Nl  B  U  S  K  E  N  N  E  T  H     &    MARS     WARK. 


■-J  ^ 


l    \^\  i 


cxli 


Registrum  Monasterii  de  Cambuskenneth, 


Akringrosk. 

1.  Confirmatio  ecclesie  et  terre  de  Arringrosk  per  episcopuni 

17th  September  1281,         .... 

2.  Eesignatio  ecclesie  supradicte,  ISth  October  1282, 

3.  Institutio  eiusdem  ecclesie,  12tli  October  1282, 

4.  Confirmatio    capituli    Sanctiandree    super   ecclesia   et  ten-a 

ecclesie  de  Arringrosk,  7th  September  1282, 

5.  Donatio  moleudini  de  Ariyngrosk,  27th  Jidy  1295 
C.  Confirmatio  Eoberti  regis  super  moleudino   de  Arryngrosk 

lOth  June  1324,       .... 

7.  Saisina  molendini  predicti,  2d  October  1295, 

8.  Carta  de  Arryngrosk,  4th  February  1323, 
S).  De  multura  AiT^-ngrosk,  2d  December  1513, 

10.  Arryngvosk  miUture   concordia  et  Sancte  Marie   acra,  21st 

November  1521,         ....... 

11.  Culla  domini  abbatis  de   Cambuskynneth  super  molendino 

de  Arryngrosk,  October  1328,      . 


3 
4 
4 

6 
6 

9 

9 

10 

13 


8     15 


11      23 


cxlii 

TABULA. 

ALVETII.                                                                            Fol.ofMS 
Begister. 

Page 
of  Priiit. 

12. 

Donatio  Eichardi  de  ecclesia  de  Alueth,  [c.  1260,] 

11 

23 

13. 

De  ecclesia  de  Aluetli  non  tenemur  presentare   vicarium, 

5tli  November  1260, 

12 

24 

14. 

Alueth  terra  ecclesiastica,  14th  February  1272,  . 

12 

24 

15. 

Donatio  ecclesie  de  Alueth  per  Hugonem  ejDiscopiun  Dun- 

keldensem,  [c.  1180,] 

12 

25 

16. 

Donatio  Willelmi  regis  Scotie  ecclesie  de  Alueth,  [c.  1180,] 

13 

26 

17. 

Ahieth  ob  visitationem   episcopi  vltra   numerum   et   fruc- 

tuum  sequestrationem,  13th  February  1394,  . 

13 

26 

Harth. 

18. 

Donatio  ten-e  de  Harth,  [f.  1214,] 

Alway. 

14 

29 

19. 

Contra  capellam  de  Alway,  20th  May  1409, 

14 

29 

20. 

Acquittancia    Henrici    abbatis    Cambuskyuneth    de    officio 

thesaurarii,  16th  August  1495,     ..... 

15 

31 

21. 

Instrumentum  de  capella  de  Alway,  15th  May  1401, 
Arringrosk. 

16 

32 

22. 

Arringrosk   capellanie    fundatio    per   Andream    Murray   de 

Balward  militem,  Ist  October  1527,      . 

17 

34 

BULLS. 

23. 

Prima  Bulla  protectionis  et  confirmationis  ordinis  monasterii 
nostri  et  possessionum  de  Cambuskynneth,  30th  August 

1147 

19 

38 

24. 

Secunda  Bulla  Originalis,  5th  December  1164,   . 

20 

40 

25. 

Tertia  Bulla  originalis  protectionis  et  inhibitionis  ecclesiarum 

terrarum  et  aliarum  possessionum,  13th  May  1195, 

21 

42 

26. 

BuEa  protectionis   et  inhibitionis  ecclesiarum   terrarum  et 

TABULA. 

1  ofMS 
egister. 

cxliii 

Page 
of  Pruit. 

Fo 
E 

aliarum  ijossessionura  monasterii  de  Cambuskynueth,  6tli 

May  [1207,] 

23 

47 

27. 

Bulla  confirmationis  omnium  libertatum  et  privilegiorum  a 
Eomanis  poutificibus  et  regibus  concessorum,  27tli  July 

[1201,] 

24 

48 

28. 

De  possessionibus  et  bonis  fratrum  vel  conuersorum  nostrorum 

petendis  et  liabendis,  18th  January  [1268,]    . 

24 

49 

29. 

Bulla  protectionis  generalis  possessionum  aliorumque  bono- 

rum,  5th  January  [1268,] 

25 

50 

30. 

BuDa  protectionis  et  inhibitiouis  contra  vadiatores  captores  et 
detentores   bonorum   de   Cambuskynneth,  18th  January 

[1268,] 

25 

50 

31. 

Bulla   de  prouisionis  pensionum  seu  beneficiorum  non  faci- 

endo,  27th  July  1201, 

26 

51 

32. 

Bulla  in  qua  conceditur  abbati  vti  mitra  annuli.s  et  populum 

benedicere,  22d  March  [1406,] 

26 

52 

33. 

Bidla  reuocationis  quarumcunque  possessionum  qualitercuii- 
que  alienatarum  continens  capitulum  ea  que  de  bonis,  27th 

Febraary  [1380,] 

26 

53 

34. 

Bulla   dispensationis    cum    proprietariis    cum    injectionibus 

manuum  et  aliis  transgTessionibus,  5th  January  [1381,] 

27 

54 

35. 

BuUa  ea  que  de  bonis  per  Patricium  Calenter,  4th  June  1433, 
Balcokmok. 

27 

55 

36. 

Donatio  quatuor  bouatarum  terrarum  de  Balcormol':,  ['■.  1 1 78,] 

28 

56 

37. 

Alia  carta  de  Balcormok,  [1195-1214,]     .... 

28 

50 

38. 

Confirmatio  Willelmi  regis  super  predicta  terra  de  Balcormok, 

[1180-1214,] 

28 

57 

cxliv 

TABULA. 

Bekwick.                                        ^^'«s 

Page 
ot  Prlnt. 

39. 

Cartade  Berwico,  20th  October  1324,       .... 

29 

57 

40. 

Carta  de  terra  Berwici,  20th  October  1324, 

BUTHKEXNER. 

30 

59 

41. 

Biithkenner  soluendi  preceptum,  17th  September  [1317,] 

31 

<il 

42. 

Preceptum  vicecomitibus  de  Striueling  per  Dauid  regem  de 
octo  libris  et  quinque  denariis  et  sex  celdris  frumenti  de 
Bothkenner  et  de    decimis   firmarum   de  Atlieray,    20th 

November  [1344,]     ....... 

31 

61 

43. 

Buthkenner  frumeuto  additur  celdra  per  Dominum  Abbercor- 

num,  4th  October  1363, 

31 

62 

44. 

[De]  Buthkenner  septem  celdi-arum  frumenti  reddendo  pre- 

ceptum,  2d  September  [1424,]      ..... 

32 

64 

45. 

Buthkenner  frumentum  septem  celdrarum  pro  quinque  mit- 

tatur,  23d  September  1459, 

32 

64 

Blare. 

46. 

Donatio  WiUelmi  episcopi  Sanctiandree  super  centum  solidos 

ecclesie  de  Blare,  [«.1215,] 

33 

65 

47. 

Confirmatio  prioris  Sanctiandree  et  conuentus  super  centuni 

solidis  ecclesie  de  Blar,  [c.  1215,] 

33 

66 

48. 

Bulla  centum  solidorum  ecclesie  de  Blar,  9th  May  [1216,]    . 
Badindath. 

34 

66 

49. 

Badmdath  carta,  17th  October  1282,         .... 
Cambuskynneth. 

34 

67 

50. 

Carta  originahs  et  confirmatio  regis  Malcolmi  de  terris  Cam- 

buskynneth  et  piscaria,  [c.  1163,]          .... 

35 

70 

51. 

Prima  carta  originalis  Dauid  regis  fuudatoris  nostri  de  Cam- 

buskynneth,  [c.  1147,]        ...... 

36 

71 

TABULA. 


cxlv 


52.  Cambuskynneth  terrarum  et  piscarie  confirmacio  per  regem 

Wilelmum,  [c.  1168,] 

53.  Cambuskynneth  terrarum  et  piscarie  confirmacio  per  regem 

Alexandrum  filium  Willelmi  regis,  12th  February  [1248,] 

54.  Carta  de  fractione  piscariarum  de  Cambuskynneth  et  de  eorun- 

dum  nominibus  qui  inuaserunt  crouas,  27th  July  [1365,] 

55.  Sequuntur  nomina  illorum  qui  fregeruut  crouas  [de]  Cambus- 

kynneth,  [c.  1365,] 


Fol.  of  MS.     Page 
Register.  of  Priat. 


36 


37      73 


38 


38     76 


Clackmanan. 

56.  Clacmannan  possessionis  preceptum   a  decauo    rectore    de 

Torrye,  22d  August  1350, 

57.  Clacmanan  ecclesia  ex  dono  Dauid  regis,  [cmtc  1153,] 

58.  Vicarie  de  Clakmanan  donatio,  4th  June  1350, 

59.  Confirmatio  Eogeri  episcopi  de  Clacmanan  et  de  Kirkis,  Ist 

July  [c.  1200,] 

60.  Confii-matio  rectorie  de  Clacmauan  Malcolmi  Regis,  [c.  1160,] 

61.  Clacmanan  possessionis  preceptum,  22d  August  1350, 

62.  Bulla  vnionis  vicarie  Clacmanan  monasterio  de  Cambuskyn- 

neth,  15th  September  [1306,] 

63.  Bulla  declarationis  vicarie  Clacmanan  non  obstantibus  quod 

in  originali  bulla  vera  non  fuit  fructuum  expressio,  28th 
Januaiy  [1307,]        ....... 

64.  Perambulatio  acrarum  de  Clacmanan,  6th  March  1505, 

65.  Decima  Carbocidii  de  Salquhye,  4tli  February  1510,    . 

Cakel. 

66.  Marca  annui  redditus  de  Carel,  [c.  1178,] 


39 

77 

39 

77 

39 

78 

40 

79 

40 

79 

40 

80 

40     81 


42     84 

42  85 

43  87 


44     88 


cxlvi 

TJBULA. 

Creythy. 

^ol.  ofMS.     Pans 
Register.  ofPtUit. 

67. 

Confirmatio  ecclesie  de  Cretliyn  vt  sit  solum  curatis  manu- 

alis,  Uth  January  1347,     ...... 

44 

88 

68. 

Item  alia  confirmatio  eiusdem,  6tli  Marcli  1395, 

MlLLS  OF  CLACKMANAN. 

44 

89 

69. 

Eenunciatio  putatiui  juris  omnium  decimarum  niolendinorum 

de  Clacmanan,  6tli  October  1406,          .          .          .          . 

45 

90 

DUGLYN. 

70. 

Donatio  terre  de  Duglyn,  [c.  1200,]            .... 

45 

91 

71. 

Item  deeadem,  [e.  1200,] 

46 

92 

72. 

Douglie  terrarum  contirmatio,  [c  1200,]     .... 

46 

92 

73. 

Eesignatio  terre  de  Duglyn,  [c.  1200,]        .          .          .          . 

46 

93 

74. 

Compositio  super  decimis  eiusdem,  1247, 

EXCOMMUNICATIO. 

47 

94 

75. 

Secunda  Citatio,  28th  Jauuary  1392,         .... 

47 

95 

76. 

Excommunicatio  in  Episcopum  Dunkeldensem,  25th  Eebruary 

1392, 

49 

99 

77. 

Excommunicatio  in  Episcopum  Dunkeldensem  in  iudicio  facta 

per  Judicem,  25th  February  1392,         .           .           .           . 

50 

101 

78. 

Instrumentum  executionis  excommuuicationis  in  episcopum 

Duukeldeusem  et  citationis,  25th  March  1393, 

52 

106 

DUNYPAIS. 

79. 

Donatio  dimidie  carrucate  apud  Dunypais,  [c.  1200,]  . 

53 

107 

80. 

De  duabus  bouatis  terre  de  Dunypais,  [('.  1190,] 

53 

108 

81. 

Donatio  terre  de  Dunypais  cum  quatuor  bovatis  terre  tam 

citra  quam  vltra  aquam  per  Adam  Morhame,  [c.  1200,] 

54 

108 

55 

112 

56 

112 

56 

112 

57 

114 

58 

117 

59 

119 

TABULA.  cxlvii 

Fol.  of  MS.     Page 
Register.  of  Prmt. 

82.  Super  sa.sina  facta  de  terra  de  Dunypai,s  per  dominum  Adam 

de  Moram  abbati  et  conuentui  de  Cambu.skyunetli,  [c.  1200,]  54     110 

83.  Item  de  eadem  terra  carta  de  Bikirtoune,  [r-.  1200,]      .  .      55     110 

84.  Quieta  clamatio  domini  de  Bikertoune  de  Donypais  pro  ex- 

cambio  terre  abbatis  et  conuentus  in  Beuyne,  etc,  [c.  1200,]    55     111 

85.  Inquisitio  facta  de  ecclesia  Douypais,  6th  April  1267, 

86.  De  decima  molendini  de  Donypais,  [c.  1200,] 

87.  Dunypais  testimouium  assise  pro  monasterio,  21st  January 

1426, 

88.  Dunj-pais  possessio  per  testes  probatur,  21st  January  1426, 

89.  Dunypais  pacificatio,  30th  and  31st  May  1462, 

90.  Donj-pais  terrarum  renunciatio,  lOth  November  1429, 

91.  Donypais  terrarum  quatuor  acrarum  litis  renunciatio,   28th 

May  1462, 60     121 

Dedicatio. 

92.  Dedicationis  ecclesie  testimoniale,  llth  July  1521,       .  .      61      122 

Eeth. 

93.  De  auuuis  redditibus  de  Erth  et  de  Cambuskyuneth,  (Cambus- 

baroune,)  30thNovember  [1365,]  .  .  .  .      61     123 

Edinbuegh. 

94.  Carta  Johannis  Quliiting  facta  Martino  Wricht  de  terra  sua 

anteriori  nunc  abbatis  et  conuentus  de  Cambuskynneth 

de  venditione  eiusdem  in  burgo,  2d  June  1 4 1 1 ,        .  .      62     124 

95.  Edinburghgabelle  vsus  monasterio  conceditur,  Ist  April  1443,      63     126 

96.  Edinburgh  tenementi  emptionis  carta  per  Dauid  abbatem, 

13th  June  1455, 64     127 


cxlviii                                                 TABULA. 

97. 

Fol.  ot  M8 
Register. 

Ediuburgh  terre  possessio  per  abbatem  Dauid,  1 7th  June  1455,     64 

Page 
of  Print. 

129 

Electio. 

98. 

Electio  confirmari  petita  a  priore  et  capitulo  Sanctiandree, 

25th  April  1336, 

65 

130 

EOKTEUIT. 

99. 

Donatio  ecclesie  de  Forteuit,  [c.  1165,]       .... 

66 

132 

100. 

Donatio  ecclesie  de  Forteuieth,  [('.  1175,] 

66 

132 

101. 

Donatio  quatuor  acrarum  terre  in  Forteuiet  per  regem  Willel- 

mum,  [c.  1180,] 

66 

133 

Farina. 

102. 

Nova  obligatio  dominorum  abbatis  et  conuentus  monasterii  de 
Dunfermeling  super  solutione  annue  pensionis  unius  celdre 

farrine  auenatice  de  Pobnais  Eegis,  1422, 

67 

134 

103. 

Novum  Instrumentum   super  solutione  farine  de  Pohnais 

Eegis,  23d  May  1422, 

67 

134 

FULECHE. 

104. 

Cartade  Fuleche,  [f.  1200,] 

Glenilef. 

68 

136 

105. 

Compositio  inter  nos  et  abbatem   de  Cupro  de  ecclesia  de 

Glenyleff,  12thSeptember  1311,            .... 

69 

137 

lOG. 

Glenileiff  ecclesie  pensionis  soluende  firmitas,  1 6th  September 

1405, 

70 

139 

107. 

Quittanciade  Glenyleff,  12th  February  1413,     . 

70 

141 

108. 

Hospitalis  Sancti  Jacobi  sasine  preceptum,  lOth  March  [1402,] 
Kirketox. 

71 

141 

109. 

De  ecclesia  de  Kirketon  prima  donatio  WiUekiio  primo  ablsati 

de  Canibuskynneth,  [c.  1160,]      ..... 

71 

142 

TABULA. 

cxli.K 

110. 

Fol.  ofMS 
Reffiater. 

Douatio  terre  de  Kirketon  per  Dauid  episcopum  Sanctiandree, 

Pagt 

[7th  July]  1242, 

71 

142 

111. 

lustitutio  vicarie  ecclesie  de  Kirketoun,  [12th  Juue]  1295,  . 

71 

143 

112. 

Confirmatio  Eicliardi  episcopi  ecclesie  de  Eggles,  [c.  1 1 70,]  . 

72 

144 

113. 

Donatio  ecclesie  de  Kirketoun,  [c.  1170,]  .... 

72 

144 

114. 

Coadunatio  vicarie  de  Kirketoun  cum  rectoria,   16tli  May 

1295, 

72 

144 

115. 

De  institatione  ecclesie  de  Kirketou,  16th  May  1295, 

73 

146 

116. 

Coadunatio  ecclesie  de  Kirketoun  rectorie  cum  vicaria,  25th 

December  1300, 

73 

146 

117. 

De  procurationibus  ecclesie  de  Kii-ketoun,  6th  August  1251, 

74 

148 

118. 

Compositio  inter  nos  et  Dumfermeling  super  diuersis  decimis 
et  de   celdra  fariue   de   Polmas  regis    Kirketoun,    24th 

October]215, 

74 

149 

119. 

Bulla  de  Kirketoun  vicaria  vnita  et  vnione  coufirmata,  6th 

November  [1372,]     ....... 

76 

153 

120. 

Cura  Sancti  Niuiani  de  Kirketouu  temporalis  et  ad  nutum. 

lOth  November  1527, 

78 

155 

Kyncardyn. 

121. 

Donatio  ecclesie  de  Kincardin,  [c.  1199,]   .... 

79 

160 

122. 

Kyncardin  ecclesie  confirmatio,  [c.  1210,] 

80 

160 

123. 

Confirmatio  ecclesiarum  de  Kincardin,  Tulibody  et  Tulicultry, 

[c.  1220,] 

80 

161 

124. 

Confirmatio  Osberti  episcopi  Dunblanensis  et  capituli  eiusdem 

super  predictis  ecclesiis,  [c.  1230,]         .... 

80 

161 

125. 

Ordinatio  super  quartis  debatis  (debitis)  episcopo  Dunblaneusi, 

29th  January  1239, 

M 

81 

162 

cl 

TABULA. 

126. 

Fol.  ofMS 
Begister. 

Confirmatio  capituli  Dunblanensis  super  tribus  ecclesiis,  30tli 

Page 
ofPrint. 

January  1239,            ....... 

82 

165 

127. 

Donatio  Wilelmi regis  ecclesie  Kyncardyn  et  terrarum,  [c.  1199,' 

KlPPAJsE. 

83 

166 

128. 

Institutio    Kippane    nouissima   abbatis   et   conuentus,    21st 

July  1510, 

83 

167 

129. 

Kippaue  ecclesie  noua  douatio  per  Jacobum  quartum  reyem 

Scotie,  6tli  April  U96, 

84 

168 

130. 

Kyppane  coucordia  iuter  Dunblane  et  Cambuskynneth,   Ist 

April  1511, 

85 

170 

131. 

Kippane  ecclesie  instrumentum  confirmationis  Jacobi  quarti 
in  suo  parliamento  secunduni  tenorem  carte  nobis  con- 

cesse,  23d  June  1496, 

87 

174 

KlKKINTCLAUCH. 

132. 

Donatio  ecclesie  de  Kirkintolauch,  [«w/c  1195,]  . 

88 

175 

133. 

Confirmatio  Alexandri  regis  ecclesie  predicte,  27th  March  1226, 

88 

176 

134. 

Item  confirmatio  ecclesie  predicte,  [c  1230,] 

88 

176 

135. 

CoUatio  episcopi   Johanni   Striueling   vicarie    Kirkintulach, 

31st  May  1500, 

89 

177 

136. 

Citatio  superThomaFlemyng  et  presbyteri.?,  20th  March  1522, 

90 

179 

137. 

Kirkiutulach  decretum  decimarum  pro  monasterio  de  xxxiii 
celdrisfarrine  et  tres  celdris  ordei  precium  bolle  xiii^  et 
quatuor*^,  et  pro  qualibet  bolla  gallina,  precium  iiii'^,  lltli 

March  1523 

90 

181 

138. 

Compotum  domini  Flemyng,  30th  March  1527,  . 

91 

182 

139. 

Copia  acti  super  dominum  Flemyng,  lOth  October  1507, 

93 

186 

TABULA.  cli 

Fol.  of  MS.     Page 
Eegisier.  ofPi-int. 

140.  Collatio    episcopi  eiusdem  vicarie  magistro  Jacobo  Lyn,  Ist 

Marcli  1525, 94     187 

141.  Possessio  eiusdem,  lOtli  June  1526,  .  .  .  .95     189 

142.  Collatio  eiusdem  vicarie  magistro  Duncauo  Burnet  de  Kirkin- 

tulach,  7tli  AprU  1527, 95     190 

143.  CoUatio  vicarie  perpetue  parrocbialis  ecclesie  Sancti  Niniani 

de  Lenze  pro  magistro  Alexandro  Annande,  22d  September 

1530, 98     195 

144.  Possessio  eiusdem  vicarie,  25th  September  1530,  .  .      99     197 


KlLMAEONOK. 

145.  Donatio  ecclesie  de  Kilmaronoch,  IGth  January  1325, 
140.  Confirmatio  ecclesie  predicte,  22d  November  1325, 

147.  Confirmatio  Capituli  Glasguensis  ecclesie  prediete,  lOth  July 

1327, 

148.  Institutio  ecclesie  predicte,  8th  Jime  1328, 

149.  Item  de  procurationibus  dicte  ecclesie,  31st  January  1351 

150.  Kilmaronok  ecclesie  confirmatio  pape,  22d  June  1334, 

151.  Kilmaronok  noua  commissio  approbans  donationem  episcop 

2d  October  1342, 

152.  Collatio  vicarie  de  Kibiiaronoch,  3d  September  1507,  . 

153.  Collatio  vicarie  de  Kihnaronok  pro  domino  Eichardo  Striuel 

ing,  13thMay  1522, 

154.  Instrumentum  possessionis  dicte  vicarie,  15th  May  1522, 

155.  Collatio     vicarie     de    Kilmaronok    pro    magistro    Eoberto 

Grahame,  8th  June  1527,  . 

156.  CoUatio  vicarie  deKUmaronok  pro  Mauricio  Clerk,  25th  July 

1527, 


100 

199 

100 

200 

101 

201 

102 

203 

102 

204 

103 

205 

103 

205 

104 

207 

105 

209 

lOG 

211 

107     212 


108     214 


clii 

TABULA. 

157 

[lustramentum  possessiouis  dicte  vicarie,]  28th  July  1527,  . 

Pol.  of  MS 
Register. 

109 

Page 
of  Pruit. 

216 

158 

Decretum  garbalium  decimarum  contra  parrocliianos  de  Kil- 

maronok,  26tli  February  1528,     . 

110 

218 

159 

Ecclesia  Kilmaronok  libera  monasterio  Cambuskynneth,  9th 

December  1529,         ....... 

112 

222 

Kysnoule. 

160. 

Donatio  patronatus  ecclesie  de  Kynnoule,  27th  January  1361 

113 

224 

161. 

Confirmatio  episcopi  super  eodem,  7th  Febraary  1361, 

113 

225 

162. 

Confirmatio  regis  super  eodem  transcriptum  de  registro  regis. 

7th  April  1361 

114 

226 

163. 

Confirmatio  episcopi  et  prioris  Sanctiandree  de  Kynnoule,  7th 

February  1361,          ....... 

115 

227 

164. 

Institutio  et  coUatio  episcopi  Sanctiandree  de  data  Tnillesimo 

tricentesimo  sexagesimo  primo,  19th  February  1361, 

116 

229 

165. 

BuUa  de  Kynnoxile  de  \Tiione  dicte  ecclesie,  26th  October 

1378, 

116 

230 

166. 

Noua  bulla  vnionis  ecclesie  de  Kynnoule,  2d  April  1405, 

118 

233 

167. 

Instrumentum  nouum  de  Kynnoule  quomodo  Andreas  Tre- 
brone   rector  de  Kynnoule   concessit   esse  contentus    de 

annua  pensione  viginti  Ubrarum,  26th  September  1403,   . 

119 

236 

168. 

Instrumentum    donationis    et  quieteclamationis    ecclesie   de 
Kynnoule  per  Nicholaum  de  Erskin  monasterio  de  Cam- 

Iiuskynneth,  21st  March  1400, 

121 

239 

169. 

Kynnoule  interruptio  prescriptionis,  18th  November  1521,    . 
Ketlistoun. 

1  22 

241 

170. 

Donatio  terre  de  Ketlistoun,  [f.  1150,]       .          . 

126 

250 

171. 

Confirmatio  Alexandri  regis  terre  predicte,  7th  January  1244, 

126 

250 

127      251 


127      251 


TABULA.  cliii 

"~~   ~  ~~^  Fol.  ofSIS.     Page 

Resfist«r.  ofPriiit. 

172.  Liberatio  namationis  homimim  de  Ketlistonn  pro  lie  Blude- 

wite  per  auditores  scaccarii,  conformiter  inliibitioui  regis 
Eoberti,  14th  July  1525, 

173.  Ketlistoun  liberum  a  secta  curie  ^dcecomitatus,  18th  August 

1390, 

Kaeell. 

174.  Confirmatio  Willelmi  regis  de  marca  Kerrall,  [c.  1174,]  128     252 

175.  ConfirmatiodeKarell,  [f.  1174,] 128     252 

KlNTULACH. 

176.  Bullaconfirmationis  de  Kintulach,  9th  April  1374,      .  .     128     253 

177.  Kintulach  Eoberto  Erskin  et   Cristine  sponse  sue  donatio, 

[a  1361,] 129      255 

178.  Eoberti  senescalli  Scocie  confirmatio  comitis  de  Stratherne 

super  donatione  de  Kintulach  et  ad  mortuara  manuni 
concessionis  licencia  absque  seculari  seruicio  in  puram 
elemosinam,  12th  September  1361,        ....     130     256 

179.  Kintulacli  tertie  partis  terrarum  resignatio  in  nianus  abbatis, 

16thFebruary  1381, 131     258 

180.  Kintvdach  inhibitio  regia  ue  vicecomes  leuet  contributiones, 

lstMayl369, 132     259 

181.  Kantulach  decretum  inter  Abbatem  Fentoune  et  Dunbarnye, 

13thFebruary  1389, 132     259 

182.  Carta  de  Kintulach,  Ist  June  1530,  .  .  .133     261 

183.  [Letters  of  Eeversion  of  the  third  part  of  Kiatuhicli],  2Gt]i 

March  1533  and  4th  March  1534,         .  .  .  .     135     264 

KlNCLEVIN. 

184.  De  ecclesia  de  Kinclevin  et  Lecroth,  2d  November  1260,       .     137     267 

185.  Kinclevin  ecclesie  compositio,  19th  May  1315,   .  .  .    138     270 


Fol.  ofMS 

RegUter. 

Fage 
of  Priiit. 

139 

271 

139 

272 

140 

274 

141 

275 

cUv  TABULA. 

LlNLITHGOW. 

186.  Linlitliqw  acre  terre  resignacio,  10  February  1493, 

187.  Linlithqw  tenementi  possessio,  22d  August  1440, 

MUETOUN. 

188.  Carta  de  Murtoun,  8tli  November  1399,     . 

189.  Confirmatio  regis  de  Murtoune,  24th  February  1400,    . 

MOBBISCROFT. 

190.  Carta  de  Mobbiscroft  et  de  i^iscaturis  de  Carsy  et  Tulybody 

et  de  asiameutis  de  Torwod,  [c  11.50,]  .  .  .  .    143 

Malar. 

191.  Deterrade  Malar,  [c.  1180,] 143 

Petcorthy. 

192.  De  terra  de  Petcorthy,  [c.  1153,] 

Perth. 

193.  Coufirmatio  Willelmi  Eegis  de  crofta  de  Perth,  [f.  11G5,] 

194.  Pertli  quiuquagiuta  solidorum  donatio  regia,  [c.  1105,] 

195.  Sentencia   diffinitiua   crofte    apud   Perth   contra   Johanuem 

Dunyng,  8th  August  1520, 

Plane. 

196.  Eedditus  de  Pkne,  25th  August  1364,       .... 

197.  Plane  annuus  redditus,  25th  February  1366, 

198.  Bulla  de  annuo  redditu  le  Plane,  16th  Juue  1369, 

Parcum. 

199.  Compositio  inter  nos  et  Dunfermeliug  de  decimis  Cambus- 

baroun  et  veteris  parci,  25th  March  1319,      .  .  .148     2f 


143 

279 

144 

279 

144 

280 

144 

281 

145 

282 

146 

283 

147 

284 

TABULA. 

clv 

200. 

Fol.  of  MS 
Eegister. 

Compositio  inter  nos  et  Duufermeliiig,  lOtli  November  1320,    148 

P.-.ge 
of  Print. 

288 

201. 

Preceptum  soluendi  debita  mouasterio,  7th  Juue  1395, 

PlSCAEIA. 

149 

288 

202. 

Piscarie  decretum  pro  monasterio  contra  prepositum  balliuos 

et  communitatem  de  Striueling,  8tli  April  1495, 

149 

289 

203. 

Decretum  contra  prepositum  balliuos  et  communitatem  de 
Striueliug  pro  mouasterio  de  Cambuskynneth,  8th  March 

1531, 

150 

290 

204. 

Piscarie  de  Forth  supramonasterium  precario  possidet  vicarius 

Striueling,  16th  November  1526, 

151 

292 

205. 

In  causa  piscarie  decimalium  salmonum  de  Forth  inhibitio 

per  ordinarium,  9th  Xovember  1468,     .... 

152 

293 

206. 

Actum  contra  dominum  Tulibody  pro  piscaria,  12th 

1527, 

153 

295 

207. 

Contra  Polmais  Weland  pro  piscaria,  9th  August  1520, 
SxrauELiNG. 

153 

296 

208. 

StriueHng  annuus  in  excambium  molendinorum  de  Clacmauan 

redditus,  30th  April  1265, 

154 

297 

209. 

Striueling  annui  redditus  duorum   solidorum,   8th   October 

1436,       .                    

154 

297 

210. 

Indentura  inter  nos  et  Johannem  Scugall  de  teuemeuto  in 

Striueling,  lOth  December  1412, 

155 

298 

211. 

Striuehng  processus  antique  Scole  in  VineUa  beate  jVIarie, 

24th  June  1481, 

156 

300 

212. 

Striueliug  in  Yinella  Sancte  Marie  processus  tenementi,  20th 

June  1481,       

157 

303 

clvi 

TABULA. 

213. 

Striueliug  oppidi  teuementum  ob  proeessum  recuperatum  et 

FoL  of  MS 
EesisMr. 

Pag» 
of  Print. 

abbati  possessio  data,  20tli  November  1482,  . 

159 

305 

214. 

Striueling   annui   redditus    assignantur   altaribus   et   annui 

redditus  ortorum,  5th  January  1445,     .... 

160 

307 

215. 

Carta  regis  Dauid  de  tholoueo  non  dando,  [c.  1150,]     . 

TULIBODY. 

162 

312 

216. 

Donatio  ecclesie  de  Tulibody,  [c.  1 1 70,]     .... 

163 

312 

217. 

Confirmatio  ecclesie  de  Tulibody,  [f.  1200,] 

163 

312 

218. 

De  quatuor  solidis  Tulibody,  [c.  1 1 70,]       .... 

163 

313 

219. 

Tulibody  per  episcopum  Duublanensem  confirmatio,  [c.  1170,] 

TCLLICULTRE. 

163 

313 

220. 

Donatio  "Wilelmi  regis  de  ecclesia  Tulicultre,  [c.  1199,] 

164 

314 

221. 

TuUecidtry  ecclesie  et  terrarum  regie  donatiouis  confinnatio, 

[c.  1199,] 

164 

314 

222. 

Carta  decem  acrarum  terre  de  TuIIicultri,  [c.  1300,]      . 

164 

315 

223. 

Tidlecidtiy  decem  acrarum  per  Eobertum  regem,  4tli  Mareh 

1315, 

165 

316 

TULLYMUETHAC. 

224. 

Donatio    centum    petrarum    casei    de    Tidlymurthae,    15th 

January  1232,            ....... 

165 

316 

225. 

Testimoniale  regium  pro  abbate  contra  episcopum  Dunkel- 

densem,  28th  March  [l395,] 

166 

317 

R  E  G I  S  T  R  U  M 

MONASTERII  DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 

Jacobus  Dei  gracia  Eex  Scotorum,  vniuersis  et  singulis  ad  quorum  noticias 
presentes  littere  peruenerint,  salutem  :  Quia  per  supplicationem  coram  con- 
silii  nostri  dominis  porrectam  pro  parte  venerabilis  iu  Cristo  patris  et  con- 
siliarii  nostri  dilecti  Alexandri  abbatis  mouasterii  nostri  de  Cambuskynnetli, 
concessus  etiam  uostri  quam  sessiouem  vocant  presidentis,  et  conuentus 
eiusdem  monasterii,  exj)ositum  erat  quod  carte  et  euidencie  ipsis  pertiuentes 
et  in  dicto  nostro  mouasterio  liactenus  asseruate,  quod  situm  est  in  loco  aquoso, 
ex  Lumore  et  aieris  rubigiue,  jam  quasi  et  cera,  membranis,  sigillis  ac  carec- 
teribus  absumpte  sunt,  et  breui  penitus  consumeutur,  non  siue  ipsorimi  abbatis 
et  conuentus  maximo  et  irremediabili  detrimento,  uisi  statim  eiis  de  remedio 
succurratur  ;  quare  rogauerunt  dicti  abbas  et  couuentus  quatenus  liuiusmodi 
sue  carte  et  euidencie  cum  nostre  auctoritatis  iuterpositione  autentice  in 
formam  libri  pergameuo  scripti  sub  manuali  subscriptione  eiusdem  uostri 
consdii  et  registri  clerici,  vnacum  nostri  sigilli  appensioue,  transumerentur, 
copiarentur  et  transcribereutur :  Quamquidem  supplicationem  prefati  uostri 
consilii  domini  justam  et  rationi  consouam  reputantes,  ex  eorum  decreto 
ordinauerunt  edictum  in  valuis  pretoru  nostri  Edinburgeusis  quarto  die 
mensis  instantis  Julii  affigi  debere,  ad  citaudum  seu  summonieudum  omnes 
et  singulos  interesse  habentes  seu  habere  putantes  ad  compareudum  coram 

1 


RKGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


eiis  iii  ilicto  nostro  pretorio,  vigesiino  quarto  die  mensis  Julii  predicti  hora 
causaruni,  ad  videndum  et  audiendum  omnes  et  singulas  carfcas  et  euidencias 
dicti  nostri  monasterii  iu  formam  libri,  manuali  subscriptione  dicti  nostri 
cousilii  et  registri  clerici  transumendas  esse  copiandas  et  transcribendas,  vna- 
cum  magni  uostri  sigilli  appensione,  sic  quod  liuiusmodi  transumpto  tanta  et 
similis  fides  adhibeatur  sicufcprincipalibus  cartis  et  euidenciis;  cum  cerfcifica- 
fcione  quod  siue  prefafce  persone  infceresse  habenfces,  siue  se  habere  pufcanfces, 
dicfcis  die  et  loco  comparuerinfc,  siue  non,  prefafci  nosfcri  consilii  domini  huius- 
modi  carfcas  efc  euidencias,  sic  ut  premitfcitur,  trausumendas  esse  copiandas  et 
transcribendas  decernerenfc  efc  ovdinarent  :  Quoquidem  die  vigesimoquarto 
die  mensis  Julii  adueniente,  omnibusque  efc  singulis  interesse  habenfcibus,  seu 
interesse  putantibus  ad  ostium  dicti  nostri  pretorii  clauigeri  voce  alta  et 
intelligibili  rifce  vocafcis,  et  dicto  venerabili  patre  et  consiliario  nostro  Alex- 
andro  alibate  pro  se  et  nomine  sui  conuentus,  sic  citatorum,  vocatorum  et 
non  comparencium  contumacias  accusanfce  efc  dicfcas  carfcas  et  euidencias  fcrans- 
sumi,  fcranscribi  efc  copiari  instanfcer  pefcente  efc  posfculanfce,  prefafci  consilii 
nosfcri  domini,  videlicefc,  reverendissimus,  reuerendus  ac  venerabiles  in  Crislo 
pafcres,  Gawinus  archiepiscopus  Glasguensis,  fcocius  regni  Scocie  cancellarius  ; 
Jacobus  episcopus  Eossensis ;  Roberfcus  abbas  de  Kinloss ;  Walfcerus  dominus 
sancti  .Johannis  ordinis  Jerosolametani ;  magisfcer  Eicardus  Bothuile  recfcor 
de  Erskirli ;  magisfcer  Georgius  Ker  prepositus  de  Dunglas ;  magisfcer 
Ilenricus  Quliifce  rector  de  Fynevin ;  magister  Willelmus  Prestoun  recfcor 
de  Beltoun  ;  magisfcer  Willelmus  Gibson  decanus  de  Eesfcalrig ;  Johannes 
Campbell  de  Lundy,  efc  Jacobus  Coluile  de  Esfcwemis,  mUifces ;  magister 
Jacobus  Eoulis  de  Colinfcoun,  concilii  regisfcri  efc  rofculorum  clericus ; 
Adam  Ofcfcerburne  de  Eeidhall,  miles,  aduocafcus  regius ;  Nicholaus  Craufurd 
de  Oxingaugis,  clericus  iusticiarie ;  Thomas  Scot  de  Petgormo ;  magister 
Jacobus  Lawson  de  Bordland,  prepositus  Edinburgi,  et  magisfcer  Franciscus 


ILLUMINATED     LETTERS    IN    THE     CARTULARY     QF    C  AM  B  U  S  KEN  N  ET  H 


1)E  CAMBCSKEXXErif. 


Botliuile ;  onines  et  siiigulas  predictas  cartas  et  euidencias  in  funnani  liliri 
sub  mauuali  subscriptioue  dicti  uostri  coucilii  et  registri  clerici,  vnacuni  nostri 
sigilli  magni  appensioue,  traussumeudas  esse,  copiandas  et  transcribeudas 
decreuerunt  et  ordiuaueruut,  sic  cpiod  liuiusmodi  transumpto  ut  premittitur 
facto,  tauta  et  similis  fides  in  posterum  adhibeatur  sicut  origiualibus,  et  ac  si 
iu  acto  dicti  nostri  concilii  desuper  coufecto  singillatim  inserereutur  :  Quarum 
omnium  et  singularuni  tenores  sequuutur  de  verbo  iu  verbum  : 


1.    COXFIEMATIO  ECCLESIE  ETTERKE  DE  AeRIXGROSK  PEE  EPISCOPU.M. 

Omnibus  Christi  fidelibus  ad  quos  preseutes  littere  perueuerint,  "Willelmus 
miseratione  diuiua  ecclesie  Sauctiaudree  miuister  humilis,  salutem  iu  Domino 
sempiteruam  :  Xouerint  vuiuersi  nos  coucessisse  et  hoc  presente  scripto  con- 
firmasse  illaui  donatiouem,  quam  Gilbertus  domiuus  de  Fourgy  dedit  et  cou- 
cessit  iu  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosiuam  Deo  et  ecclesie  Leate  Marie  de 
Cambuskyuueth,  et  ibidem  canouicis  Deo  seruieutibus  et  imperpetuum  serui- 
turis,  illam  scilicet  partem  terre  que  fuit  Ledereth,  que  jacet  propinquior 
domui  que  uuuc  est  sacerdotis,  in  territorio  de  Arringrosk,  vuacum  jure 
patrouatus  ecclesie  de  Arringrosk  :  Preterea  nos  paupertati  dicti  mouasterii 
compacieutes,  concedimus  imperpetuum  pro  uobis  et  successoribus  nostris, 
diuiue  pietatis  iutuitu,  ut  rectore  eiusdem  ecclesie  de  Arryngrosk  qui  uunc 
est  cedeute  vel  decedente,  omnis  fructus  et  prouentus  predicte  ecclesie  cedant 
canonicis  dicti  monasterii  iu  proprios  vsus  imperpetuum,  saluo  in  omuibus 
jure  dyocesano  :  In  cuius  rei  testimouium  preseutibus  litteris  sigilhim  uostrum 
apposuimus  ;  datimi  apud  Wedall,  die  Marcurii  pro.xima  post  festum  exalta- 
tionis  sancte  crucis,  auno  gracie  millesimo  duceutesimo  octuagesimo  primo  ; 
hiis  testibus,  domino  Eoberto  Dei  gracia  episcopo  Duublaueusi,  domiuo 
Waltero  de  Curry,  milite ;  magistro  Eicardo  de  Wontouu  ;  magistro  Iticardo 


-\RRINGROSK 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


ABRINGROSK. 


de  Lanarc  ;  raagistro  Ricardo  Kossard  ;  domino  Roberto  capellano,  et  multis 
aliis. 


2.    PiESIGNATIO  ECCLESIE  SUPRADICTE. 

Omnibu.s  sancte  matris  ecclesie  filiis  presentes  literas  inspectiiris,  Eadulfus 
dominus  de  Synmerdsburn,  rector  ecclesie  de  Arryngrosk,  eternani  salutem  in 
Domiuo  :  Xouerit  vniuersitas  vestra  quod  tenore  presentium,  non  vi  com- 
pulsus,  nec  metu  indvictus,  nec  prece  nec  precio,  sed  pura  et  perpetua  ac 
spontanea  voluntate,  cedo  omnimodo  juri  michi  competenti  vel  competituro  in 
dicta  ecclesia  de  Arryngroslc,  quam  adeptus  fui  ex  presentatione  legittima 
qiTondam  Duncani  domini  de  Foiirgy,  et  institutione  canonica  habita  in  eadem, 
resignans  spontanee  pura  et  perpetua  vohintate  totum  jus  michi  competens 
vel  competiturum  in  ecclesia  antedicta,  ratione  predictarum  presentatiouis  et 
institutionis  vel  alteriusjuris  cuiuscunque  :  In  cuius  rei  testimonium,  presen- 
tibus  literis  sigiUum  meum  est  appensum  ;  datum  apud  Sanctum  Andream, 
die  Martis  proxima  ante  festum  Sancti  Luce  ewangehste,  auno  Domini  mille- 
simo  ducentesimo  octuagesimo  secundo. 

3.  Institutio  eiusdem  ecclesie. 
BoLDREDUS  ofticiahs  domini  Sanctiandree,  dilecto  sibi  in  Cristo  decano  Cris- 
tianitatis  de  Fyff  et  Fothrick,  sahitem  in  Domino  :  Cum  Gilbertus  dominus  de 
Fourgy  patronus  ecclesie  de  Arringrosk,  diuine  caritatis  intuitu,  contulit  et 
concessit  ius  patronatus  dicte  ecclesie  de  Arryngrosk  abbati  et  conuentui  de 
Cambuskynneth,  cum  illa  portiuncula  terre  que  fuit  Ledereth,  que  jacet  pro- 

'  A  similar  docquet  is  appended  to  eaeh  writ  in  the  Eegister. 


.  BE  CAMBUSKEXXETII. 


pinquior  domni  que  lumc  est  sacerdotis,  iiitcr  ipsam  domum  et  ecclesiam 
prefatam,  in  liberam  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam;  et  cum  dominus 
Willelmus  Sanctiandree  episcopus,  dominus  noster,  dictam  concessionem 
autoritate  sua  confirmauit,  et  post  cessionem  vel  decessum  domini  Eadulti 
de  Synmerdisburn,  rectoris  supradicte  ecclesie,  dictis  abbati  et  conuentui  in 
proprios  vsus  concessit,  capituli  sui  ad  id  accedente  conseusu,  cum  preliabita 
deliberatione  et  solempni  tractatu  in  capitulo  super  hoc  celebrato,  cumque 
dictus  dominus  Eadulfus  tunc  temporis  rector  dicte  ecclesie  de  Arryngrosk, 
in  presentia  nostra  constitutus  personaliter,  non  vi  compulsus,  nec  metu 
inductus,  nec  prece  nec  precio,  sed  pura  et  perpetua  ac  spontauea  voluntate, 
cessit  omnimodo  juri  sibi  competenti  vel  competituro  in  dicta  ecclesia  de 
Arryngrosk,  et  dictam  cessionem  necnon  et  resignationera  spoutaneam  ad 
instanciam  dicti  domini  Eadulfi  admisimus ;  vobis  in  virtute  obediencie 
firmiter  procipiendo  mundamus,  quatenus  adhibitis  vobiscum  duobus  vel 
tribus  capellanis  vicinioribus,  ac  instanti  die  Marcurii  vel  die  Jouis  sequenti, 
dictam  ecclesiam  de  Arryngrosk  adeatis,  et  predictum  abbatem  de  Cambus- 
kynneth,  nomine  ecclesie  sue,  in  corporalem  possessionem  sepedicte  ecclesie 
de  Arrjmgrosk  inckicatis  seu  instituatis,  et  dictam  institutionem  de  mandato 
nostro  factam  canonice  defeudatis,  et  in  signum  niandati  nostri  ad  plenum 
executi  dicto  abbati,  nomiue  sui  conuentus,  preseutes  literas  reddatis,  sigillo 
officii  vestri  apposito ;  datum  apud  Sanctum  Andream,  die  Lune  proxima 
post  festum  Sancti  Dionisii  ]\Iartiris,  anno  gracie  millesimo  ducentesimo 
octuagesimo  secundo. 


ARRINGROSK. 


4.  CoxFiRMATio  c.vriTULi  Sakctiandeee  super  ecclesia  et  terka  ecclesie 

DE  AeEINGROSK. 

Omnibus  Cristi  fidelibus  presens  scriptum  visuris  vel  audituris,  Johannes  Dei 
gracia  prior  cathedralis  ecclesie    Sanctiandree    et   eiusdem   loci    conuentus, 


REGISTR  UM  ilOXASTEnil 


AKBINGROSK. 


eteniam  in  Doniiiio  saluteni  :  nouerit  vniuersitas  vestra  nos,  communi 
assensu  et  consensu  capituli  uostri,  confirmasse  illam  donacionem  quam 
Gilbertus  donriuus  de  Foui'gy  dedit  et  concessit  in  puram  et  perpetuam 
elemosinam  Deo  et  ecclesie  beate  Marie  de  Cambuskynnetli,  et  canonicis 
ibidera  Deo  seruientibus  et  imperpetuum  seruituris  :  Illam  scilicet  partem 
terre  rpie  fuit  Lederetb,  que  jacet  propinquior  domui  que  nunc  est  sacerdotis, 
in  territorio  de  Arryngrosk,  vnacum  jure  patrouatus  ecclesie  de  Arryngrosk : 
Quamquidem  donationem,  vnacum  jure  patronatus  ecclesie  prefate,  dicto 
monasterio  vt  supradictum  est  venerabilis  pater  WiUebnus  Dei  gracia 
episcopus  Sanctiandree  autoritate  pontiticali  confirmauit  :  Preterea,  cum 
idem  episcopus  paupertati  dicti  monasterii  compaciens  concesserit  imper- 
petuum  pro  se  et  successoribus  suis,  diuine  pietatis  intuitu,  ut,  rectore  eiusdem 
ecclesie  de  Arryngrosk  (|ui  nunc  est  cedente  vel  decedeute,  omnis  fructus  et 
prouentus  predicte  ecclesie  cedant  canonicis  dicti  monasterii  in  proprios  vsus 
imperpetuum,  saluo  iu  omnibus  jure  diocesano,  eandem  concessionem  vnauimi 
consensu  confirmamus  :  In  cujus  rei  testimonium  presenti  scripto  commune 
sigilluni  capituli  nostri  fecimus  apponi ;  datum  apud  Sanctum  Andream,  die 
Lune  proxima  post  festum  translationis  Saucti  Augustini  episcopi,  anno 
gracie  millesimo  ducentesimo  octuagesimo  secundo. 


5.    DOXATIO  MOLENDINI  DE  AeRYXGROSK. 

Universis  jjresentes  literas  inspecturis,  Henricus  de  Freslay  dominus 
de  Fourgy,  salutem  iu  Domino :  Cum  inter  opera  caritatis  illis  potissime 
quilibet  teneatur  astrictus  a  quibus  certuju  est  eum  beneficia  recepisse, 
idcirco  ego  beneficiorum  ac  honorum  micbi  ac  predecessoribus  meis  a 
viris  religiosis  abbate  et  conuentu  de  Cambuskynneth  collatorum  non 
immemor,  in  dictorum  beneficioruni  comjieusationem,  et  anime  mee  sahi- 
tem,   molendinum    de   Arryngrosk,  cum    omnibus  suis  juribus,  libertatibus, 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


aysiaraentis  et  pertinenciis,  aiit  in  futurum  pertinere  valentibus  quoeuuque 
casu  vel  causa,  vnacuui  duabus  acris  terre  dicto  molendiuo  adiacentibus,  in 
puraui  liberam  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  predictis  abbati  et  conuentui  cari- 
tatiue  confero  ;  nulla  penitus  miclii  aut  heredibns  seu  suceessuribus  meis 
juris  alicuius  seu  recognitionis  in  dicto  molendino  aut  aliquo  ad  dictuni 
molendinum  spectante  seu  in  futurum  spectare  valente  facta  reseruatione, 
excepta  dumtaxat  pensione  annua  quatuor  solidorum  sterlingorum  monasterio 
de  Culueros  debita,  que  a  meis  predecessoribus  in  dicto  molendino  predicto 
monasterio  fuerat  assignata ;  sed  totum  jus  qnod  in  dicto  molendino  habeo 
in  dictos  abbatem  et  conuentum  de  Cambuskynueth  pure  transfero,  omni 
conditioue  et  modo  reiectis  :  Volo  eciam  et  per  literas  presentes,  fide  super  hoc 
prestita  corporali,  me  obligo  et  heredes  ac  successores  meos  qiiod  nullum 
molendinum  de  nouo  construere  valeam,  aut  editicium  seu  opus  quodcunque 
aliud  facere,  perciuod  aut  occasione  cuius  vtilitati  predictorum  religiosorum  in 
ah(j^uo  poterit  derogari :  Volo  insuper,  et  fide  etiam  super  hoc  prestita,  me  et 
heredes  ac  successores  meos  obligo  quod  si  aliqui  tenentes  mel  qui  ad  dictum 
molendinum  sectam  debeut  a  dicto  molendino  se  subtraxeriut,  aut  ad  dictum 
molendinum  venientes  pro  multura,  prout  de  jure  tenentur,  non  satisfecerint, 
quod  ego  et  heredes  ac  successores  mei,  non  venientes  ut  veniant,  et  non  satis- 
facientes  ut  satisfaciant,  quantum  districtius  poterimus,  compellemus  et  dis- 
tringemus  ;  scilicet  tenentes  meos  de  Arryngrosk,  de  Conlony,  de  Newtoun,  vt 
ad  dictum  molendiuum  veniant,  et  pro  multura  sextum  decinium  vas  de  grano 
sicco  et  humido  persoluaut ;  iUos  autem  do  Petillocis  vt  veniaut,  et  vicesimum 
quartum  vas  pro  multura  persoluaut ;  illos  vero  de  Beyu  et  de  Cathehill  ut 
veniant,  et  pro  multura  prout  tenentur  satisfaciant ;  ac  illos  de  Baleward,  uisi 
forte  illi  de  Baleward  aut  eorum  domiuus  docere  poterint  quare  ad  dictum 
molendinum  venire  de  jure  minime  teneantur :  Ego  vero  et  heredes  ac 
successo)-es  mei  de  terra  quam  sumptibus  nostris  propriis  excoluerimus,  cum 


ARRINGROSK. 


EEGISTRVM  MONASTEEII 


ARRiNGRosK.  ad   dictuui  molendiuuin  venerimus,  pro  multura  sexagesimum  quartum  vas 

tantummodo  persoluemus ;  sed  si  ad  firmam  extra  manum  nostram  eam 
posuerimus,  ille  qui  eam  in  toto  vel  in  parte  receperit  ad  dictum  molendinum 
veniet,  et  pro  multura  sextum  decimum  vas  persoluet ;  compellemus  eciam  ego 
et  heredes  ac  successores  mei  omnes  ad  dictum  molendinum  sectam  debentes 
vt  dictum  moleudinum,  stagnum  ac  rivum  eiusdem,  quociens  opus  fuerit, 
reficiant,  prout  de  jure  tenentur,  ac  de  nouo  construant,  secundum  quod  eciam 
de  jure  tenentur,  cum  lioc  facere  fuerit  necesse ;  suLiciens  me  et  lieredes  ac 
successores  meos  jurisdictioni  ac  cohertioni  dominorum  archidiaconorum 
Sanctiandree  et  Dunblanensis  qui  pro  tempore  fuerint,  vit  possint  me  et 
heredes  ac  successores  meos,  vel  eciam  alter  eorum  qui  super  lioc  fuerit 
requisitus,  eompellere,  per  sentencias  suspensionis  et  excommunicationis, 
monitionibus  dumtaxat  i^remissis,  ad  obseruanciam  omnium  et  singulorum 
premissorum,  si  contra  premissa  vel  aliquod  premissorum,  quod  absit,  venire 
presumpserimus,  clam  vel  palam,  per  nos  vel  per  alios  directe  vel  indirecte  ;  et 
ad  hoc  renuncio  pro  me  et  heredibus  ac  successoribus  meis  exceptioni  doli, 
mali  pacti,  conuenti,  et  omui  alii  exceptioni  juris  et  facti,  et  omni  juris  beneficio, 
ac  omnibus  literis  regiis,  episcopalibus  et  papalibiis  impetratis  et  impetraudis, 
cujuscunque  tenoris  existant,  eciam  si  de  presenti  scripto  plenam  et  expressam 
de  verbo  ad  verbum  fecerint  mentionem,  per  quod  vel  quas  hec  presens  niea 
donatio  impugnari  valeat  seu  diminui  quoquo  modo  :  Ego  vero  et  heredes  ac 
successores  mei  singuli  dictum  molendinum  cum  terra  predicta,  in  forma 
predicta,  prefatis  abbati  et  conuentui  contra  omnes  homines  warantizabimus, 
et  sumptibus  nostris  et  periculo  defendemus,  cum  libero  aditu  et  exitu  ad 
molendinum  predictum  et  terram  predictam  :  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  pre- 
sentibus  literis  sigillum  nieum  apposui ;  et  ad  maiorem  huius  rei  euiden- 
ciam  et  securitatem  super  hac  mea  donatione  de  dicto  molendino  et  terra 
predicta,  predictis   religiosis  in   forma  prescripta  facta,  sigilla  predictorum 


^«=S2=i£=ii^ 


DE  CAMBUSKEXXErU. 


dommorum  arcliidiacononua  Sanctiandree  et  Dimblanensis  in-eseuti  scripto 
apponi  procuraui ;  datum  apud  Cambuskynueth,  sexto  kalendas  Augusti 
anno  gracie  millesinio  ducentesimo  nonagesimo  quiuto. 


ARRIXGROSK. 


6.    COXFIKJUTIO  IlOBERTI  KEGIS  SUPEK  MOLENDINO  DE  ARRYXUROSK. 

EoBERTUS  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotorum,  oninibus  probis  liominibus  tocius  terre  sue, 
salutem  :  Sciatis  nos  concessisse  et  liac  preseuti  carta  uostra  confirmasse  dona- 
tionem  illam  quam  WiUehuus  de  Freslay,  uiiles,  dominus  de  Fourgy,  fecit 
religiosis  viris  abbati  et  couuentui  de  Cambuskynneth  de  molendino  de 
AiTingrosk,  cimi  duabus  acris  terre  proximo  adiaceutibus  moleudiuo  predicto  : 
Teueudum  et  habeudum  eisdem  religiosis  et  eorum  successoribus  imperpetuum 
in  liberam,  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosiuam,  adeo  libere  et  quiete,  pleuarie  et 
houorifice  sicnt  dicti  Willelmi  carta  eisdem  religio.sis  confecta  plenius  iuste  pro- 
portat  et  testatur,  saluo  seruicio  uostro  :  In  cuius  rei  testimouiumpreseuti  carte 
nostre  sigillum  nostram  precipimus  apponi;  testibus,  Barnardo  abbate  de  Abir- 
brothoc  canceUario  nostro,  Waltero  Senescallo  Scotie,  Jacobo  de  Douglas, 
riolieito  de  Keith  marescallo  uostro,  et  Gilberto  de  Haya  constabulario  nostro 
Scotie,  militibus,  apud  Glasgw,  decimo  die  Junii,  anuo  regui  nostri  decimo  uono. 


7.  Saisixa  jiolexdixi  pkedicti. 

Memoranduii,  c^uod  die  Domiuica  proxima  post  festum  beati  Michaelis  arcli  - 
angeli  anno  Domini  millesimo  ducentesimo  nouagesimo  quinto,  Heuricus  de 
Freslay  domiuus  de  Arryngro.sk  et  de  Fourgy,  iu  pjresencia  archidiaconi  domiui 
de  Guthilgurdy,  Monathe  Macalpy,  Haklany  iudicis,  et  Ade  de  PetUlok, 
dedit  saisinam  molendini  de  Arryugro.sk  cum  duabus  acris  terre  iuxta  dictum 
moleudinum  domino  Patricio  abbati  de  Cambuskyuneth,  uomiue  suo  et  con- 
uentus  sui,  et  ipsum  abbatem  in  corporalem  possessionem  misit ;  Quodquidem 


10 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERIl 


molendimim  cuiii  predictis  duabus  acris  dictus  Henricus  prefatis  religiosis  in 
puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  ex  sua  mera  liberalitate  concessit  et  donauit, 
prout  carta  inde  confecta  sigillo  dicti  donatoris  signata  plenius  testatur :  In 
cuius  rei  testinionium  presentibus  sigillum  predicti  Henrici,  predicti  molendini 
donatoris,  vnacum  sigillis  predictorum  testiuni,  videlicet,  arcliidiaconi  domiui 
de  Gutliilgurdy,  ilonathe  Macalpy,  Haldany  iudicis,  et  Ade  de  l'etillok  est 
appensum  :  Datum  apud  Arryngrosk,  die  et  raino  supradictis. 


8.  Carta  de  Arryxgrosk. 

Vniueesis  presentes  literas  inspecturis,  Willelmus  de  Freslay  dominus  de 
Fourgy,  miles,  salutem  iu  Domiuo :  Cum  inter  opera  caritatis  iUis  potissimequi- 
libet  teneatur  astrictus  a  quibus  certum  est  eum  beneficia  recepisse,  ego  beuefi- 
ciorum  et  honorum  miclii  ac  predecessoribus  meis  a  religiosis  viris  abbate  et 
conuentude  Cambuskynnetli  collatorum  non  immemor,  in  beneficiorum  dicto- 
rum  compeusationem  et  anime  mee  salutem,  molendinum  de  Anyngrosk  cum 
omuibus  suis  juribus,  libertatibus  et  asianieutis  et  pertinentibus  aut  in  futurum 
pertinere  valentibus  quocunque  casu  vel  causa,  vuacum  duabus  acris  ten-e 
dicto  molendino  adiacentibus,  in  puram,  liberam  et  perpetuam  elemosinam 
predictis  abbati  et  conueutui  caritatiue  coufero,  nulla  penitus  miclii  et 
heredibus  aut  successoribus  nieis  juris  alicuius  aut  recognitionis  in  dicto 
molendino  aut  aliquo  ad  dictum  molendinum  spectante  seu  in  futuruiu 
spectare  valente  facta  reseruatione,  excepta  dumtaxat  pensione  annua  quatuor 
solidorum  sterlingorum  monasterio  de  Culueros  debita,  que  a  meis  predecessori- 
bus  in  dicto  molendino  predicto  monasterio  fuerat  assignata,  sed  totum  jus 
quod  in  dicto  molendino  liabeo  iu  dictos  abbatem  et  conuentum  de  Cambus- 
kynneth  pure  transfero,  omni  modo  et  conditione  reiectis :  Volo  eciam  et  per 
literas  presentes,  fide  super  hoc  prestita  corporali,  me  obligo  et  heredes  ac 
successores  meos  quod  uullum  de  nouo  construere  molendinum  valeam  vel 


DE  CA  MB  l  -SKEXmXE  Tll. 


11 


valeaut,  aut  edificium  seu  opus  quodeunque  aliud  facere  per  quod  aut 
occasione  cuius  vtilitati  dictorum  religiosorum  iu  aliquo  poterit  derogari :  Volo 
eciam,  et  fide  iusuper  super  lioc  prestita,  lue  et  lieredes  ac  successores  nieos 
obligo  quod  si  aliqui  tenentes  mei  qui  ad  dictum  molendinum  sectam  debent 
a  dicto  molendino  se  subtraxeriut,  aut  ad  dictum  molendinum  venientes,  prout 
de  jure  teueutur,  non  satisfeceriut,  ego  et  heredes  ac  successores  uiei,  uou 
veuieutes  vt  veuiaut,  et  uon  satisfacieutes  vt  satisfaciaut,  quantum  districtius 
poterimus,  compellemus  et  distringemus ;  scilicet,  teueutes  nieos  de  Arryu- 
grosk  et  de  Coudelani  vt  ad  dictum  molendinum  veniant,  et  pro  multura 
vicesimum  quartum  vas  de  grauo,  sicco  et  liumido,  persoluant  ;  illos  autem 
de  Newtouu,  vt  ad  dictum  moleudiuuui  veuiaut,  et  pro  multura  sextum  deci- 
numi  vas  persoluaut ;  illos  autem  de  Pettillok,  vt  veuiaut  et  vicesimum 
quartum  vas  pro  multura  persoluant ;  illos  vero  de  Beiui  et  de  Catliol  et  de 
Catham,  vt  veuiaut,  et  de  multura  prout  teueutur  satisfaciant ;  ac  illos  de 
Baleward,  uisi  forte  illi  de  Baleward  aut  eoruni  dominus  docere  poteriut  quare 
ad  dictum  molendinum  veuire  de  jure  minime  teueautur  :  Ego  vero  et 
heredes,  ac  successores  mei  de  terra  uostra  dominicaU  de  Fourgy,  cum  ad 
dictum  uioleudiuum  venerimus,  pro  multura  vnam  ferlotam  de  celdra  tantuui- 
modo  persohiemus,  siue  terram  illam  domiuicalem  iu  mauibus  nostris  retinu- 
erimus,  siue  eam  aliis  ad  firmam  dimiserimus  ;  compellemus  eciam  ego  et 
lieredes  ac  suceessores  niei  omnes  ad  dictum  moleudinum  sectam  debeutes  vt 
dictum  molendinum,  stagnum  ac  riuum  eiusdem,  quocieus  opus  fuerit, 
reficiant,  prout  de  jure  teueutur,  ac  eciam  de  novo  construaut,  secundum 
eciam  quod  de  jure  tenentur,  cuui  hoc  facere  fuerit  necesse,  excei^tis  tenenti- 
bus  meis  de  Arringrosk  et  de  Condolan,  quos  ab  huiusmodi  ouere  volo 
esse  liberos  et  immuues  :  Concedo  eciam  venientibus  ad  dictum  moleu- 
diuum  et  de  ipso  redeuutibus,  tam  teuentibus  meis  quam  alienis,  iter  liberum 
et  competens  iu  loco  magis  apto  et  viciuo  pro  vtilitate  ipsorum  :   Donatiouem 


ARRINGROSK. 


12 


REGISTRUM  MOXASTERII 


autem  Henrici  de  Freslay  quondam  domiiii  de  Fourgy,  predecessoris  mei, 
eisdem  religiosis  de  dicto  molendino  factam,  ratam  liabeus  tenore  presentium, 
et  confivmamus,  in  forma  premissa  literas  regie  confirmationis  sufticientes 
infra  sex  menses  a  tempore  date  presentium  dictis  religiosis  fideliter  me  ira- 
petraturum  obligo ;  subiciens  me  et  heredes  ac  successores  meos  jurisdictioni 
ac  coliertioni  dominorum  arcliidiaconorura  Sanctiandree  et  Dunblanensis 
qui  pro  tempore  fuerint,  vt  pnssint  rae  et  heredes  ac  successores  raeos,  vel 
etiam  alter  eorum  fpii  super  hoc  fuerit  requisitus,  compellere  per  sentencias 
suspencionis  et  excommunicacionis,  monitionibus  dumtaxat  premissis,  ad 
obseruanciam  omnium  et  singulorum  preraissorum,  si  contra  premissa  vel 
aliquod  premissorum,  quod  absit,  venire  presumpserimus,  clara  vel  palam,  per 
nos  vel  per  alios  directe  vel  indirecte  ;  et  ad  hoc  renuncio  pro  me,  et  heredibus 
ac  successoribus  meis,  exceptioni  doli,  mali  et  pacti,  conuenti,  et  omni  alii 
exceptioni  juris  et  facti,  et  juris  beneficio,  ac  omnibns  literis  regiis,  episcopa- 
lilius  et  papalibus  impetratis  et  impetrandis,  cuiuscunque  tenoris  existant, 
eciara  si  de  presenti  scripto  plenam  et  expressam  de  verljo  ad  verbura  fecerint 
mencionem,  per  quod  vel  quas  presens  mea  donatio  impugnari  valeat  seu 
diminui  quoquo  modo  :  Ego  vero  et  heredes  ac  successores  raei  singidi  dictum 
molendinnm  cura  terra  predicta,  in  forma  ^iredicta,  jjrefatis  abbati  et  conuentui 
contra  oranes  homines  warantizabimus,  et  sumptibus  nostris  et  periculo 
defendemus,  cum  liliero  aditu  et  exitu  ad  dictura  raolendinum  et  terram  pre- 
dictam  :  In  cuius  rei  testiraonium  presentibus  sigillum  raeum  apposui,  et  ad 
maiorem  securitatem  sigillum  reuerendi  in  Cristo  patris  domini  Willelmi,  Dei 
gracia  Sanctiandree  episeopi,  presentibns  apponi  procurani;  datum  apud  Cam- 
buskynneth,  die  Veneris  proxima  post  festum  purificationis  beate  INIarie  Vir- 
ginis  anno  Domini  millesimo  tricentesimo  vicesinio  tertio;  hiis  testibus,  domino 
Thoma  de  Haya,  milite,  raagistro  Willelmo  de  Morauia  decretorum  doctore ; 
Thoma  de  Balcasky,  et  Johanne  filio  eius,  et  pluribus  aliis. 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


13 


9.  I)e  multura  Arryngeosk. 
Gawinus  Dunbar  arcliidiaconus  Sauctiaudree,  priucipalis  iudex  in  hac  parte, 
ex  submissione  et  electioue  quondani  Henrici  de  Freslay  doniini  de  Arryn- 
groslv  et  de  Fourgy,  pro  se,  heredibus  et  successoribus  suis  specialiter  nonii- 
natus  et  deputatus,  vniuersis  et  singulis  clericis,  presbyteris  et  notariis 
publicis  infra  diocesim  Sanctiandree  constitutis,  salutem ;  Quia  licet  alias 
Johannes  Anuand,  Robertus  Annand,  tenentes  de  Arryngrosk,  Walterus  Ymery 
et  Thomas  Ymery,  tenentes  de  Conlony  alias  Condland,  Laureucius  Pete, 
Kicardus  Edward,  et  Kobertus  Cutlar,  tenentes  de  Newtoun,  pro  multura 
granorum  tam  siccorum  quam  humidorum  vas  decimum  sextum  molendino 
de  Arryngrosk  et  Eichardo  Hay  teneuti  eiusdem,  Eobertus  Douglas  et  Dauid 
Forestar  tenentes  de  Petilloch  pro  multura  vicesimum  quartum  vas,  Alexander 
Atkin,  Jacobus  Bawlvyne,  tenentes  de  CathcochiU,  pro  multui'a  vicesiraum 
quartum  vas,  Willelmus  Scott  et  Henricus  Maky,  tenentes  de  Beyn,  jiro  multura 
vicesimum  quartum  vas,  Andreas  ]Murray,  miles,  Tliomas  Senzeor  inhabitantes 
terras  de  Balward,  pro  multura  decimum  sextum  vas,  Patricius  Greg,  Jacobus 
Annand,  Henricus  Brison,  Thomas  Dekesou,  tenentes  terrarum  de  Fourgy, 
Johannes  ilultray,  Willelmus  Murray,  et  Jacobus  Johnestoun,  tenentes  de 
Lethame  et  Hethame,  pertinenciarum  de  Fourgy  nouiter  constructarum  de 
terris  antiquitus  nuucupatis  Fourgy  per  alias  Hteras  nostras  patentes,  persol- 
uere  sub  pena  excommunicationis  moniti  fuerant,  necnon  ad  deferendum 
apud  molendinum  predictum  de  Arryngrosk  sua  blada  et  grana,  humida  et 
sicca,  nisi  causam  aliquam  allegare  vellent  quare  premissa  facere  non  com- 
pellerentur  :  Ad  quam  probandum  et  allegandum  si  (|uam  pretendere  vellent, 
iidem  supra  nominati,  necoon  et  IMargareta  Barclay  sponsa  dicti  domini 
Andree,  pro  suo  interesse  tanquam  domiua  et  heres  Henrici  Freslay  et 
terrarum  suarum  de  Arryngrosk  et  Fourgy,  et  iidem  Andreas,  miles,  et  sua 
sponsa  dominis  abbati  et  conuentui  de  Cambuskynneth  et  dicto  Eicardo  Hay 


ARRINGROSK. 


14 


REGISTRUM  MOXASTERII 


eorum  teneuti  iiredicti  molendini  super  iniiista  constructione  molendini  de 
Balward  infra  liouiidas  dominii  de  Fourgy  iu  preiudicium  dicte  multure  et 
dampnum  dictorum  religiosorum  virorum  de  Cambuskynnetli  ad  certos  diem 
et  locum  citati  fuerant  :  Quiljus  adueuientibus,  comparuit  dictus  Andreas, 
miles,  coram  nobis  et  pro  causa  rationabili,  cartam  antiquiorem  in  qua  de 
nniltura  predicta  nuUa  est  mentio  facta  [produ.xit] :  Et  quia  per  cartam  dicti 
Ilenrici  Freslay  ex  parte  dictorum  dominorum  abbatis  et  conuentus  eiusdem 
concessam  et  coram  nobisproductam  comperimustenentes  terrarum  predictarum 
supra  nominatos  ad  veniendum  molendino  predicto  de Arryngrosk  ad  soluendum 
multuram  respectiue  vt  est  supra  expressum,  ratione  carte  dicti  Henrici  esse 
astrictos,  necnon  eisdem  Andree,  militi,  et  sue  sponse  Margarete  dietum  molen- 
dinum  de  Balward  construere  minime  licuisse  nec  licere  debere,  sed  de  facto 
et  contra  antecessoris  sui  cartam  attemptatum  et  presumptum,  causam  ipsam 
allegatam  tan^piam  nullam  et  minime  rationabilem  seu  releuantem  comperi- 
mus  ;  et  ideo  ea  non  obstante,  contra  eosdem  ad  vlteriora  procedendum  fore 
decreuimus :  ipsosque  supra  nominatos  Andream  militem  et  ]\Iargaretam 
suam  sponsam  ac  tenentes  predictos  excommunicare  poteramus,  nos  tamen 
mitius  agere  volentes  vobis  et  vestrum  cuilibet  precif)imus  et  mandamus 
quatenus  adhuc  et  iterato  moneatis  legitime  dictum  Andream,  militem,  et 
Margaretam  eius  sponsam  primo,  secundo,  tercio  et  peremptorie,  vnico  tamen 
contextu  pro  tripbci  edieto,  quos  nos  tenore  presentium  sic  monemus  ut  infra 
nouem  dierum  spacium,  quorum  tres  pro  iirimo,  tres  pro  secundo  et  reliciuos 
dies  pro  tertio  et  peremptorie  termino  sibi  assignamus,  et  per  vos  volumus 
assignari,  huiusmodi  molendinum  de  nouo  infra  boundas  dicti  dominii  de 
Fourgy  et  multure  in  dampnum  et  preiudicium  dicti  monasterii  et  Eicardi 
tenentis  molendini  de  Arryngrosk  constructum,  suis  sumptibus  et  expensis  de- 
moliant,  fuuditus  et  simpliciter  obstruant  et  prosterni  faciant ;  necnon  iirefatos 
Johannem,  Eobertum,  Walterum,  Thomam,  Laurencium,  Eicardum,  Eobertum, 


DE  GA  MB  USKEXXETII. 


15 


riobertum,  Davul,  AlexanJrum,  Jacobum,  Willulmum,  Ilenvicum,  Andream, 
Thomam,  Patricium,  Jacobum,  Henricum,  Thomam,  Johannem,  Willelmuni  et 
Jacobum,  prefatarum  terrarum  tenentes,  primo,  secundo,  tertio,  vt  supra,  quate- 
nus  indilate  et  in  futurum  ad  dictum  molendinura  de  Arryngrosk  sua  blada  et 
grana,  liumida  et  sicca,  moleuda  deportent  et  deferent,  niulturam,  vt  supra 
expremitur,  plenarie  et  integre  de  terminis  preteritis  et  futuris  persoluant 
realiter  et  cum  effectu,  sub  pena  excommunicationis  maioris,  qnam  in  ipsos  et 
ipsoruni  quemlibet  monitionibus  huiusmodi  non  parentes,  ex  nunc  prout  extunc 
et  e  contra,  lapsis  dictis  nouem  diebus,  trina  et  canonica  inonitione  premissa, 
ferimus  in  hiis  scriptis,  et  qnos  vos  sic  excommuuicatos  in  ecclesiis  vestris 
omnibus  diebus  dominicis  et  festiuis  publice  et  solemnitor  denuncietis  non 
cessantes  donec  a  nobis  aliud  habueritis  in  mandatis  et  presentes  debite  exe- 
cutas  earundem  latori  reddatis  :  Datum  sub  sigillo  nostro,  apud  Perth,  secundo 
die  mensis  Decembris  anno  Domini  millesimo  quingentesimo  decimo  tertio. 


AKRINGROSK. 


10.    AeRYXGROSK  MrLTURE  COXCORDI.A.  ET  SaXCTE  MaRIE  ACRA. 

UxiUEESls  et  singulis  sancte  matris  ecclesie  filiis  ad  quorum  noticias  presentes 
litere  peruenerint,  Hugo  Spens  sacre  theologie  professor,  decretorum  doctor, 
prepositus  ecclesie  collegiate  sancti  Saluatoris,  iudex(j[ue  cause  etpartibus  infra- 
scriptis,  vnacmn  nostris  in  hac  parte  collegis  se  legittime  excusantibus,  a  sede 
apostolica  specialiter  constitutus  salutem,  et  presentibus  fidem  adhibere  in- 
dubiam  :  Literas  sanctissinii  in  Cliristo  patris  et  domini  nostri,  domini  Leonis 
pape  decimi,  nobis  preseutatas,  nos  cuni  ea  reuerentia  qna  decnit  noueritis  re- 
cepisse,  huiusmodi  sub  tenore :  Leo  episcopus  seruus  seruorumDei,  dilectis  filiis 
sancti  Saluatoris  et  beate  Marie  de  rupe  Sanctiandree  ciuitatis  prepositis,  ac 
in  diocesi  Sanctiandree  commorantibus,  Dauid  Spens  canonico  Moraviensiiun 
ecclesiarum,  salutem  et  apostolicam  benedictionem :  sua  nobis  dilecti  filii 
Andreas  Murray  de  Balward,  Eobertus  Douglas,  Joliannes  Annand,  Walterus 


16 


REGISTRUM  MOXASTERII 


ARRIXGROSK. 


Yniry,  Johannes  Annand,  Thomas  Ymry,  Laureucius  Peyt,  Eicardus  Edward. 
Eobertus  CutUar,  David  Foster,  Alexander  Atkyn,  Jacobus  Ballinbin,  Will- 
elmus  Atkin,  Henricus  Maky,  Thomas  Sonzour,  Patricius  Greg,  Jacobus 
Annand,  Henricus  Brison,  Thomas  Dikson,  Johannes  Multray,  "WiUehnus 
JNIurray  et  Jacobus  Johneson,  ac  quidam  alii  clerici  et  laici,  uecnou  dilecta  in 
Cliristo  filia  IMargareta  Berclay,  prefati  Audree  jMurray  vxor,  Sauctiandree 
diocesis,  in  hac  parte  litisconsortes  petitioue  monstraruut  quod  olim  abbas  et 
conveutus  monasterii  de  Cambuskyuueth  saucti  Beuedicti  seu  alterius  ordinis, 
dicte  diocesis,  falso  assereutes  tpioddieti  litiscousortes  eorum  graua,  humida  et 
sicca,  ad  quoddam  eorundem  abliatis  et  couventus  moleudinum  de  Arryugrosk 
uuncupatum,  ad  multaudum  deferre  seu  portare  et  multuram  huiusmodi 
granorum  eis  persoluere  tenebantur ;  ipsos  litiscousortes  super  hiis  rebusque 
aliis  tunc  expressis  coram  certo  arcludiacouo  ecclesie  Sanctiandree  quem 
iudicem  super  hoc  competentem  fore  dicebant,  uou  ex  delegatione  apostolica, 
traxerunt  in  causam,  et  idem  archidiacouus,  quisbusdam  exceptionibus  et 
defensionibus  legitimis  et  releuantibus  ac  de  jure  admissibilibus,  pro  parte 
dictorum  litiscousortum  coram  eo  suis  loco  et  tempore  propositis,  saltem  tacite 
reiectis,  in  causa  ipsa  perperam  et  de  facto  procedeus,  quamdam  in  fauorem 
dictorum  abbatis  et  conueutus  et  coutra  prefatos  litisconsortes  sentenciam 
promulgauit  iniquam,  a  qua  et  uonnuUis  tunc  expressis  litisconsortibus  per 
euudem  archidiaconum  illatis  grauamiuibus  pro  parte  eorundem  litiscousortum 
fuit  ad  sedem  apostolicam  appellatum  :  Quocirca  discretioni  vestre  per  aposto- 
lica  scripta  mandamus,  quatenus  vocatis  qui  fuerint  euocandi  et  auditis  liinc- 
iude  propositis,  quod  justum  fuerit,  ajipellatioue  remota,  deceruatis,  facieutes 
quod  decreueritis  per  ceusuram  apostolicam  fiiTuiter  obseruari :  testes  autem 
qui  fuerint  nominati,  si  se  gracia,  odio  vel  fauore  subtraxerint  censura 
simili,  appenatione  cessaute,  compellatis  veritati  testimonium  perhibere : 
Quod  si    non  omnibus  hiis    exequendis  potueritis   iuteresse,  duo  aiit    vuus 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


17 


vestrum  ea  uichilomiuus  exequautur  :  Datum  Kome,  apud  sanctum  retrum, 
anno  incarnationis  Domiuice  millesimo  quiugeutesimo  quartodecimo,  quiuto 
Idus  Nouembris,  pontificatus  nostri  anno  secuudo  :  Quaeumquideji  literarum 
apostolicarum  vigore  vocatis  preinsertis  abbate  et  conuentu,  ac  lite  coram  nobis 
aliquandiu  super  preinsertis  moleudino  et  eius  midtura  pendente,  processum 
est  iii  causa  huiusmodi  ad  plures  actus  judiciales  citra  tameu  senteucie  diffini- 
tiue  prolatiouem ;  Taudem  die,  anno  et  loco  subscriptis,  coram  reuerendo  iu 
Cristo  patre  et  domiuo,  domino  Gawiuo  miseratione  diuiua  episcopo  Abir- 
donensi,  prius  Sanctiandree  archidiacono,  judice  de  quo  est  in  huiusmodi 
causa  appellationis  et  de  quo  in  preinsertis  literis  generalis  dignitatis  nominis 
mentio  facta  est,  necnon  venerabili  in  Christo  patre  Hemico  abbate  monasterii 
de  Lundoris,  uostris  in  hac  parte  assessoribus,  nobisque  pro  tribunali  sedenti- 
biis  comparueruut  venerabilis  iu  Christo  pater  Alexander  Abbas  mouasterii  de 
Cambuskynneth,  pro  se  suoque  conuentu  et  monasterio,  ex  vna  parte,  et 
dominus  Dauid  Murray  de  Fourgy  seu  Arryngrosk,  miles,  illius  dominii  baro 
et  feodi  recti  domiuus,  domina  Margareta  Barclay  eius  mater,  ex  cuius  jure 
prouenit  dicta  liereditas  et  dominium  ;  dominus  Audreas  Murray,  miles,  dicte 
domine  Margarete  spousus,  vsufructuarii  seu  liberi  tenementi  domiui  dominii 
et  baronie  predicte,  ac  eciam  Johaunes  Murray  dicti  domiui  Dauid  frater  ger- 
manus,  et  dictorum  domiuorum  Andree  et  Margarete  filius  secuudo  geuitus, 
vassallus  fratris  terrarum  de  Condland,  ac  domiuus  terrarum  vitalis  de 
Pettillok  infra  dictum  dominium,  consistens  pro  suo  iuteresse  ex  aduerso 
principalis,  et  disputatione  inter  partes  predictas  aliquandiu  coram  nobis  et 
assessoril3us  predictis  facta,  aUegante  dicto  Alexandro  abbate  molendinum  de 
Arryngrosk  cum  suis  juribus  et  pertiueuciis,  ciun  duabus  acris  terre  eidem 
adiacentibus,  riuum  et  stagnum  conseruaudum  et  reficiendum,  molaresque 
vehendum,  cum  ceteris  juiibus  ex  molendinorum  legibus  pertiuere  et  per 
incolas   ternirum   de  Arryngrosk,  Condlaud,  Hethame,    Lethame,   Pettillok, 

3 


ARRINGROSK. 


u 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERIl 


ARRiNGROSK.  Foupgy,  et  ly  Fosterseyt  fieri ;  necuou  multuram  de  ArrjTigrosk,  Condland, 

Newtoun,  Fourgy,  Hethame,  Letliame,  et  Fosterseyt  ad  decimum  sextum  vas 
constitutam,  et  tenentes  de  Petillok  ad  vigesimum  quartum  vas,  [et  tenentes] 
de  Balwarde,  Beyn  et  Cathecliill  ad  multuram  del^itam  astrictos  esse  ;  necnon 
quandam  acram  terre  prope  ecclesiam  de  Arryngrosk,  infra  boundas  ville  de 
Pettillolv  jaceutem,  sibi  et  dicto  monasterio  suo  pertinere,  et  injuste  per  dictum 
dominuin  Andream  et  reliquos  prescrij)tos  ab  eisdem  detentam ;  necnon  molen- 
dinum  de  nouo  constructum  apud  castrum  de  Balwarde,  quod  petiit  demoliri 
et  distrui  secundum  tenorem  carte  domini  Henrici  de  Freslaw  domini  deFourgy, 
pro  se  et  heredibus  et  successoribus  dictis  abbati,  conuentui  et  eorum  mona- 
sterio  de  Camliuskynueth,  super  singulis  premissis  facere  :  Subseqxienter  vero 
idem  dominus  Dauid  ilurray,  miles,  Johannes  frater  eius,  dominus  Andreas,  et 
Margareta  allegautes  quod  vltra  memoriam  hominum  nec  unquam  ab  inicio 
dicti  reUgiosi  viri  eraut  in  possessione  multure  dictarum  terrarum  de  Balwarde, 
Cathochill  et  Beyn,  et  molendinum  similiter  ad  illa  terapora  fuisse  ibidem 
constructum,  iu  cuius  terrarum  multure  et  moleudini  semper  extiterunt  in 
possessione,  Cjuodque  similiter  ville  et  terre  de  Ethame,  Lethame,  ly  Fosterseyt, 
in  huiusmotU  carta  juinime  continebantur,  et  tenentes  illarum  ad  multuram 
minime  cogi  debuerant,  sicut  nec  eciam  acram  illam  terre  vocatam  Mare  Akyr 
dare  non  erant  compeUendi,  ex  eo  quod  dictis  religiosis  viris  minime  vncpiam 
per  dominum  de  Fourgy  aut  PetUlok  concessa  erat ;  ad  percendum  tamen 
laboribus  et  expensis,  Utiumque  dubietatem  et  anfractus  vitandum,  inter- 
uentu  dicti  reuerendi  in  Christo  patris,  et  j)ropter  bonum  pacis  et  concordie  in 
hanc  que  sequitur  concordiam  finaUter  est  deuentum,  videUcet,  dicti  dominus 
Dauid  et  Johannes  pro  se  et  heredibus  suis,  teuentibus  et  assigiiatis,  ratifi- 
carunt  et  approbarunt  et  quantum  in  eis  fuit  confirmarunt,  prout  tenore  pre- 
sentium  ratificant,  approbant  et  confirmant,  et  cj^uantum  opus  est  de  nouo 
dant  omnes  et  singulas  iUas  donationes,  factas  per  Henricum  de  Freslaw 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


19 


dominum  de  Forgy,  dicte  domine  Margarete  progenitorem,  abbati,  couuentui 
et  monasterio  predictis  de  et  super  molendino  de  Arryngrosk  et  duabus  acris 
terre  eidem  adiacentibus,  cum  omnibus  suis  juribus,  asiamentis  et  pertinentibus 
aut  in  futurum  pertiuere  valentibus  quocuuque  casu  vel  causa  in  puram  ele- 
mosinam  perpetuam,  nullo  in  dicto  molendiuo  retento  jure,  exceptis  quatuor 
solidis  anuui  redditus  monasterio  de  Culross  ex  eodem  molendino  prius  donatis  ; 
et  similiter  dicta  domina  Margareta  de  cousensu  sui  sponsi  specialiter  et 
persoualiter  facto,  et  dicto  domiuo  Ancbea  de  nostra  et  dicte  Margarete 
presenciis  amoto,  domina  Margareta,  tactis  sanctis  Dei  ewangeliis,  se  ad  boc 
minime  coactam,  corporale  prestitit  jurameutum,  dictusque  dominus  Audreas 
iterum  redieus  pro  eius  et  dicte  domine  Margarete  toto  tempore  vite  ratifi- 
carunt,  approbaruut  et  quantum  in  eis  fuit  confirmarunt  prefatas  donatioues, 
sic  quod  si  minor  terra  adiacet  dicto  molendiuo  quam  due  acre  aut  duas  acras 
per  eos  augebuut,  et  si  pbis  possident  abbas  et  conuentus,  quod  est  supra 
dictis  dominis  Dauid,  Audree  et  Margarete  spectabit,  cum  pacto  fide  firmato 
de  non  coustruendo  moleudiuuui  de  uouo,  aliudve  edificium,  vel  quodcuuque 
aliud  facere  per  quod  aut  occasioue  cuius  vtilitati  predictorvmi  abbatis  et  cou- 
uentus  in  aliquo  poterint  derogari :  Cum  obligatione  dicti  domini  Dauid  et 
heredum  suorum  atque  successorum  quod  si  aliqui  teueutes  sui  qui  ad  dictum 
molendinum  sectam  debent  dicto  moleudiuo  se  subtraxerint  vel  subtrahant, 
seu  ad  dictiun  molendinum  venientes  pro  multura  prout  de  jure  tenentur  non 
satisfaciant,  vt  satisfaciant,  dictus  dominus  Dauid  heredes  et  successores  sui, 
non  venientes  vt  veniant,  non  satisfacieutes  vt  satisfaciant,  quani  districtius 
poterint  compellant  et  distriugant ;  scilicet,  teneutes  de  Arryngroslc,  coloni  de 
Condland,  Petillok,  Forgy,  Heithame,  Lethame  et  Fosterseyt  ad  satisfacieudum 
de  bladis  suis,  tam  siccis  quam  humidis,  et  tam  ductis  ad  molendiuum  quam 
aliter  expositis,  vulgariter  dry  viultir,  vigesimum  quartum  vas  et  mensuram, 
vnacum  causa,  secta  et  compulsione  tenencium  dictarum  terrarum  ad  molen- 


ARRINGROSK. 


20 


REGISTRUM  MONASTEPdl 


ARRINGEOSK. 


dinum,  riuum,  stagnum  et  molarium  vectionem,  reficiendum,  construendum 
secundum  ratam  terrarum  dictorum  dominonmi  Dauid,  Johannis,  Andi-ee  et 
Margarete  infra  perrocbiam  de  Arryngrosk  pertinentium  et  consistentium 
tociens  quociens  hoc  facere  sit  necesse ;  dicta  acra  terre  vocata  Marc  Akyr 
eisdem  abbati  et  conuentui,  quia  in  possessione  eiusdem  fuerunt,  imperpetuum 
remanebit ;  et  quod  in  futurum  nullum  bladum  dictorum  suorum  tenentium  ter- 
rarum  predictarum  et  terrarum  regiarum  de  Newtoun  molendum  in  molendino 
suo  de  Balward  recipient  seu  molendinum  de  nouo  construant,  vel  impedimen- 
tum  faciant  quominus  dicti  abbas  et  conuentus  ac  eorum  firmarii  molendini 
de  Arryngrosk  debitam  recipiant  multuram;  et  similiter  in  futurum  sint  auxilio 
fauore  et  consilio  dictis  abbati  et  conuentui  in  coUectione  et  perceptione 
suarum  decimarum  predialium  et  personalium  ecclesie  de  Arryngrosk  ;  nec 
sibi  abbati  et  conuentui  et  suis  successoribus  sint  impedimento  per  se  aut 
suos  tenentes,  familiares,  consanguineos,  affines  et  alios  quos  imjiedire  poterint ; 
et  si  contingat  noualia  fieri  iu  bondis  dictarum  villarum  de  Arryngrosk, 
Condland,  Heithame,  Lethame,  Petillok,  Forgy,  Fosterseyt  vel  noua  edificia 
construi,  et  illis  nomina  noua  imponi,  aut  nomina  villarum  predictarum 
rautari,  nichilominus  remanebit  dictis  abbati  et  conuentui  et  successoribus 
eorum  molendino  de  Arryngrosk  et  firmariis  multura  earundem  et  omnium 
terrarum  et  dominii  de  Fourg}'  infra  parochiam  de  Arryngrosk  consistentiuni ; 
et  quia  in  dicta  carta  domini  Henrici  de  Freslaw  ad  plenum  non  constabat 
tenentes  de  Balward  ad  dictum  molendinum  de  ArrjTigrosk  astrictos,  nec 
eciam  tenentes  dictaram  villarum  de  Beyn  de  Cathochill  in  vsu  fuisse  veniendi 
ad  idem  molendinum,  dictumque  molendinum  de  Balward  antiquitus  con- 
structum,  quod  molendinum  ipsimi  de  Balward  remanebit  in  suo  statu  sicut 
nunc  est,  multureque  dictarum  villarum  de  Balward,  Beyu  et  Cathochill  eidem 
molendiuo  pertiueant,  et  ab  omni  secta  et  exactione  dicti  molendini  de  Arryn- 
grosk  sint  liberi  imperpetuum.    Et  dicte  partes  hinc  inde  pro  perimpletione 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


21 


premissoruni  se,  suos  successores  lieredes  et  assignatos  respectiue  submiserunt 
jurisdictiouibus  Sanctiaudree  et  Dunblanensis,  et  easdem  prout  opus  fuerit 
imperpetuum  prorogarunt,  procuratoresque  constituerunt,  cum  ratiliabitione, 
venerabiles  viros  magistros  et  dominos  Johannem  Speus,  ^Martiuum  Balfour, 
Robertum  Eeid,  Thomam  Wemys,  Alexandrum  IMartyn,  Johannem  Ches- 
holme,  Jacobum  ^Mlson,  Eobertum  Leirmonth,  Duncauum  Burnate,  Walterum 
Maihiile,  Henricum  Sibbald  et  Eicardum  Striueliug,  et  eorum  queuilibet  in 
solidum,  ad  coram  ordinariis  dictarum  diocesium  et  eoruui  officialibus  seu 
commissariis  confitendum  dictam  concordiam  et  nomine  parcium  assumendum 
monitiones,  penas  et  censuras  ecclesiasticas  in  se,  successores,  heredes  et 
assignatos  cum  coertione  canonica,  quociens  contrauentum  fuerit  eidem  con- 
cordie  :  Et  quia  dictus  domiuus  Dauid  miles  et  Johaunes  eius  frater  minor 
annis  erant  in  decimo  octavo  et  decimo  nono  annis  vel  eocirca,  constituti 
per  nos  de  priuilegiis  minorum  certificati  et  certiorati  ad  premissa  seruanda 
corporale  prestiterunt  iuramentum,  et  contrauenientes,  si  abbas  et  conuentus 
aut  eorum  successores,  centum  libras  ;  si  Dauid,  Andreas,  Margareta,  Johanues, 
heredes  sui  aut  assignati,  centum  libras  mouete  Scotie  seruauti  antequam  ad 
ingressum  litis  admittantur  satisfaciant  sine  compulsione  :  In  quorum  omnium 
et  singulorum  robur,  fidem  et  testimonium  premissorum  presentes  literas  siue 
presens  publicum  iustrumentum  hauc  concordiam  in  se  contineus  exinde  fieri, 
et  per  notarium  publicum  subscriptum  subscribi  et  publicari  mandauimus, 
nostrique  sigilli  iussimus  et  fecimus  appensione  commuuiri ;  et  parti  huius 
concordie  cuui  dictis  abbate  et  couuentu  eorumque  successoribus  prefato 
monasterio  de  Cambuskynueth  permansure  sigilla  dictorum  domini  Dauid, 
Andree,  domine  Margarete  et  Johannis  ;  parti  vero  cum  dictis  domino  Dauid, 
Andrea,  ]\Iargareta  et  Johanue,  et  cum  heredibus  permansure  sigillum  com- 
mime  dicti  monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth  sunt  appensa;  ajjud  Sauctum 
Audream,  die  vicesimo   primo  mensis  Nouembris  anno   Domini   mLllesimo 


ARRINGROSK. 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


quingeutesimo  vicesimo  primo,  indictione  decima,  pontificatus  sanctissimi  in 
Christo  patris  et  domini  nostri,  domini  Leonis  diuina  prouidencia  pape  decimi 
anno  nono  ;  presentibus  ibidem  dictis  reuerendo  in  Christo  patre  Gauiiio 
miseratione  diuina  Abirdonensi  episcopo,  Heurico  abbate  de  Lundoris;  vener- 
abilibus,  lionorabilibus  et  lionestis  viris  magistris  Georgio  Ferne  rectore 
vniuersitatis  Sanctiandree,  Duncano  Burnate,  Eoberto  Broun,  Willelmo 
]\Iailuile,  capellanis,  et  Koberto  Arduthre,  testibus  ad  premissa  vocatis  pariter 
et  rogatis.  Eobertus  Eeid,  Notarius  Publicus. 


Et  ego  Eobertus  Eeid  arcium  magister,  clericus  Sanctiandree  diocesis, 
pul^licus  sacra  auctoritate  apostolica  notarius,  quia  predictarum  literarum 
lecture  apostolicarum  dictique  contractus  concordie  interuentu  dicti  reuerendi 
in  Christo  patris  confectioni,  prefatorum  judicum  submissioni,  eorundemque 
jurisdictiontim  prorogationi,  procuratorum  prefatorum  constitutioni,  potestatis 
dationi,  juramentorumque  prestationi  et  pene  appositioni,  ceterisque  pre- 
missis  omnibus  et  singulis  dum  sic,  vt  premittitur,  agerentur,  dicerentur  et 
fierent,  vnacum  prenominatis  testibus  presens  et  personaliter  interfui,  eaque 
omnia  et  singula,  sic  fieri  vidi,  sciui  et  audiui  ac  in  notam  cepi;  ideoque  hoc 
presens  publiciun  instrumentum  prefatum  contractum  concordie  in  se  conti- 
nens,  manu  aliena,  nie  aliis  negociis  prepedito,  fideliter  scriptum,  exinde  confeci, 
et  in  hanc  publicam  formam  redegi,  signoque  nomine  et  subscriptione  meis 
solitis  et  consuetis,  vnacum  aiipensione  sigillormn  predictorum  magistri  nostri, 
magistri  Hugonis  Spens  judicis  delegati  antedicti  in  media  cauda,  domini 
Dauid,  mditis,  iu  prima  cauda,  Andree  eius  patris  in  secunda,  Margarete  in 
quarta,  et  Johaunis  Murray  in  quinta  cauda,  signaui,  in  fidem  et  testimonium 
omnium  et  siugulorum  premissorum  rogatus  et  requisitus. 

EoBEKTUS  Eeid,  Notarius  Publicus. 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETE. 


23 


11.  BuLLA  DOMiNi  Abbatis  de  Cambuskynneth  super  molexdino  de 
Aekyngkosk. 
Joha>'NES  episcopiis  seraus  seruoram  Dei,  dilectis  filiis  alibati  et  con- 
ventui  monasterii  de  Cambuskynnetli  ordinis  Sancti  Augustiui,  Sancti- 
andree  diocesis,  salutem  et  apostolicam  lienedictionem  :  Cum  a  nobis  peti- 
tur  quod  iustum  est  et  honestum,  tam  vigor  equitatis  qnam  ordo  exigit 
ratiouis  vt  id  per  solicitudinem  officii  nostri  ad  deliitum  producatur  effec  • 
tum,  sane  petitio  vestra  nobis  exliibita  continebat  qiiod  nobilis  vir  Willel- 
mus  de  Freslaw  dominus  de  Fourgy,  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  de  propria  salute 
cogitans,  et  cupiens  terrena  in  celestia  et  transitoria  in  etema  salubri  com- 
mertio  commutare,  molendinum  de  Arryngrosk  dicte  diocesis  cum  duabus 
acris  terre  adiaceutibus  dicto  molendino,  cum  omnibus  juribus,  pertinenciis  et 
asiamentis  ipsius  molendini  tunc  ad  dictum  nobilem  pertinentibus,  vobis  et 
monasterio  vestro  pro  suo  et  parentum  siTorum  animarimi  remedio,  imper- 
petuum  pia  et  prouida  deliberatione  donauit,  prout  in  patentibus  literis  inde 
confectis  venerabilis  fratris  nostri  episcopi  Sanctiandree  et  dicti  nobilis  sigillis 
muuitis  plenius  dicitur  contineri ;  nos  itaque  vestris  supplicationibus  inclinati 
quod  super  hoc  -pie  et  prouide  factum  est  ratum  et  gi'atum  habentes,  id  autori- 
tate  apostolica  confirmamus,  et  presentis  scripti  patrocinio  communimus :  NuUi 
ergo  omnino  hominum  liceat  hanc  paginam  nostre  confirmationis  infringere, 
vel  ei  ausu  temerario  contraire ;  si  quis  autem  hoc  attemptare  presumpserit, 
indignationem  omnipotentis  Dei  et  beatorum  Petri  et  Pauli  apostolorum  eius 
se  nouerit  incursurum  :  Datum  Avinione  Kalendas  Nouembris,  pontifi- 

catus  nostri  anno  terciodecimo. 

12.  DoNATio  Eiciiakdi  de  ecclesia  de  Alueth. 
PiiCHAEDUS  Dei  gracia  Dunkeldensis  episcopus,  omnibus  sancte  matris  ecclesie 
filiis,  salutem  :  Sciant  tam  posteri  quam  presentes  nie  dedisse  et  concessisse  et 


ARRIXGROSK. 


24 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


liac  mea  carta  confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte  Marie  de  Cambuskynneth  et 
canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seniientibus  ecclesiam  de  Aluetli  cum  omnibus  iustis 
pertinentiis  suis  in  perpetuam  elemosiuam  :  Tenendam  ita  libere  et  qvdete 
et  honorifice,  sicut  aliqua  ecclesia  liberius  et  quietius  et  lionorificentius  teue- 
tur  in  episcopatu  meo,  saluo  episcopali  jure  ;  teste  Bricio,  priore  de  insula 
Sancti  Columbe,  Thoma  capellano  Netretule,  Eadulfo  capellano  episcopi, 
Magistro  Abraham,  Eugenio  clerico,  Macduschath,  Hugone  clerico,  cancellario. 

13.    DE  ECCLESIA  DE  ALUETH  NON  TENEMUR  PRESENTAUE  A'ICAE1UM. 

Omnibus  Cristi  fidelibus  ad  quos  presens  scriptum  peruenerit,  Eichardus  Dei 
gracia  episcopus  Dunkeldensis,  eternam  in  Domiuo  saUitem :  Nouerit  uuiuer- 
sitas  vestra  nos  virorum  religiosorum,  abbatis  et  conuentus  de  Cambuskyuneth, 
paupertati  compacientes,  de  communi  consensu  decani  et  capituli  nostri  Dun- 
keldensis,  concessisse  eisdem  caritatis  intuitu,  vt  in  ecclesia  sua  de  Alueth 
propter  eius  tenuitatem  possint  libere  deseruire,  sine  compulsione  vicarii 
faciendi,  per  ydoueum  capellauum  nobis  et  successoribus  nostris  pro 
tempore  imperpetuum  presentandum,  saluis  nobis  et  successoribus  nostris 
episcopalibus  sicut  dicta  ecclesia  autiquitus  facere  consueuit  :  Vt  autem  ista 
concessio  nostra  perpetue  firmitatis  robur  obtiueat,  sigiUum  nostrum  vnacum 
sigillo  capituli  uostri  Dunkeldensis  presenti  scripto  fecimus  apponi:  Datum 
apud  Dunkeld,  die  Veneris  proximo  post  festum  Omnium  Sanctorum  anno 
gracie  millesimo  ducentesimo  sexagesimo,  teste  capitulo. 


14.  Alueth  teeka  ecclesiastica. 
Omnibus    Cristi    fidelibus    hoc   scriptum   visuris   vel   auditm-is,   Alexander 
dominus  de   Striueling,  miles,  salutem  eternam  in  Domino :   Noueritis  me, 
diuine  pietatis  intuitu  et  pro  salute  anime  mee  et  antecessorum  et  succes- 
sorum   meorum,  dedisse,  concessisse  et  hac  presenti  carta  niea  confirmasse 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


25 


Deo  et  beate  Maiie  et  sancto  Seruano  et  ecclesie  saucti  Seruaiii  de  Alueth  im- 
perpetuum,  pro  me  et  lieredibus  meis,  vuam  acram  terre  cum  pcrtinenciis  suis 
iu  villa  de  Alueth,  illam  videlicet  que  jacet  propinquior  fonti  ^-ancti  Seruani, 
inter  ipsum  fontem  et  ecclesiam,  cum  libero  introitu  et  exitu  :  Tenendam  et 
habendam  libere  et  qniete  in  liberam  puram  et  perputuam  elemosiuam  omni- 
bus  rectoribus  dicte  ecclesie  qui  pro  tenqiore  fuerint,  in  doteui  ipsius  ecclesie, 
adeo  libere,  quiete  et  houorifice  sicut  dosalicuius  ecclesie  liberius,  quietius  et 
honorificentius  teueri  poterit  vel  possideri :  Ego  vero  et  heredes  mei  dictam 
acram  terre  cum  pertinenciis  suis  et  libertatibus,  vt  jiredictum  est,  eidem 
ecclesie  et  eius  rectoribus  contra  omues  homines  et  feminas  warantizabimus, 
imperpetuum  adqiiietabimus  et  defendemus  :  Et  vt  ista  douatio  mea  perpetue 
firmitatis  robur  obtineat,  presens  scriptum  sigilli  mei  impressione  roboraui ; 
testibus,  domino  Eoberto  Dei  gracia  episcopo  Dunblauensi  qui  dictam 
ecclesiam  die  dominica  proxima  post  festum  sancte  Scolastice  virgiuis  anuo 
gracie  millesimo  duceutesimo  septuagesimo  secuudo,  me  persoualiter  ecclesiam 
dotante,  dedicauit,  magistro  Tlioma  decano,  magistris  Kichardo  et  Johanne  de 
Eoglyn,  canonicis  Dunblanensibus,  domino  Patricio  de  Grahamc,  Joliaune  filio 
meo  primogenito,  Eicardo  de  Trippeuetli,  Henrico  filio  Eoberti  de  Striueliu, 
et  aliis. 


15.  DOXATIO  ECCLESIE  DE  ALUETII  PEK  IIUGONEM   ETISCOPU.M  DUNKELDEXSEM. 

HuGO  Dei  gracia  Dunlveldensis  episcopus,  omnibus  saucte  matris  ecclesie 
filiis  eternam  in  Domino  salutem ;  Cum  non  tantum  plantare  sacram 
religionem,  verum  eciam  plantatam  fouere  omnibus  modis  debeamus,  vt 
subsequens  gracia  Christi  incrementum  tribuat  et  augmentum,  notum  sit 
vniuersitati  vestre  nos  concessisse  ecclesiam  de  Alueth  ecclesie  sancte  Marie 
de  Striueling  et  cauonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  regulam  sancti  Augustini 
professis,  quam  ecclesiam  pie  memorie  Eichardus  et  J  ohannes  predecessores 

4 


26 


EEGISTEUM  MONASTEEII 


nostri  eis  caritatiue  contulerunt ;  nos  antem  eorundem  canonicorum  tcuuitati 
et  paupertati  conipacientes,  et  predictam  donationem  ratam  habentes,  eandeni 
benignius  interpretantes  concedimus  et  volumus  vt  iidem  canonici  fructus 
eiusdem  ecclesie  ad  vsus  proprios,  secundum  quod  sibi  melius  expedire 
viderint,  valeant  convertere  ;  presentabunt  eciam  eidem  canonici  nobis  et 
successoribus  nostris  capellanos  (|ui  pro  temp^jre  eidem  ecclesie  deseruient, 
nobis  et  successoribus  nostris  de  plcbis  cura  respoudeaut ;  ipsis  vero  de  tem- 
poralibus  si  maluerint  rationem  reddant  competeutem,  saluis  episcopalibus ; 
hiis  testibus,  magistro  Hugone  archidiacono  Dunkeldensi,  magistro  "Willelmo 
de  Edenam,  magistro  Eicliardo  de  Eaparlaw,  Barnardo  capellano  de  Kergill, 
niagistro  Johanue  de  Iletun,  et  multis  aliis. 

16.    DOXATIO  WlLLEL.MI  KEGIS  SCOTIE  ECCLESIE  DE  AlUETH. 

WiLELMUS  Dei  gracia  Eex  Scotorum,  episeopis,  abbatibus,  coniitibus,  baronibus, 
justiciis,  ministris,  et  omnibus  probis  honiiuibus  tocius  terre  sue,  clericis  et 
laicis,  salutem:  Sciant  presentes  et  futuri  me  concessisse  et  hac  carta  mea  con- 
firmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  sancte  Marie  de  Striuelyne,  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo 
seruientibus,  ecclesiam  de  Alweth  cum  decimis  omnimodis  et  omnibus  eiusdem 
ecclesie  iustis  pertinentiis:  Teuendam  ethabendam  ita  liliere  et  cpiiete,  pleuarie 
et  honorifice,  in  liberam  et  perpetuam  elemosinam,  sicut  alias  suas  ecclesias 
lilierius,  quiecius,  plenius  et  honorificencins  tenent ;  testibus,  Eichardo  de 
Moreuill  constabulario,  Waltero  Olikis  (Olifard)  justiciario,  Waltero  de 
BarkUIie  camerario,  Eoberto  de  Berkyle,  apud  Strinelyn. 


17-    ALUETH  OB  VISITATIOXE.M  EPISCOPI  VLTRA    XUMEEUM  ET  FEUCTUUM 
SEQUESTEATIONEM. 

In  nomine  Domini  amen :  Per  hoc  presens  publicum  instrumentum  cunctis 
pateat  evidenter  cpiod  anno  Domini  millesimo  tricentesimo  nonagesimo  qnarto. 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


mensis  Februarii  die  terciodecimo,  indictione  tercia,  et  pontificatus  sanc- 
tissimi  in  Christo  patris  ac  domini  nostri,  domini  Benedicti  diuina  prouidencia 
pape  anuo  primo :  In  mei  notarii  publici  et  testium  infrascriptorum 

presencia  venerabilis  in  Christo  pater  Willehuus  permissione  diuina,  abbas 
monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth,  sancti  Audree  diocesis,  personahter  cousti- 
tutus,  pro  se  et  monasterio  suo  predicto,  quamdam  appellacionem  in  scriptis 
in  quadam  ceduhi  papirea  exhibuit  et  iuterposuit,  et  apostolos  cum  instan- 
tia  peciit  sub  hac  forma :  Cum  appellationis  seu  prouocationis  remedium 
in  subsidiimi  oppressorum,  seu  verisimiliter  opprimi  timentium  a  jure 
salubriter  sit  indultum,  hinc  est  quod  ego  Willehnus  de  Blakburne  abbas 
monasterii  de  Cambuskynnetli,  ordiuis  sancti  Augustiui,  Sanctiaudree 
diocesis,  nomine  meo  et  monasterii  mei  predicti,  propono  et  dico  quod  hcet 
reverendus  in  Christo  pater,  dominus  Eobertus  miseratione  diuina  episcopus 
Dimkeldensis,  septimadecima  die  mensis  Januarii  vltimi  preteriti,  ecclesiam 
de  Lecro,  et  in  crastino  ecclesiam  de  Alueth  personahter  visitaverit,  cum 
(punquaginta  sex  euectionibus,  meis  expensis  et  monasterii  mei  predicti, 
ipsam  procurando,  ipse,  dicta  procuracione  non  obstante,  j)er  literas  suas 
patentes  sequestrari  mandauit  omnes  et  singulos  fructus  ecclesiarum  pre- 
dictarum  in  manibus  hiicorum,  monentes  uono  die  mensis  Februarii  presentis 
Johannem  de  Conyngliame  et  Johannem  de  Zare,  receptores  fructuum  dictarum 
ecclesiarum,  vt  liuiusmodi  fructus  tam  preteritos  (|uam  presentes  et  futuros, 
(jualitercunque  debitos,  in  manus  suas  colHgant  et  custodiant,  nemini  respon- 
dendo  de  eisdem,  preter  expeusas  necessarias,  pro  seruicio  dictarum  ecclesia- 
rum,  et  sibi  de  residua  huiusmodi  fructuum  curent  lideliter  respondere  sub 
pena  excommunicationis  ;  monendo  eciam  eodem  die  capellanos  perrochianos 
ecclesiarum  predictanmi  vt  ibidem  amplius  non  celebrarent  nec  deseruiant 
ecclesiis  predictis  quindecim  diebus  post  monitiones  predictas  elapsis  ;  et 
eciam  quod  capellani  predicti  iuxta  ecclesias  memoratas  resideant,  et  mansa 


28 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


seu  hospicia  ad  residendum  habeant  ante  festum  pasehe  proxime  futurum,  licet 
ecclesia  de  Lecro  non  habeat  mansum  nec  vnquam  habuit  sibi  limitatum,  nec 
ego  seu  monasterium  meum  ibidem  habeam  aliquam  terram  pro  huiusmodi 
manso  deputando  :  Ex  quibus  fructuum  sequestratione,  monitionibus,  proces- 
sibus  et  mandatis  sentiens  me,monasterium  meum  predictum,  capellanos  et  fruc- 
tuumreceptores  seu  meos  procuratores.per  dictum  dominum  episcopumindebite 
grauari  ab  eodem  domino  episcopo  Dunkeklensi  et  a  dictis  suis  sequestra- 
tionibus,monitionibus,processibus  et  mandatis,et  ab  omnibus  grauaminibus  que 
ex  dicto  iniquo  processu  suo  colhgi  possunt,  necnon  ab  omnibus  sentenciis  ex- 
communicationis  suspensionis  et  interdicti,  et  aliis  penis  quibuscunque  in  dictis 
literis  suis  contentis,factis  et  faciendis,  latis  et  ferendis,impositis  et  imponendis, 
nomine  meo  et  monasterii  mei  predicti  ad  sacrosanctam  sedem  apostolicam  et 
dominum  nostrum  papam  in  hiis  scriptis  prouoco  et  appello  et  apostolos  peto 
instauter,  instantius  et  instantissime,  qui  si  michi  denegati  fuerint,  iterum  ut 
prius  prouoco,  appello  et  apostolos  peto,  cum  instaneia  prenotata  ;  subiciens 
me,  monasterium  meuni  prcdictum,  et  ecclesias  predictas  de  Ahieth  et  de 
Lecro,  et  eorum  capellanos,  fructus,  redditus  et  prouentus  earundem,  procura- 
tores  seu  coUectores,  ac  omnia  bona  monasterii  mei  predicti  protectioni,  tuitioni 
et  defensioni  sacrosancte  sedis  apostolice  supradicte  :  Et  protestor  me  hanc 
meam  appellationem  infra  juris  terminum  velle  prosequi  cum  effectu;  et  si  opus 
fuerit  innovare,  mutare,  addere,  diminnere,  et  si  informis  sit,  in  dehitam  fonnam 
redigere,  ad  consihum  seu  correctionem  cuiuslibet  sapientis  :  Exhibita,  lecta  et 
interposita  fuit  hec  appellatio  in  scriptis  coram  me  notario  infrascripto  et 
testibus  subscriptis  per  dictum  dominum  abbatem  de  Cambuskynneth,  in 
ecclesiaperrochiali  de  Perth,  anno,  indictione,  die,  mense  et  pontificatu  rpiibus 
supra ;  presentibus  dominis  Eoberto  de  Lauark,  et  Johanne  Kuyk  capelhanis, 
Johanne  filio  Walteri  burgensi  ville  do  Perth,  et  multis  aliis  testibus  ad  pre- 
missa  vocatis  specialiter  et  rogatis. 


DE  GAMBUSKENNETH. 


29 


Et  ego  Eichardus  ile  Creyth,  clericus  Sancti  Aiulree  diocesis,  pul.ilicus  auto- 
ritate  apostolica  et  imperiali  notarius,  predicte  aijpellationis  interpositioni, 
exhibitioni  et  lecture,  ac  apostolorum  petitioni,  et  omnibus  aliis  et  singulis 
suprascriptis,  dum  sic  vt  premittitur  fierent  et  agerentur,  vnacum  prenominatis 
testibus  presens  iuterfui,  eaque  sic  vidi  fieri  et  audiui,  et  in  hanc  publicam  for- 
mani  redegi,  propria  manu  scripsi,  signoque  meo  consueto  signaui,  rogatus  et 
requisitus  in  testimonium  omnium  premissorum. 

Creytji  Xotarius  rublicus. 


18.    DOXATIO    TERl!!';    DE    HaETH. 

"WiLELMU.s  Dei  gracia  Eex  Scotoruni,  omnibus  probis  hominiljus  tocius  terre 
sue,  clericis  et  laicis,  sahitem  ;  Sciant  presentes  et  futuri  me  dedisse  et  conces- 
sisse  et  hac  carta  mea  confirma.sse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte  ilarie  de  Striuelyne,  et 
canonicis  ibideni  Deo  seruientibus,  vnum  plenarium  toftum  iu  burgo  meo  super 
Harth  :  Teneudum  in  liberam  et  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam,  ita  libere  et 
(juiete,  plenarie  et  lionorifice  siciit  aliqua  doinus  rehgiosa  ahquod  toftuni 
in  predicto  burgo  meo  super  Harth  liberius  et  quietius,  plenius  et  hono- 
rificentius  tenet  et  possidet ;  testibus,  Eicliardo  de  prebenda,  clerico  meo, 
Geruasio  Auenell,  Johanne  de  Hastitig  (Hastingis),  Alexandro  vicecomite  meo 
de  Striuelin,  Eadulfo  de  Camera,  Eicardo  filio  Hngonis,  Henrico  de  Kinross, 
Rogero  de  AViltum,  apud  Striuehn,  vicesinio  nono  die  mensis  Septemliris. 

19-     CONTRA    CAPELLAM    DE    AlAVAV. 

HENracus  miseratione  diuina  episcopus  Sancti  Andree,  capellano  parrocliiali 
eeclesie  de  Chikmannane,  salutem  cum  benedictione  diuina  :  Quamuis  diuersis 
vicibus  diuersos  fecerimus  processus  contra  parrochianos  ecclesie  predicte  ex 
eo  quod  defectus  eiusdem  ecclesie  reparationibus  variis  indigentis  reficere  non 
curauerint,  ipsi  tamen  luiiusmodi  nostris  processibus  minime  paruerint,  pro  eo 


30 


UEGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


quod  viri  iuhabitantes  tenniuos  et  districtus  seu  dominium  de  Alway  vnacum 
eis  ad  huiusraodi  reparationes  coutribuere  noluerint,  super  quo  iuformationes 
debite  fieri  fecimus,  et  materiam  pleue  discussimus  cum  peritis,  per  quas  com- 
perimus  commorautes  in  terris,  districtu,  seu  in  dominio  de  Alway  ad  repa- 
rationes  ecclesie  parrocliialis  de  Clakmannau  quascuuque  et  quocieuscuuque 
contigerint,  vnacutn  aliis  uuiversis  parochianis  dicte  ecclesie  debere  contribuere 
et  teueri,  vude  ipsos  ad  huiusmodi  reparatioues  teneri  teuore  presencium 
decerniuius  et  dech\ramus  :  Quocirca  uobis  in  virtute  obediencie  firmiter  pre- 
cipimus  et  mandamus  quateuus,  autoritate  uostra  moueatis  omues  et  singulos 
parrochiauos  predictos  et  precipue  illos  de  terris,  districtu  seu  dominio  antedic- 
tis,  quos  nos  monemus  per  preseutes  vt  iufratriginta  dies  a  tempore  publicatiouis 
preseucium  immediate  sequentes,  quorum  decem  dierum  pro  prima  monitioue, 
decem  pro  secuuda  mouitione,  et  reliquos  decem  dies  pro  tertia  et  cauouica 
mouitione  ac  termino  peremptorio  eis  et  eorum  singulis  assignamus,  et  per  vos 
volumus  assiguari,  et  predictos  defectiis  iucipiaut  reformare,  continuando 
douec  pleuarie  reformeutur,  ahociuiu  ipsos  onnies  et  singuL^s,  seu  eorum  per- 
sonas  siuguhares  qui  huiusmodi  vestris  monitiouibus  ymmo  verius  uostris  uou 
parueriut  cum  effectu,  lapsis  dictis  trigiuta  diebus,  excommuuicauius  iu  liiis 
scriptis,  quos  statim  sic  per  vos  fore  excommunicatos,  singuhariter  et  nomi- 
natim  denuucietis  :  Et  nichilomiuus  ob  culpam  ipsorum  uostris  mouitionibus 
non  pareucium,  si  huiusmodi  excommuuicatiouem  sustiuueriut  per  uouem  dies, 
animo  indurato,  ecclesiam  ipsam  de  Clakmauuaue,  necnon  capellas  et  oratoria 
iufra  parochiam  ipsam,  et  presertim  infra  terras,  districtum  seu  domiuium 
de  Ahvay  tenore  preseucium  ecclesiastico  supponimus  interdicto,  inhibeutes 
universos  viros  ecclesiasticos,  ne  quis  extuuc  iu  ecclesia  et  capellis  seii  oratoriis 
predictis  diuina  celebrare,  nisi  iu  casibus  premissis  a  jure,  presumat,  aut  aliqua 
sacramenta  ecclesiastica  ministrare,  peuiteutia  uioriencium  et  baptismo  par- 
uulorum  exceptis  :  et  in  siguum  huius  mandati  uostri  per  vos  plenius  executi 


DE  CAMBUSKEXNETH. 


31 


sigillum  vestruni  presentibus  apponatis,  ac  modum  et  formam  executiouis, 
vnacum  nominibus  testium  qui  intererunt  subscribatis :  Datum  sub  sigillo 
nostro  apud  Sauctum  Andream,  uicesimo  die  mensis  IMaii,  anno  Domini  mille- 
simo  quadringentcsimo  nono,  et  consecratiouis  nostre  sexto. 


20.   ACQUITTAXCI.i  HEXEICI  AbBATIS  CaMBUSKYNXETH  I)E  officio 

Thesaukarii. 

Jacobus  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotorimi,  uniuersis  et  singulis  ad  quorum  noticias 
presentes  littere  perueneriut,  salutem  :  Sciatis  nos  recepisse  bonum  et  fidele 
compotum  ae  solutionem  plenariam  a  uenerabili  in  Cbristo  patre  iiostroque 
cousiliario,  Henrico  abbate  monasterii  nostri  de  Cambuskynneth,  de  omnibus 
et  singulis  pecuniarum  sumniis,  compositiouibus,  wardis,  releuiis,  maritagiis, 
extractibus  itineram  justiciarie  et  camerarie,  ac  vicecomitum  et  balliuorum 
curiarum  amerciamentis,  ac  cartarum,  remissionum,  infeodationmn  compo- 
sitionibus,  et  de  omnibus  extractis,  proficuis,  bonis  et  intromissionibus,  et  aliis 
rebus  quibuscuuque  per  eundem  ueuerabilem  iu  Christo  patrem  jure  fiscali 
vel  alias  habitis  et  receptis,  ac  quomodolibet  expositis,  omni  tempore  quo 
habuit  de  uobis  officium  nostre  thesaurarie,  et  de  eisdem,  vt  premittitur,  fidele 
compotum  reddidit  domiuis  nostri  consilii  et  clericis  per  nos  ad  huiusmodi 
compotum  audieuduni  et  recipiendum  limitatis  et  assignatis  ;  necnon  recipi- 
mus  ab  eodem  uenerabili  patrc  plenariam  et  integram  deliberationem  omiii- 
um  et  singulorum  nostrorum  jocalium,  lapidum  preciosorum,  ac  auri  et  argenti, 
monetati  et  non  monetati,  et  aliorum  bouorum  nostrorum  quorumcunque  sibi 
in  custodia  commissorum,  et  per  eum  receptorum  aliquo  teiupore  quo  intromisit 
cuui  officio  nostre  thesaurarie  predicto ;  de  quibus  omnibus  et  singulis  pecimia- 
rum  summis,  compositionibus,  wardis,  releuiis,  maritagiis,  extractibus  itinenim 
justiciarie  et  canierarie,  curiarumc|uevicecomitumetbaIIiuorum  amerciameutis, 
ac  cartarum,  remissionum,  infeodationum,  et  aliarum  litterarum  quarumcunque 


32 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


compositionibus,  et  de  omnibus  escbaetis,  proficuis  et  intromissionibus,  jure 
fiscali  et  alias  quauis  occasione  et  quacunque  de  causa ;  necnon  de  omnibus 
jocalibus,  lapidilnis  preciosis,  ac  auro  et  argento,  monetato  et  nou  monetato,  et 
aliis  bonis  quibuscuuque  vsque  in  diem  date  presencium  tempore  preterito, 
ratione  dicti  officii  thesaurarie  per  eundem  uenerabilem  jjatrem  receptis,  liabitis, 
expositis  et  nobis  deliberatis,  tenemus  nos  Ijene  contentos,  placatos,  ac  plenarie 
et  fideliter  persolutos,  et  dictum  venerabilem  patrem  suosque  successores, 
heredes,  executores  et  seruitores,  pro  nobis,  heredibus  et  successoribus  nostris, 
de  omnibus  premissis  acquietauimus,  quittosclamauimus  et  exoneraidmus, 
tenore  presencium  acquietamus,  qnittosclamamus,  et  exoneramus  pro  per- 
pietuo  :  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  niagnum  sigilhim  nostrum  presentibus  apponi 
fecimus,  apud  Striueling,  decimo  sexto  die  meusis  Augusti  anno  Domini 
millesimo  quadriugentesimo  nonagesimo  quinto,  et  regni  nostri  oetauo. 


21.    IXSTKUMEXTUM  DE  CAPELL.V  DE  ALWAY. 

In  Dei  nomiue  amen  :  Per  hoc  presens  publicum  instrunientum  cunctis  pateat 
euideuter  quod  anno  a  natiuitate  Domiui  juxta  computationem  ecclesie  Scoti- 
cane  millesimo  f[uadringentesimo  primo,  mensis  Maii  die  quintodecimo,  in- 
dictione  uona,  poutificatus  sanctissimi  iu  Christo  patris  ac  domini  nostri, 
doiniui  Benedicti  diuina  prouidencia  pape  tertii  decimi,  auno  septimo  ;  in  mei 
notarii  publici  et  testium  infrascriptorum  jireseucia  personaliter  constitutus 
venerabilis  in  Christo  pater,  I'atricius  abbas  mouasterii  de  Cambuskj-nneth, 
nomine  sui  monasterii  et  eiusdem  loci  conueutus,  personaliter  coustitutus, 
quamdam  literam  papiream  clausam  sub  signeto  nobihs  domiui,  domini  Dauid 
Flemyng  domini  de  Bigar,  et  iufra  sigiDis  nobilium  et  discretorum  virorum 
Johannis  de  Leviugston,  mililis,  domini  de  Calaudar,  Johaunis  de  Erskiu  can- 
cellarii  Glasguensis,  WiUelnii  de  Blakburne  vicarii  de  Kirkyntulacli,  et 
Joliiinnis  de  Ychiltre  notarii  publici,  in  cera  rubea  affixis,  auteutice  roboratis 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


33 


michi  uotario  publico  prebuitperlegendam;  cuius  tenor  sequitur  in  bec  verba  : 
Acta  apud  Cambuskynueth,  sexto  die  mensis  Aprilis,  auno,  etc.  quadringen- 
tesimo  primo  decretum  fuit  et  ordinatum  per  nobiles  ac  potentes  et  discretos 
viros,  dominos  Dauid  Flemyng  dominum  de  Bigar,  Johannem  de  Levingstoun 
dominum  de  Calentar,  milites,  Johaunem  de  Erskyn  caucellarium  Glas- 
guensis,  Willehnum  de  Blackburne  vicarium  de  Kirkyntulach,  et  Johannem 
de  Vchiltre,  arbitros  electos  per  reuerendum  in  Christo  patrem  Patricium 
abbatem  de  Cambuskynneth  antedictum  et  eiusdem  loci  conuentum,  ex  vna 
parte,  et  nobilem  et  potentem  dominum,  dominum  Thomam  de  Erskin, 
militem,  dominum  eiusdem,  ex  parte  altera,  iu  causa  mota  inter  ipsos  super 
seruicio  capelle  de  Alway,  quod  dictus  dominus  Thomas  clamabat  fieri 
dicte  capelle  per  dictuni  dominum  Abbatem  vt  perpetuum  vicarium  de 
Clakmannan,  consideratis  ratiouibus  ambarum  partium  propositis  in  dicta 
causa  et  allegatis  tam  viua  voce  quam  scriptis,  quod  dicti  domiui  abbas 
et  conueutiis,  prout  solito  cousueueriut,  liljeuti  animo  prestabunt  suum 
consensum  quod  canonicus  siue  presbyter  in  dicta  vicaria  de  Clakmaunan 
ministraus  diebus  domiuicis  et  festiuis  in  dicta  capella  ministret  modo 
hactenus  consueto,  si  liceutia  domini  episcopi  Sanctiaudi'ee  ex  procuratione 
dicti  domini  Thome  et  iucohirum  sui  dominii  et  aliorum  dictam  capellam  fre- 
quentancium,  mediante  requisitione  dicti  domini  Abbatis  poterit  impetrari  sine 
fraude  per  ipsum  et  eundem  capellauum  in  dicta  vicaria  miuistrantem,  et  ad 
liec  omnia  et  singula,  vt  premittitur,  fideliter  et  immobiliter  obseruandum 
^•traque  pars  predicta  fidem  mutuo  prestitit  corporalem,  et  in  siguum  omnium 
premissorum  sigilla  arbitrorum  autedictorum  presenti  scripto  sunt  affixa,  anuo, 
meuse  et  die  predictis,  incluso  signeto  dicti  doniini  Dauid,  quod  nostrum  de- 
cretum  ordiuauimus  apponi,  presentibus  immediate  precedeutibus  iufra  festum 
Peuthecostes  :  De  cuiusquidem  litere  inspectm-a  et  publica  lectura  memoratus 
dominus  Abbas,  uomine  quo  supra,  a  me  notario  publico  sibi  fieri  peciit  publi- 

5 


34 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


ciitn  instramentum  :  Acta  fuerant  hec  apud  Cambuskynnetli  antedictum,  loco 
capitulari  eiusdem,  hora  quasi  tertia  post  nonam,  anno,  mense,  die,  indictione  et 
pontificatu  quibus  supra ;  hiis  testibus,  domino  Johanne  de  Erskin  vicario  de 
Inchesclienane,  Johanne  Ysaach  scutifero,  Johanne  de  Benyne  clerico,  Eicardo 
de  Blakburne,  Eoberto  de  Blakburn,  Henrico  Molendinam,  Eichardo  Fabre,  et 
multis  aliis  ad  premissa  vocatis  capitulariter  et  rogatis. 


Ego  Willelmus  de  Blakburne  presbiter  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  publicus  auc- 
toritate  apostolica  notarius,  dum  hec  omnia  premittuntur,  fierent  et  agerentur, 
vnacum  prenominatis  testibus  presens  interfui,  eaque  sic  fieri  vidi  et  audiui, 
et  in  hanc  publicam  formam  redegi;  ac  quia  me  in  aliis  occupato,  per  alium 
scribi  feci,  et  signo  meo  solito  ac  consueto  signaui,  per  dictum  dominum  Abba- 
tem  rogatus  ac  speciahter  requisitus,  iu  testimonium  omnium  et  singulorum 


premissoram. 


WlLLELMUS  BlaKBURN. 


22.  Arkingeosk  capellanie  fundatio  rer  Andream  Murray  de  Balward 

MILITEM. 

Omnibus  hanc  fundationis  cartam  indentatam  siue  indenturam  bipartitam 
visuris  vel  audituris,  Margareta  Berclay,  domina  liberi  tenementi  omnium 
et  singularuni  terrarum  et  baronie  de  Arryngrosk,  Andreas  Murray  sponsus 
meus,  et  Dauid  jMurray  filius  noster,  mihtes,  dominus  feodi  recti  omniura  et 
sin"ularum  predictarum  terrarum  et  baronie  cum  pertinentiis,  sahitem  in 
oinnium  Sahiatore  :  Quia  iu  carta  infeodationis  dicti  Dauid,  militis,  predicta- 
nuu  et  aliarum  terrarum  mearum,  per  serenissimum  principem  Jacobum 
quartum,  Scotorum  regem  illustrissinuun,  post  meam  resignationem  in  manibus 
suis  apud  Striueling,  vigesimo  primo  die  mensis  Januarii  anno  Domini  millesi- 
mo  quingentesimo  septimo  factam,  idem  illustrissimus  princeps,  nostro  ad  hoc 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


35 


accedente  consensu,  excepit  et  reseruauit  quatuordecini  marcas  annui  redditus 
de  dictis  terris  et  baronia  de  Arryngrosk  et  de  quacunque  parte  earundem  que 
dicto  meo  sponso  et  miclii  magis  placeret,  ad  sustentacionem  vnius  capellani 
perpetui,  loco  quo  nobis  magis  placitum  foret,  seruicium  iuslitiiere  pro  salute 
anime  mee,  dicti  sereiiissimi  principis,  et  animarum  aliarum  in  fundationis 
carta  specificandarum,  prout  in  eadem  fundationis  carta  plenius  continetur  : 
Noueritis  igitur  nos  Margaretam,  Andream  et  Dauid,  milites,  vnanimi  consensu 
et  assensu,  in  laudem,  gloriam  et  Iionorem  sancte  et  indiuidue  Trinitatis,  Patris 
et  Filii  et  Spiritus  Saucti,  gloriosissime  virginis  et  beati  Columbe  abbatis, 
patroni  nostri  ecclesie  parrocliialis  parrocbie  de  Anyngrosk,  Sanctiandree 
diocesis,  dedisse,  concessisse  et  in  perpietuam  elemosinam  confirmasse,  Deo, 
beate  Marie  virgiui  et  beato  Columbe  predictis,  ac  domiuo  Willelmo  Mailuile 
presbytero,  et  suis  successoribus  presbyteris  diuina  celebrantibus  et  perpetuis 
futuris  temporibus  missas,  lioras  canonicas  et  alia  suffragia  apud  dictam 
ecclesiam  celebraturis,  dictas  quatuordecim  marcas  aunui  redditus  annuatim 
percipiendum  et  leuandum  de  omnibus  et  singulis  terris  baronie  nostre  de 
Arringrosk,  et  quaUbet  parte  earundem,  ad  sustentationem  dicti  domini  Wil- 
lelmi  et  successorum  suorum  capellanorum,  et  eorum  proprias  manus  nobis, 
aut  beredibus  et  successoribus  nostris,  vel  nostrorum  aut  illorum  balliuis 
seu  ofiiciariis  minime  requisitis  aut  requirendis ;  necnon  et  duas  acras  terre 
coutinuo  adiacentes  cemiterio  diete  ecclesie  ad  partem  australem  eiusdem,  et 
ex  parte  australi  cuiusdam  semite  seu  vie  qua  itur  de  dicto  cemiterio  ad 
villam  de  Arryugrosk  adiacentes,  pro  manso,  ortis  et  edificiis  dicti  domiui 
Willelmi  et  suorum  successorum  capellanorum,  pro  animabus  dicti  illus- 
trissimi  principis  et  suorum  nobilissimorum  progenitorum  et  successorum, 
auimabus  nostris,  parentum,  antecessorum  et  heredum  ac  successorum 
nostronmi,  et  omnium  fidelium  defunctorvim  :  Tenendum  et  habendum  dicto 
domino  WHlelmo   MailuLle   presbytero,    et    suis   successoribus    presbyteris 


ARRINGROSK. 


36 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


totum  et  integrum  aniiuum  redditum  predictum  qiiatuordecim  marca- 
rum  et  duas  acras  terre  superadditas  cum  pertinentiis  predicte,  de  Deo 
omnipotenti,  beata  ^argine  Maria  et  sancto  Colmnba  patrono  predicto, 
in  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  ac  in  proprietatem  imperpetuum, 
libere,  quiete,  plenarie,  integre,  bonorifice,  bene  et  in  pace,  ac  sine  retine- 
mento,  reuocatione,  aut  obstaculo  aliquali ;  et  adeo  libere,  quiete,  in  omnibus 
et  per  omnia,  sicut  aliquis  annuus  redditus,  seu  aliqua  terra  per  quamcunque 
quibuscunque  capellanis  seu  piis  vsibus  aut  locis  vbilibet  infra  regiium  Scotie 
liberius  datur,  conceditur  seu  confirmatur,  aut  dari,  concedi  seu  confirmari 
poterit  qualitercunqne  in  futurum  ;  celebrantes  indies  et  pro  perpetuo  cura 
dispositus  fuerit  dictus  dominus  Willelmus  IMailuile,  et  sui  successores 
capellani,  missarum  solemnia  et  orationum  suffragia  ad  summum  altare  dicte 
ecclesie  parrocliialis,  si  legitime  prepeditus  non  fuerit  seu  fuerint,  et  lioras 
canonicas,  et  exequias  defunctorum  in  dicta  ecclesia  parrocbiali,  vel  prope 
eam,  sic  quod  si  processu  temporis  diuinus  cultus  augmentetur  ut  in  eadem 
ecclesia  missarum  et  nlianim  Iiorarum  solemnia  cantu  Gregoriano  vel  col- 
legiatim  celebrari  institutum  fuerit,  ipse  dominus  Willelmus  et  sui  successores 
capellani  parati  sint  et  obedientes  vnacum  ceteris  psallere,  collegiatim  viuere  ; 
volumus  autem  quod  nullus  ad  hoc  seruicium  assumetur  in  futurum  nisi  actu 
presbyter  sufficientis  litterature  et  cantus  Gregoriani.  Ipseque  dominus  "NVil- 
lelmus,  et  sui  successores  capellani,  personalem  et  continuam  apud  dictam 
ecclesiam  parrocliialem  faciet  et  facient  residentiam,  sic  quod  si  per  vnius 
mensis  spacium  in  toto  anno  abfuerit  seu  abfuerint,  eciam  diuersis  vicibus, 
licebit  nobis  et  heredibus  nostris  alteri  cuicunque  capellano  ydoneo  literatm-a 
et  cantu  de  buiusmodi  capellania  disponere  et  donare,  ipso  capellano  absente 
vt  premittitur,  minime  vocato  ;  donationem  autem  predicte  capellanie  quociens 
vacare  contigerit  per  cessum,  decessum,  inbabilitatem.non  residenciam,aut  alias 
quouismodo,  ad  nos  et  beredes  nostros,  confirmationem  donationis  huiusmodi  ad 


DE  CAMBUSKENXETIL 


37 


veuerabilem  in  Christo  patrem  et  dominum  dominum  Alexandrum  abbatem 
monasterii  de  Cambuskyuneth  et  suos  suecessores  dicti  monasterii  abbates 
pertinere  vohmius,  sic  quod  si  ad  huiusmodi  capellaniam  per  nos  aut  heredes 
nostros  capellanus  ydonietate  predicta  quaUficatus  infra  quadraginta  dies  a 
die  vacationis  eiusdem  immediate  compotandos  datus  non  fuerit,  Hcebit  dicto 
Alexandro  abbati  et  successoribus  suis  abbatibus  cuicumque  ydoneo  capellano 
ydonietate  predicta  qualificato  eandem  conferre  capellaniam,  nostra  et  here- 
dum  nostrorum  negligencia  causante,  ac  vice  et  illo  casu  dumtaxat,  sic  quod 
postea  dum  vacauerit,  donatio  ad  nos  et  heredes  nostros  et  confirmatio  ad 
(lictum  Alexandrum  et  successores  suos  abbates  spectet  et  pertineat :  Et  quia 
diuinum  cultum  tahter,  donante  Domino,  in  dicta  ecclesia  de  Arringrosk  aug- 
mentauimus,  sepulturamque  nostram  in  eadeni  elegimus,  dictus  Alexander 
Abbas  et  sui  conuentus  unanimi  consensu  totum  chorum  dicte  ecclesie  nobis, 
heredibus,  successoribus  et  progenei  ac  familie  nostre  vniuerse  in  liberum 
concesserunt  sepulcrum,  sic  quod  non  licebit  parrochianis  seu  quibusuis  ahis 
in  dicto  choro  sepeliri,  nisi  fuerit  abbas  vel  vnus  fratrum  suorum  canonicorum, 
vel  honestus  abbatis  seruitor  vel  familiaris  quem  ibidem  diem  contigerit 
claudere  extremum,  aut  in  choro  predicto  sepulturam  elegerit :  Et  nos  vero  ilar- 
gareta,  Andreas  et  Dauid,  milites,  dictum  annuum  redcUtum  quatuordecim 
marcarum  annuatim  percipieudum  et  leuandum  de  omnibus  et  singiilis  terris 
baronie  nostre  de  Arryngrosk  et  cpxalibet  parte  earundem,  ac  duas  acras  terre 
supradictas,  dicto  domino  Willelmo  presbjlero,  et  successoribus  suis  capeUanis, 
in  omnibns  et  per  omnia  forma  pariter  et  effectu,vt  premissum  est,contra  omnes 
mortales  warantizabimus,  acquietabimus  et  imperpetuum  defendemus :  In  cuius 
rei  testimonium  vni  parti  huius  fundationis  carte  indentate  apud  nos  et 
heredes  nostros  permansure  sigillum  connnune  dicti  monasterii  de  Cambus- 
kynneth,  apud  idem,  et  alteri  parti  apud  dictum  Alexandrum  abbatem  et  suos 
successores  abbates  et  monasterium  permansure  sigilla  nostra  propria,  apud 


ARRIXOROSK. 


38 


REGISTRUM  MOXASTERII 


castrum  nostram  de  Balward,  sunt  liinc  inde  appensa,  die  primo  mensis  Octo- 
bris  anno  Domini  millesimo  quingentesimo  vigesimo  septimo,  et  regis  regni 
Jacobi  quinti  illustrissimi  et  inuictissimi  anno  decimo  quinto ;  testibus,  pre- 
dicto  venerabili  patre  Alexandro  abbate,  domino  Jobanne  Clerk  eius  comite 
et  canonico,  Thoma  Forestar  de  Schiregardene,  Alexandro  Gourlay,  Henrico 
Abbircrummy,  Eoberto  Spittale,  magistro  Henrico  Mylne,  domino  Johanne 
Bullerwale,  curato  dicte  ecclesie  de  Arryngrosk,  Eichardo  Hay,  Patricio 
jMurrav,  Alano  Harwy  et  Andrea  ^Murray,  cum  diuersis  aliis. 


23.  Pkima  Bulla  protfxtionis  et  confirmationis  ordinis  Monasterii 

NOSTRI  ET  POSSESSIONUM  DE  CaMBUSKYNNETH. 

EUGENIUS  episcopus,  seruus  seruorum  Dei,  dilectis  filiis^Villehno  abbati  ecclesie 
Sancte  ^larie  de  Striueling,  eiusque  fratrilnis  tam  presentilnis  quam  futuris 
regularem  vitam  professis  imperpetuum :  Ad  hoc  vniuersalis  ecclesie  cura  nobis 
a  prouisore  omnium  bononmi  Deo  commissa  est.^i;  religiosas  diligamus  personas 
et  beneplacentem  Deo  religionem  studeamus  modis  omnibus  propagare,  nec 
enim  Deo  gratus  aliquando  famulatus  Lmpenditur  nisi  ex  caritatis  radice  pro- 
cedens  a  puritate  religionis  fuerit  conseruatus;  ea  propter,  dilecti  iu  Domino 
filii,  vestris  iustis  postulationibus,  dilecti  filii  nostri  fratris  Eoberti  prioris 
Sanctiandree  precibus  iuclinati,  clementer  annuimus  et  prefatam  ecclesiam  in 
qua  diuino  mancipati  estis  obsequio  sub  beati  Petri  et  nostra  protectione  sus- 
cepimus  et  presentis  scripti  preuUegio  communimus  ;  statuentes  vt  ordo 
canonicus  de  Arrosia  que  per  te,  dilecte  in  Domino  fili,  Willelme  abbas,  pre- 
ueniente  gracia  Dei,  consilio  et  auxilio  venerabilis  fratris  nostri  Eoljerti  epi- 
scopi  Sanctiandree  in  eadem  ecclesia  noscitur  institutus  perpetuis  ibidem 
temporibus  inuiolabiliter  conseruetur  :  Preterea  quascunque  possessiones,  que- 
cunque  bona  eadem  ecclesia  in  presenciarum  iuste  et  canonice  po.ssedit  aut  in 
futurum  concessione  pontificum,  largitione  regum  vel  principum,  oblatione  fide- 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETII. 


39 


lium,  seii  aliis  iustis  modis,  Deo  propicio,  poterit  adipisci,  tirma  vobis  vestris(|ue 
successoribus  et  illibata  permaneant,  que  propriis  dignum  duximus  exprimenda 
vocabilis ;  terram  videlicet  de  Dumbodeliu  cum  aquis,  et  terram  de  Cambus- 
kynneth,  cimi  piscatura  et  rethe  in  aqua,  et  terram  de  Collyne,  cum  nemore,  et 
decLmam  [de]  dominiis  regis  de  Striueling  et  de  redditibus  regis  XL.  solidos,  et 
canum  vnius  nauis  :  Decernimus  ergo  vt  nulli  omnino  horninum  liceat  prelatam 
ecclesiam  temere  perturbare,  aut  eius  possessiones  auferre,  vel  ablatas  retinere, 
minuere,  aut  aliquibus  vexationibus  fatigare ;  sed  omnia  integra  conseruentur 
eorum  pro  quorum  gubernatione  et  susteutatione  concessa  sunt  vsibus  omni- 
niodis  profutura;  sahia  sedis  apostolice  autoritate  et  episcopi  Sanctiandree 
canonica  reuerentia  :  Si  qua  igitur  in  futurum  ecclesiastica  secularisve  persona, 
luinc  nostre  constitutionis  paginam  sciens,  contra  eam  temere  venire  temp- 
tauerit,  secundo  tertiove  commonita,  si  non  satisfactione  congrua  emendauerit, 
potestatis  honorisque  sui  diguitate  careat ;  reamque  se  diuino  iudieio  existere 
de  perpetrata  iniquitate  cognoscat  et  a  sacratissimo  corpore  ac  sanguine  Dei  et 
Domini  Rodemptoris  nostri  Jesu  Christi  aliena  fiat,  atque  in  extremo  examine 
districte  vltioni  subjaceat ;  cunctis  autem  eidem  loco  iusta  seruantibus  sit 
pax  Domini  nostri  Jesu  Cliristi,  quatinus  et  hic  fructum  bone  actionis  per- 
cipiant,  et  apud  districtum  judicem  premia  eterne  pacis  inueniaut.      Amen. 

Ego  Eugenius  catliolice  ecclesie  episcopus. 

Ego  Odo  diaconus  cardinalis  Sancti  Georgii  ad  Velum  Aureum. 

Ego  Abbericus  Ostiensis  episcopus. 

Ego  Johannes  Paparo  diaconus  cardinalis  Sancti  Adriani. 

Ego  Hubaldus  presbyter  cardinalis  Sanctorum  Johannis  et  rauli. 

Ego  Ignarus  Tusculanus  episcopiis. 

Ego  Gregorius  diaconus  cardiualis. 

Ego  Gilbertus  indignus  sacerdos  Sancti  jMartiui. 
Datum  Altisiodori,  per   manum  Guidonis    saucte  Eomane  ecclesie  diaconi 


40 


BEGISTRUM  MOXJSTEBII 


cardiaalis  et  cancellarii,  tertio  Kalendas  Septembris,  iudictione  decima,  incar- 
nationis  Dominice  anuo  millesimo  centesimo  quadragesimo  septimo,  pontifi- 
catus  vero  Domiui  Eugeuii  tertii  pape  anuo  tertio. 


24.  Secunda  Bulla  Okiginalis. 
Alexandee  Episcopus,  seruus  seruorum  Dei,  dilectis  filiis  Alfredo  abbati 
ecclesie  de  Striueling,  eiusque  fratribus  tam  presentibus  quam  futuris  regularem 
vitam  professis  in  perpetuum  effectum:  lusta  postulantibus  indulgere,  et  vigor 
equitatis  et  ordo  exigit  rationis,  presertim  quando  petentium  voluntatem  et 
pietas  adiuuat  et  veritas  uou  relinquit :  Ea  propter,  dQecti  iu  Domino  filii, 
vestris  iustis  postulationibus  clementer  annuimus  et  prefatam  ecclesiam  in 
qua  diuino  mancipati  estis  obsequio  sub  beati  Petri  et  uostra  protectione 
suscepimus,  et  presentis  scripti  preuilegio  communimus,  statuentes  vt  quas- 
cunque  possessiones,  quecunque  bona  eadem  ecclesia  in  presentiarum  iuste  et 
cauonice  possidet,  aut  in  futurum  concessione  pontificum,  largitione  regum  vel 
princii"ium,  oblatioue  fidelium,  seu  aliis  iustis  modis,  prestante  Domino,  poterit 
adipisci,  firma  vobis  vestrisiiue  successoribus  et  illibata  permaneaut ;  in 
quibus  hec  propriis  duximus  expremenda  vocabulis  :  Ecclesiam  de  Clacmannau 
cura  quadraginta  acris  terre  ;  toftum  sacerdotis  in  eadem  villa  et  asiamentum 
in  bosco  et  plano,  ecclesiam  de  Egglyge  ex  dono  regis  Scotorum  ;  villam  de 
Ketilstoun  cum  suis  pertinentiis,  et  decimas  omnium  j)Iacitorum  suorum  et 
lucrorum  de  Striueling  et  de  Striuelingscliire,  et  de  Calentare  ;  vnum  toftimi 
in  Inirgo  suo  de  Striueling;  alium  toftum  in  Lynlinctu,  et  libertates  et  consue- 
tudines  vobis  et  liomiuilius  vestris  ab  eodem  rege  tam  in  toloneis  quam  in 
aliis  rationabiliter  coucessas  ;  quiu(|uagiuta  solidos  in  cano  de  Perth ;  molen- 
diuum  de  Clakmannau,  preter  multuram  dominice  meuse  regis  quociens  in 
eadem  villa  aduenerit,  et  preter  multuram  proprie  mense  prepositi  eius- 
dem  ville ;  terram  de  Cambuskynneth ;  piscaturam  inter  eandem  terram  et 


DE  CAifBUSKENXETH. 


41 


Polmase,  et  vnumretlie  in  aqua;  terram  quoque  de  Collyne  cum  nemore  et  suis 
pertinenciis;  terram  de  Tulybethwyne  que  est  inter  aquam  eiusdem  terre  et 
terram  de  Logyne ;  quadraginta  solidos  de  redditu  regis  de  Striueling  et  cauum 
vnius  nauis ;  vnam  salinam,  et  tantum  terre  quantum  liabet  vna  de  salinis 
regis ;  decimam  firme  de  domiuiis  suis  de  Striueling ;  insulam  que  est  inter 
Polmase  et  Tulibody ;  vnum  toftuni  plenarium  in  burgo  regis  de  luuerkething  ; 
sepulturam  quoque  ipsius  loci  liberam  esse  concedimus,  vt  eorum  deuotioni  et 
extreme  voluutati  qui  se  illic  sepeliri  deliberauerint,  nisi  forte  excommuuicati 
vel  interdicti  siut,  nuUus  obsistat,  salua  tamen  iusticia  parrochialium  eccle- 
siarum  de  quibus  mortuorum  corpora  assumuntur:  Saue  noualium  vestroriun 
que  propriis  mauibus  aut  sumptibus  colitis,  siue  de  nutrimentis  animalium 
vestrorum  decimas  a  uobis  nullus  presumat  exigere :  Obeuute  vero  te  nunc 
eiusdem  loci  abbate  vel  tuorum  quolibet  successorum  nidlus  ibi  qualibet 
suhreptionis  astucia  seu  violencia  preponatur  nisi  quem  fratres  communi  con- 
sensu  vel  fratrum  pars  sauioris  consilii  secundum  Deum  et  beati  Augustini 
regulam  preuiderint  eligendum  :  Decernimus  ergo  vt  nulli  omniuo  homiuum 
liceat  prefatam  ecclesiam  temere  perturbare,  aut  eius  possessiones  auferre,  vel 
oblatas  retinere,  miuuere,  seu  quibuslibet  molestiis  fatigare,  sed  omnia  integra 
conseruentur  eorum  pro  quorum  gubernatione  et  sustentatioue  coucessa  suut 
vsibus  omnimodis  profutm^a,  salua  sedis  apostolice  auctoritate  et  diocesaui 
episcopi  canonica  iusticia :  Si  qua  igitur  in  futurum  ecclesiastica  secularisue 
persona  hanc  nostre  constitutionis  paginam  sciens  contra  eam  temere  venire 
temptauerit,  secundo  tertioue  commonita,  nisi  reatum  simm  cougrua  satis- 
factione  correxerit,  potestatis  honorisque  sui  diguitate  careat,  reamque  se 
diuino  judicio  existere  de  perpetrata  iniquitate  cognoscat,  et  a  sacratissimo 
corpore  ac  sanguine  Dei  et  Domini  redemptoris  nostri  Jhesu  Christi  aliena  fiat, 
atque  in  extremo  examine  districte  vltioni  subiaceat ;  cuuctis  autem  eidem 
loco  sua  iura  seruantibus  sit  pax  Domini  nostri  Jhesu  Christi  quateuus  et 

6 


42 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


liic  fructum  bone  actionis  percipiant,  et  apud  districtum  judicem  premia  eterne 
pacis  inueniant.     Amen. 

Sanctus  Sanctus  Alexander, 

Petkus.  Paulus.  Papa  Tertius. 

Ego  Alexander  catholice  ecclesie  episcopus. 

Ego  Subaldus  Hostiensis  episcopus. 

Ego  Barnardus  Portuensis  et  Sancte  Eufine  episcopus. 

Ego  Gralterius  Albanensis  episcopus. 

Ego  Jacinctus  diaconus  cardinalis  Sancti  Martini  in  Cosmidyne. 

Ego  Odo  diaconus  cardinalis  Sancti  Nicholaii  in  carcere  Tulliano. 

Ego  Boso  diaconus  cardinalis  Sanctorum  Cosmi  et  Damiani. 

Ego  Curcliyus  diaconus  cardinalis  Sancti  Adriani. 

Ego  Petrus  diaconus  cardinalis  Sancti  Eustachii  juxta  temp)him  Agrippe. 

Ego  Manfredus  diaconus  cardinalis  Sancti  Georgei  ad  VeUim  Aureum. 

Ego  Arbaldus  presbiter  cardinalis  Sancte  Crucis  in  lerosolyma. 

Ego  Henricus  presbiter  sanctorum  Nerei  et  Arcliillei. 

Ego  Johannes  presbiter  cardinalis  Sancte  Anastasie. 

Ego  Albertus  presbiter  cardinalis  Sancti  Laurenti  in  Lucina. 

Ego  Guilielmus  Sancti  Petri  ad  uincula  presbiter  cardinalis. 
Datum  Seniensi,  per  manum  Harmanni  Sancte  Eomane  ecclesie  subdiacoui  et 
notarii,  nonis  Decembris,  indictione  decima  tertia,    incarnationis    Dominice 
auuo  millesimo  centesimo  sexagesimo  quarto,  pontificatus  domini  Alexandri 
pape  tertii  anno  sexto. 


25.  Tertia  Bulla  origixalis  protectioxis  et  inhibitionis  ecclesiarum 
terrarum  et  aliarum  possessioxum. 

Celestinus  episcopus  seruus  seruorum   Dei,   dilectis  filiis  Nicholao  abbati 
ecclesie  Sancte  ]\Iarie  de  Striueling  eiusque  fratribus  tam  presentibus  quam 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


43 


futuris  canonicam  vitam  professis  in  perpetuum :  Pie  postulatio  voluntatis 
effectu  debet  prosequeute  compleri,  vt  et  deuotionis  sinceritas  Jaudabiliter 
enitescat  et  vtilitas  postulata  vires  indubitanter  assumat :  Ea  propter,  dilecti 
in  Domino  filii,  vestris  iustis  postulationibus  clementer  annuimus  et  pre- 
fatam  ecclesiam  beate  IMarie  de  Striueling  in  qua  diuino  mancipati  estis 
obsequio  sub  beati  Petri  et  nostra  protectione  suscipimus  et  presentis  scripti 
priiulegio  communimus :  Inprimis  siquidem  statuentes  vt  ordo  canonicus 
qui  secimdum  Deum  et  beati  Augustini  regulam  in  eadem  ecclesia  insti- 
tutus  esse  dinoscitur  perpetuis  ibidem  temporibus  inuiolabiliter  ob- 
seruetur :  Preterea  quascimque  possessiones  quecunque  bona  eadem  ecclesia 
inpreseuciarum  iuste  et  canomce  possidet  aut  iu  futurum  concessioue 
pontificum,  largitioue  regum  vel  priucipum,  oblatione  fidelium,  seu  aliis 
iustis  modis,  prestante  DomLno,  poterit  adipisci,  firma  vobis  vestrisque 
successoribus  et  illibata  permaueant ;  in  quibus  bec  propriis  duximus  expre- 
menda  vocabulis  :  Locum  ipsum  in  quo  prefata  ecclesia  sita  est  ex  dono  et 
fundatiouis  bone  memorie  Dauid  regis  cum  omuibus  pertiueuciis  suis ;  villam 
de  Cambuskynnetli  cmn  omnibus  suis  rectis  diuisis  et  pertinenciis  ;  terram 
de  Collyne  et  terram  de  Carsyn  et  Badyudetb,  cum  nemore  eiis  assignato,  et 
cum  omnibus  suis  rectis  diuisis  et  pertiuenciis ;  Tidibotbeuyn  cum  suis  rectis 
diuisis ;  insulam  que  dicitur  Eedinche  que  est  inter  Tulybotlieuyn  et  Polmase  ; 
vUlam  de  Ketilstouue  cum  moleudino  et  omnibus  suis  rectis  diuisis  et  pertiuen- 
tiis  ;  terram  que  adiacet  ripe  de  Forth  inter  Pulmille  et  viam  que  discendit  de 
Striueling  ad  naues  ;  plenarium  toftum  in  bm'go  de  Striueling,  et  aliud  toftum 
in  burgo  de  Lynlicku ;  caumu  vnius  nauis  apud  Striueling ;  vnum  rethe  in 
aqua  de  Forth ;  viginti  cudrumis  casei  de  redditu  regis  apud  Striueling  ; 
quadi-agiuta  solidos  de  redditu  regis  in  Striueling ;  vnam  salinam,  et  tantuni 
terre  quautum  habet  vna  ex  salinis  regis ;  ecclesiam  de  Clacmannane  cum 
quadraginta  acris  terre  et  cum  capellis  suis,  et  cum  tofto  capellani  in  viUa 


44 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


de  Clacmannan ;  piscaturas  de  Carsyn  et  de  Tul)'botheyne ;  libertates  in 
toloueis  et  consuetudinibus  quas  idem  Dauid  rex  et  eius  successores  in  cartis 
suis  vobis  et  hominibus  dominii  vestri  concesserunt ;  piscaturam  que  est  inter 
Cambuslcynneth  et  Polmase ;  dimedietatem  coriorum  et  cepi  et  vnctorum 
totius  occisionis  regis  apud  Striueling  :  ex  donatione  regis  Malcolmi  molen- 
dinum  de  Clakmannan,  excepta  multura  mense  regis  quotiens  ad  eandem 
villam  venerit,  et  excepta  miiltura  mense  prepositi  regis  in  eadem  villa  ;  qiiin- 
quaginta  solidos  de  cano  apud  Perth  :  ex  donatione  regis  Willelmi  vnum  plena- 
rium  toftum  in  villa  de  Perth  ;  ecclesiam  de  Kynclethuyne  cum  terris  et  aliis 
suis  pertinenciis ;  ecclesiam  de  Tidycultri  cum  omnibus  siiis  pertinenciis ; 
ecclesiam  de  Kincardin  cum  terra  ei  assignata  et  omnibus  pertinenciis  suis  ; 
ecclesiam  de  Glenuilefe  cum  omnibus  pertinenciis  suis  :  ex  donatione  Ade 
comitisse  vnum  plenarium  toftum  in  burgo  de  Carraill  et  dimediam  carucatam 
terre  cum  communi  pastura  in  Pethcorthyn,  et  vnam  marcam  argenti  de 
redditu  suo  de  Carel ;  et  vnum  plenarivmi  toftum  in  burgo  de  Hadingtoune  :  ex 
donatione  Eoberti  episcopi  Sanctiandree  ecclesiam  de  Egglis  cum  capellis 
suis  de  Dunypas  et  de  Lethberth  et  aliis  capellis  et  oratoriis  suis,  et  cum 
omnibus  aliis  suis  pertinenciis  :  ex  donacione  Eicardi  episcopi  Dunkeldensis 
et  ex  regia  confirmatione  ecclesiam  de  Alweth  cum  pertinenciis  suis  :  ex  dona- 
tione  Alani  filii  Walteri  vnum  pleuarium  toftum  in  burgo  de  Eenfrew,  et  vnam 
piscaturam  in  aqua  eiusdem  ville  :  ex  donatione  Philippi  de  Lundyn  et  eius 
fihi  Walteri  dimediam  carucatam  terre  cum  prato  ad  eam  pertineute  in 
Balcormok,  et  pasturam  quingentarum  ouium,  et  viginti  vaccarum  et  vnius 
carucate  boum  :  ex  donatione  WiUelmi  de  Lindesay  vnam  camcatam  terre  in 
villa  de  Bynnyn  :  ex  concessione  et  confirmatione  Gocelini  episcopi  Glasguensis 
et  Willelmi  filii  Thoraldi  et  ex  regia  confinnatione  ecclesiam  de  Kirkintulach 
cum  dimedia  carucata  terre  et  aliis  sms  pertinenciis  :  et  ex  donatione  Gil- 
berti  de  Vmfrauuilla  duas  bouatas  ten-e  de  Donj-pas :  Sane  noualium  vestrorum 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


45 


que  proiiriis  manibus  aut  sumptibus  colitis,  siue  de  nutrimentis  animalium 
vestrorum  nullus  a  vobis  clecimas  exigere  vel  extorquere  presumat :  Liceat 
quoque  uobis  clericos  vel  laicos  liberos  et  absolutos  a  seculo  fugientes  ad  con- 
uersionem  recipere,  et  eos  absque  contradictione  aliqua  retiaere  :  Prohibemus 
insuper  vt  nuHi  fratram  vestrorum  post  factam  in  loco  vestro  professionem 
fas  sit  absque  abbatis  siii  licencia  de  eodem  loco  nisi  arcioris  religionis  obtentu 
discedere  ;  discedentem  vero  absque  communium  literarum  cautione  nullus 
audeat  retinere :  Cum  autem  generale  interdictum  terre  fuerit,  liceat  vobis 
clausis  januis,  exclusis  excommunicatis  et  interdictis,  non  pulsatis  campanis, 
suppressa  voce,  diuina  officia  celebrare  :  In  parrochialibus  vero  ecclesiis  quas 
habetis  liceat  vobis  sacerdotes  eligere  et  diocesano  episcopo  presentare  quibus, 
si  ydonei  fuerint,  episcopus  curam  animarum  committat,  vt  ei  de  spiritualibus, 
vobis  autem  de  temporalibus  debeant  respondere  :  Ad  hec  autoritate  apostolica 
duximus  inhibenduin  ne  quis  in  vos  vel  ecclesiam  vestram  excommunicationis 
vel  iuterdicti  sentenciam  sine  manifesta  et  causa  rationabili  promidgare,  seu 
noius  et  indebitis  exactionibus  vos  aggrauare  presumat :  Sepulturam  preterea 
ipsius  loci  liberam  esse  decernimus,vt  eonmi  deuotioni  et  extreme  voluntati  qui 
se  illic  sepelm  deliberauerint.nisi  forte  excommimicati  vel  interdicti  sint,  nidlus 
obsistat,  salua  tamen  iusticia  illarum  ecclesiarum  a  quibus  mortuorum  corpora 
assumuntur :  Obeunte  vero  te  nunc  eiusdem  loci  abbate  vel  tuorum  quolibet 
successorum  nullus  ibi  qualibet  surreptionis  astucia  seu  violencia  preponatur, 
nisi  quem  fratres  communi  consensu,  vel  fratrum  pars  cousilii  sanioris,  secun- 
dum  Dei  timorem  et  beati  Augustini  regulam  prouiderint  eligendum  :  Paci 
quoque  ac  tranquiUitati  vestre  paterna  in  posterum  soUcitudine  providere 
volentes,  autoritate  apostolica  prohibemus  vt  infra  clausuras  locorum  vestro- 
rum  nullus  violenciam  vel  rapinam  seu  furtum  committere,  ignem  apponere, 
sanguinem  fundere,  hominem  temere  capere  vel  interficere  audeat :  Decerni- 
mus  ergo  vt  nulli  omuino  hominum  liceat  prefatam  ecclesiam  temere  perturbare, 


46 


REGISTEUM  MONASTEBII 


aut  eius  possessiones  auferre,  vel  ablatas  retinere,  minuere,  seu  quibuslibet 
vexationibus  fatigare,  sed  omnia  integi'a  conseruentur  eorum  pro  quorum  guber- 
natione  ac  sustentatione  concessa  suut  vsibus  omnimodis  profutura,  salua 
sedis  apostolice  autoritate,  et  diocesani  episcopi  canonica  iusticia ;  si  qua  igitur 
in  futurum  ecclesiastica  secularisve  persona  banc  nostre  constitutionis 
paginam  sciens  contra  eam  temere  venire  temptauerit,  secundo  tertiove  com- 
monita,  nisi  reatum  suum  congrua  satisfactione  correxerit,  potestatis  lionoris- 
que  sui  dignitate  careat,  reamque  se  diuino  judicio  existere  de  perpetrata 
iniquitate  cognoscat,  et  a  sacratissimo  corpore  ac  sanguine  Dei  et  Domini 
nostri  redemptoris  Jesu  Christi  aliena  fiat,  atque  in  extremo  examine  diuine 
vltioui  subiaceat :  Cunctis  autem  eidem  loco  sua  jura  seruantibus  sit  pax 
Domini  nostri  Jbesu  Christi  quatenus  et  hic  fructum  bone  actionis  percipiant, 
et  apud  districtum  judicem  premia  eterne  pacis  inueniant.  A  Perfice  gressus 
M  meos  E  in  semitis  tu  N  is. 

Sanctus  Sanctus  Celestinus 

Petrus.  Paulus.  Papa  tektius. 

Ego  Celestinus  catholice  ecclesie  episcopus. 

Ego  Albinus  Albanensis  episcopus. 

Ego  Octauianus  Hostiensis  et  Velletrenensis  episcopus. 

Ego  Johannes  Prenestinus  episcopu.s. 

Ego  Petrus  Portuensis  et  Sancte  Eufine  episcopus. 

Ego  Gerardus  Sancti  Adriani  diaconus  cardinalis. 

Ego  Georgeus  Sancte  Marie  iu  Porticu  diaconus  cardinalis. 

Ego  Gregorius  Sancte  Marie  in  Aquiro  diaconus  cardinalis. 
DatumLateranensi  per  manum  Cencii  Sancte  Lucie  in  Orchea  diaconi  cardinalis, 
domini  pape  camerarii,  tercio  idus  Maii,  indictione  terciadecima,  incarnationis 
Dominice  anno  millesimo  centesimo    nonagesimo  quinto,  pontificatus  vero 
domini  pape  tertii  anno  quinto. 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


47 


26.    BULLA  PROTECTIONIS  ET   INHIBITIOXIS  ECCLESIARUM  TERRAEUM  ET  ALIAEUM 
POSSESSIONUM  MOXASTERII  DE  CaMBUSKYSNETH. 

Innocentius  episcopus  seruus  seruorum  Dei,  clilectis  filiis  abbati  et  canonicis 
Sancte  Marie  de  Cambuskynuetb,  salutem  et  apostolicam  benedictionem : 
Sacrosancta  Eomana  ecclesia  deuotos  et  bumiles  filios  ex  assuete  pietatis 
officio  propensius  diligere  consueuit,  et  ne  prauorum  bominum  molestiis 
agitentur  eos  tanquam  pia  mater  sue  protectionis  munimine  confouere :  Ea 
propter,  dilecti  in  Domino  fibi,  vestris  iustis  postidatiouibus  grato  coucurrentes 
assensu  personas  et  ecclesiam  vestram  in  qua  diuino  estis  obsequio  manci- 
pati  cum  omnibus  bonis  tam  ecclesiasticis  quam  mundanis  que  iupreseucia- 
rum  rationabiliter  possidetis  aut  in  futurum  iustis  modis,  prestaute  Domino, 
poteritis  adipisci  sub  beati  Petri  et  nostra  protectione  susciisimus ;  specialiter 
autem  ecclesiam  de  Kirketouue  et  ecclesiam  de  Clacmannan,  cum  capellis, 
decimis,  terris  et  omnibus  pertinenciis  suis  quas  iu  proprios  vsus  vobis  asse- 
ritis  deputatas  ;  necuon  ecclesiam  de  Kiucletbeuin ;  ecclesiam  de  Tulycul- 
trane;  ecclesiam  de  Kincardin;  ecclesiam  de  Blare  ;  ecclesiam  de  Glenilef;  eccle- 
siam  de  Aluetb ;  ecclesiam  de  Kirlcintulacb ;  ecclesiam  de  Crelyn ;  ecclesiam 
de  Tulebotheuin,  cum  omnibus  possessionibus  et  pertinenciis  earundem ; 
villam  de  Cambuskynneth,  et  villam  de  Ketellestun  cum  molendino  et  omnibus 
pertinenciis  ipsarum ;  terram  de  Collin ;  terram  de  Carsin  et  de  Badendatb, 
cum  nemore  earundem ;  Tulybotbeuin  et  insulam  que  dicitur  Eedinclie 
positam  inter  Tulybotbeuin  et  Polmase  ;  terram  que  est  iuxta  ripam  de  Forth 
inter  Polmilna  et  viam  que  discendit  de  Striueliugth  ad  naues ;  vnum 
plenarium  toftum  in  burgo  de  Striueling  et  aliud  toftum  in  Linlidchu ;  canum 
vnius  nauis  apud  Striueling ;  vnum  rethe  in  aqua  de  Forth  ;  viginti  cudermis 
casei  de  redditu  regis  apud  Striueling ;  raam  salinam,  et  tantum  terre  quantum 
habet  vna  ex  salinis  regis  ;  piscaturas  de  Carsin  et  de  Tulebotheuin  ;  libertates 


48 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


in  tholoneis  et  consuetudinibus  quas  inelite  recordationis  Dauid  et  successores 
eius  reges  Scotie  vobis  et  hominibus  de  vestris  dominus  concesserunt ;  quadra- 
ginta  solidos  de  redditu  regis  iu  Striueling ;  piscaturam  que  est  inter  Cam- 
buskynnetli  et  Polmase ;  medietatem  coreorum  sepi  et  vnctorum  totius 
occisionis  regis  apud  Striueling ;  molendinum  de  Clakmaunan ;  quinquaginta 
solidos  de  cano  regis  apud  Perth ;  vnum  plenarium  toftum  in  eadeni  villa,  et 
vnum  plenarium  toftum  iu  burgo  de  Karel ;  dimediam  carucatam  terre  cum 
communi  pastura  iu  Petcorthin ;  vuum  plenarium  toftum  in  Hadiutona ; 
vnam  marcam  argenti  in  Karel ;  decimas  omnium  placitorum  et  lucrorum 
regis  de  Striueling  et  Striuelingschire  et  de  Kalentar;  decimas  firme  de 
dominiis  regis  de  Striaelingscliu-e;  vuum  plenarium  toftum  in  Picnfrew,  et 
unam  piscaturam  in  aqua  eiusdem  ville ;  totam  terram  de  Duueglin  cum 
omnibus  pertinenciis  suis ;  vnam  carucatam  terre  in  Byning ;  quatuor 
bouatas  terre  de  Lundin  cum  prato  et  asiamentis  suis ;  vnum  toftum  in  burgo 
de  Aire ;  duas  bouatas  terre  in  Donypas,  et  duas  bouatas  terre  in  villa  de 
lunirmetliiu,  sicut  ea  iuste  et  pacifice  possidetis,  vobis  et  per  vos  monasterio 
vestro  autoritate  apostolica  coufirmamus,  et  presentis  scripti  patrociuio  com- 
munimus ;  nuHi  ergo  omnino  hominum  liceat  hanc  iiaginam  nostre  protec- 
tionis  et  confirmationis  infringere,  vel  ei  ausu  temerario  contraire  ;  si  quis 
autem  hoc  attemptare  presumpserit  iudignationem  omnipotentis  Dei  et  bea- 
torum  Petri  et  Pauli  apostolorum  eius  se  nouerit  incursurum  :  Datum  Later- 
anensi,  ii  nonas  Maii,  pontificatus  nostri  auno  decimo. 

Innocens  Papa  Teetius. 


27.    BULLA  COXFIKMATIONIS  OMNIUM  LIBERTATUM  ET  PRIVILEGIOKUM  A 
PiOMAXIS  PONTIFICIBUS  ET  REGIBUS  CONCESSOEUM. 

Innocentius  episcopus  seruus  seruorum  Dei,  dilectis  filiis  abbati  et  conuentui 
de  Cambuskynneth,  ordinis  Sancti  Augustini,  Sauctiandree  diocesis,  salutem 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


49 


et  apostolicam  benedictioueiu  :  Cum  a  nobis  petitur  quod  iustum  est  et 
bonestum,  tam  vigor  equitatis  quam  ordo  exigit  rationis  vt  id  per  sollicitu- 
dinem  officii  nostri  ad  debitum  producatur  eflectum ;  ea  propter,  dilecti  iu 
Domiuo  filii,  vestris  p)ostulationibus  inclinati  omnes  libertates  et  immunitates 
a  predecessoribus  nostris  Eomanis  pontificibus  vobis  concessas,  necnon  liber- 
tates  et  exemptiones  secularium  exactionum  a  regibus  et  principibus  et  aliis 
fidelibus  rationibiliter  vobis  indultas,  vobis  et  per  vos  ecclesie  vestre  autoritate 
apostoHca  confirmamus  et  presentis  scripti  patrocinio  commuuimus  :  Xulli 
ergo  omnino  liominum  liceat  Iianc  paginam  nostre  confirmationis  infringere  vel 
ei  ausu  temerario  coutraire  ;  si  quis  autem  hoc  attemptare  presumpserit  indig- 
nationem  omnipotentis  Dei  et  beatorum  Petri  et  Pauli  apostolorum  eius  se 
nouerit  incursurum  :  Datum  Lugdunensi  sexto  Kalendas  Augusti  pontificatus 
nostri  anno  quarto.  Innocens  Pafa. 

28.  De  rOSSESSIONIBUS  et  boxis  fratrum  vel  conuersorum  nostrorum 

PETENDIS  ET  HABENDIS. 


Clemens  episcopus  seruus  seruorum  Dei,  dilectis  filiis  abbati  et  conueutui  mo- 
nasterii  de  Cambuskynneth,  ordinis  Sancti  Augustini,  Sanctiandree  diocesis, 
salutem  et  apostolicam  benedictionem  :  Deuotionis  vestre  precibus  inclinati 
vt  possessioues  et  alia  bona  mobilia  et  immobilia  que  personas  liberas  fratrum 
vestrorum,  ad  monasterium  vestrum  mundi  vauitate  relicta  couuolancium  et 
professiouem  faciencium  in  eodem,  si  remansissent  in  seculo,  jure  successionis 
vel  quocunque  iusto  titulo  contigissent  et  que  ipsi  existentes  in  seculo  potu- 
isseut  vobis  libere  erogare,  petere,  recipere  ac  retinere  Hbere  valeatis  sine  juris 
preiudicio  alieui,  autoritate  vobis  presencium  indulgemus  :  Nulli  ergo  omnino 
hominum  liceat  hauc  paginam  nostre  concessionis  iufringere,  vel  ei  ausu 
temerario  contraire ;  si  quis  autem  hoc  attemptare  presumpserit  indignatiouem 


50 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


omnipotentis  Dei  et  beatorum  Petri  et  Pauli  apostolorum  eius  se  nouerit 
incursurum :  Datuin  Pictauie  quintodecimo  Kalendas  Februarii,  pontificatus 
nostri  anno  tertio.  Clemens  Papa. 

29.   BULLA  PKOTECTIOXIS  GENERALIS  POSSESSIOXUil  ALIOKUMQUE 
BONOKUM. 

Clemens  episcopus  seruus  seruorum  Dei,  dilectis  filiis  abbati  et  conuentui 
monasterii  de  Cambuskynnetli  ordinis  Sancti  Augustini,  Sanctiandree  diocesis, 
salutem  et  apostolicam  benedictionem  :  Cum  a  nobis  petitur  quod  iustum 
est  et  lionestum,  tam  vigor  equitatis  quam  ordo  exigit  ratiouis  vt  id  per 
solicitudiuem  oificii  nostri  ad  debitum  perducatur  effectum  ;  ea  propter,  dilecti 
in  Domino  filii,  vestris  iustis  postulationibus  grato  concurrentes  assensu  per- 
sonas  vestras  et  locum  in  quo  diuino  estis  obsequio  mancipati,  cum  omni- 
bus  bonis  que  in  preseuciarum  rationabiliter  possidet,  aut  in  futurum  iustis 
modis,  prestante  Domiuo,  poteritis  adipisci  sub  beati  Petri  et  nostra  protectione 
suscipimus,  specialiter  autem  terras,  possessiones,  domos,  prata,  pascua,  neniora, 
piscarias,  grangias  et  alia  bona  vestra  sicut  ea  omnia  iuste  et  pacifice  possidetis, 
vobis  et  per  vos  eidem  monasterio  autoritate  apostolica  coufirmamus,  et 
presentis  scripti  patrocinio  communimus  :  Nulli  ergo  omnino  hominum  liceat 
hanc  paginam  nostre  confirmationis  infringere,  vel  ei  ausu  temerario  con- 
traire ;  si  quis  autem  lioc  attemptare  presumpserit  indignationem  omni- 
potentis  Dei  et  beatorum  Petri  et  Pauli  apostolorum  eius  se  uouerit  incursu- 
rum  :  Datum  Pictauie  nonis  Januarii  poutificatus  nostri  anno  tertio. 


30.  BuLLA  pkotectioxis  et  i>;iiibitionis  contra  vadiatokes  captokes  et 

detextores  bonorum  de  Cambuskynxeth. 

Clemens  episcopus  seruus  seruorum  Dei,  dilectis  filiis  abbati  et  conuentui 

monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth,  ordinis  Sancti  Augustini,  Sanctiandree  diocesis. 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


51 


salutem  et  apostolicam  benedictionem  :  Ex  parte  vestra  fuit  propositum  coram 
nobis  quod  nonnuUi  clerici  et  ecclesiastice  persone,  tam  religiosi  quam  secu- 
lares  et  laici,  asserentes  se  in  vos  aliquid  questionis  liabere,  aliquando  cano- 
nicos,  interdum  vero  conuersos  et  nonnulla  animalia  et  alia  bona  monasterii 
vestri,  pretextu  cujusdam  praue  cousuetudinis,  temeritate  propria,  capere, 
vadiare  ac  tamdiu  detiuere  presumunt  donec  sit  eis  de  liuiusmodi  questionibus 
juxta  ipsorum  beneplacitum  satisfactum,  quamquam  jurisdictionem  in  vos 
non  babeaut  ordinariam  vel  etiaui  delegatam  ;  cum  itaque  iudicialis  vigor 
ideo  sit  in  medio  constitutus,  vt  nemo  sibi  audeat  sumere  vltionem,  et  ad  hoc 
id  tanquam  nullo  jure  subuixum  non  sit  aliquatenus  tollerandum  :  nos 
volentes  in  bac  parte  paci  et  quieti  vestre  consulere,  et  predictis  maliciis 
obuiare,  autoritate  presencium  districtius  iubibemus  ne  quis  occasione  predicte 
consuetudinis  vobis  memoratas  inferre  molestias  et  bona  monasterii  predicti 
absque  jiu-is  ordine  capere,  vadiare  seu  quomodolibet  detinere  presumat : 
NuHi  ergo  omnino  bominum  liceat  banc  paginam  nostre  inbibitionis  infringere, 
vel  ei  ausu  temerario  contraire ;  siquis  autem  hoc  attemptare  presumpserit,  in- 
dignationem  omnipotentis  Dei  et  beatorum  Petri  et  Pauli  apostolorum  eius 
se  nouerit  incursurum  :  Datum  Pictauie  quintodecimo  Kalendas  Fein-uarii, 
pontificatus  nostri  anno  tertio.  Clemens  Papa. 


31.    BULLA  DE  PROUISIONIS  PENSIONUM  SEU  BENEFICIOEUM  NON  FACIENDO. 

Innocentius  episcopus  seruus  seruorum  Dei,  dilectis  filiis  abbati  et  conuentui 
de  Cambuskynnetb,  ordinis  Sancti  Augustini,  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  salutem 
et  apostoUcam  benedictiouem  :  Paci  ac  tranquilUtati  vestre  ac  ecclesie  vestre 
ad  preces  dUecti  fiUi  nobiUs  viri  "WUleUni  de  Lindesay  et  aliorum  nunciorum 
carissimi  in  Christo  filii  nostri  regis  Scotie  Ulustris,  paterna  volentes  in  poste- 
rum  soUcitudine  prouidere,autoritate  vobis  presencium  indulgemus  vt  ad  recep- 
tionem  vel  prouisionem  aUcuius  in  pensionibus  seu  aUis  ecclesiasticis  beneficiis 


52 


REGISTBITM  MONASTERII 


compelli  aiitoritate  sedis  apostolice  minime  valeatis  absque  speciali  mandato 
sedis  eiiisdem  faciente  de  liac  indulgencia  mentionem :  Nulli  ergo  omnino 
hominum  liceat  liauc  paginam  nostre  concessionis  infringere,  vel  ei  ausu 
temerario  contraire  ;  si  quis  autem  lioc  attemptare  presumpserit  indignationem 
omnipotentis  Dei  et  beatorum  Petri  et  Pauli  apostolorum  eius  se  nouerit  in- 
cursurum  :  Datum  Lugduni  sexto  Kalendas  Augusti,  pontificatus  nostri 
anno  quarto.  Innocentius  Papa. 


32.    BUILA  IN  QUA  CONCEDITUE  ABBATI  VTI  MITEA  ANKULIS  ET  POPULUM 
BENEDICEKE. 

PjENEDICTUS  episcopus  seruus  .seruorum  Dei,  dilectis  filiis  Patricio  abbati  et 
conventui  luonasterii  de  Cambu.skynneth,  ordinis  Sancti  Augustini,  Sancti- 
andree  diocesis,  .salutem  et  apostolicam  benedictionem  :  Exposcit  vestre  deuo- 
tionis  sinceritas  et  religionis  promeretur  honestas,  vt  tam  vos  quos  speciali 
dilectione  prosequimur.quam  monasteriumvestrum  dignis  honoribus  accolamus, 
hinc  est  quod  nos  vestris  iu  hac  partc  supplicationibus  inclinati  vt  tu,  fili  abbas, 
et  successores  tui,  abbates  dicti  monasterii  qui  pro  tempore  fuerint,  mitra, 
annulo  et  aliis  pontificalibus  insigniis  libere  possitis  vti ;  necnon  quod  in 
dicto  mouasterio  et  prioratibus  eidem  monasterio  subiectis,  ac  parrochialibus 
et  aliis  ecclesiis  ad  vos  communiter  vcl  diuisim  pertinentibus,  quamvis  uobis 
pleno  jure  non  subsit,  benedictionem  solemnem  post  missarum,  vesperoi-um  et 
matutinarum  solemnia,  dummodo  in  benedictione  huiusmodi  abquis  antistes 
vel  sedis  apostolice  legatus  presens  non  fuerit,  elargiri  possitis  felicis  recorda- 
tionis  Alexaudri  pajie  quarti  predecessoris  nostri,  que  incipit — Abbates,  et 
aliis  quibuscunque  constitutionibus  apostolicis  in  coutrarium  editis  nequaquam 
obstantibus,  uobis  et  eisdem  successoribus  autoritate  apostolica  de  speciali 
gracia  tenore  presencium  indulgemus :  NuEi  ergo  omnino  hominum  liceat 
hanc  paginam  nostre  concessionis  infringere,  vel  ei  ausu  temerario  contraire, 


T)E  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


53 


si  qiiis  autein  lioc  attemptare  presumpserit,  indignationem  omnipotentis  Dei 
et  beatorum  Petri  et  Pauli  apostolorum  eius  se  nouerit  incursurum  :  Datum 
Saone  vndecimo  Kalendas  Aprilis,  pontifieatus  nostri  anno  duodecinio. 


33.    BULLA  EEUOCATIONIS  QUARUMCUNQUE  POSSESSIONUM  QUALITERCUNQUE 
ALIENATARUM  CONTINENS  CAPITULUM  EA  QUE  DE  BONIS. 

Clemens  episcopus  seruus  seruorum  Dei,  venerabili  fratri  episcopo  Glasguensi 
salutem  et  apostolicam  benedictionem  :  Ad  audienciam  nostram  peruenit 
ipiod  tam  dilecti  filii  abbas  et  conventus  monasterii  de  Cambuslvynnetli,  ordinis 
Sancti  Augustini,  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  quam  j)redecessores  eorum,  decimas, 
redditus,  census,  terras,  domos,  grangias,  piscarias,  prata,  pascua,  lacus,  nemora, 
molendina,  jura,  jurisdictiones,  pensiones  annuas  et  quedam  alia  bona 
ipsius  monasterii,  datis  super  Iioc  literis  confectis  exinde,  publicis  instrumentis 
interpositis, juramentis  factis,renunciationibus  et  penis  adiectis  in  grauem  ipsius 
monasterii  lesionem,  uonnullis  clericis  et  laicis,  aliquibus  eorum  ad  vitain, 
quibusdam  vero  ad  non  modicum  tempus,  et  aliis  perpetuo  ad  firmam  vel  sub 
censu  annuo  concesserunt,  quorum  aliqui  dicuntur  super  hiis  confirmationis 
literas  in  forma  communi  a  sede  apostolica  impetrasse  ;  quia  vero  nostra  interest 
super  liiis  de  oportuno  remedio  prouidere,  fraternitati  tue  per  apostolica  scripta 
mandamus  quatenus  ea  que  de  bonis  ipsius  nionasterii  per  concessiones  huius- 
modi  alienata  inTieneiis  illicite  vel  distracta,  non  obstautibus  literis,  instrumen- 
tis,jurameutis  et  renunciationibus,  penis  et  confirmationibus  supradictis  adjus 
et  proprietatem  eiusdem  monasterii  legilime  reuocare  ;  procuratores,  contradic- 
tores  per  censuram  ecclesiasticam,  appellatione  postposita,  compescendo  : 
testes  autem  qui  fuerunt  norainati,  si  se  gracia,  odio  vel  timore  subtraxerint, 
censura  simili,  appellatione  cessante,  compellas  veritati  testimonium  perhibere : 
Datum  Auinione  tertio  Kalendas  Marcii  pontificatus  nostri  anno  secundo. 


54 


EEGISTRUM  MONASTEEII 


34.    BULLA.  BISPENSATIONIS  CUM  PROPRIETARIIS  CUM  IXJECTIONIBUS 
MANUUM  ET  ALIIS  TRANSGRESSIONIBUS. 

Clemexs  episcopus  seiuus  seruoruin  Dei,  dilecto  filio  abbati  nionasterii  de 
Cambuskyunetli,  ordiuis  Sancti  Augustini,  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  salutem  et 
apostolicam  benedictionem  :  Exliibita  nobis  tua  petitio  continebat  quod  non- 
nuUi  nionasterii  tui  canonici  et  conuersi  pro  violenti  iniectione  manuum  in 
se  ipsos,  et  quidani  pro  detentione  proprii,  alii  etiam  pro  denegata  tibi  et  pre- 
decessoribus  tuis  obediencia  seu  conspirationis  offensa  iu  excomniunicationis 
laqueum  iuciderunt,  quorum  canonicorum  quidam  diuina  celebraruut  officia, 
quidam  exceperuut  ordines  sic  ligati:  Quare  super  liiis  eorum  prouidere  saluti 
a  nobis  humiliter  postulasti ;  de  tua  itaque  circimispectione  plenam  in  Domino 
fiduciam  obtinentes  discretioni  tue  presencium  autoritate  concedimus  vt  eosdem 
excommunicatos  liac  vice  absoluas  ab  liuiusmodi  excommunicationis  sentenciis 
iuxta  formam  ecclesie  vice  nostra,  iniungens  eis  quod  de  jure  fuerit  iuiungen- 
dum  ;  prouiso  vt  manuum  injectores  quorum  fuerit  grauis  et  enormis  excessus 
mittas  ad  sedeni  apostolicam  absoluendos;  cum  illis  autem  ex  eisdem  canonicis 
quifacti  immemoresvel  juris  ignari  absolutiouis  beueficio  nonobteuto  receperunt 
ordines  et  diuina  officia  celebraruut,  iniuncta  eis  pro  modo  culpe  penitencia 
competenti :  Eaque  peracta  liceat  tibi  de  misericordia  que  superexaltat  judicio 
prout  eorum  saluti  expedire  videris  dispensare  ;  si  vero  prefati  canonici  excom- 
municati  scienter  talia  non  tamen  in  coutemptum  clavium  presumpserunt 
eis  per  bieunium  ab  ordiuum  executioue  suspeusis  et  imposita  iUis  penitencia 
salutari,  eos  postmodum  si  fuerint  bone  conuersiouis  et  vite  ad  gratiam  dis- 
pensationis  admittas  ;  proprium  autem  si  quod  liabent  dicti  cauouici  et 
conuersi  iu  tuis  facias  mauibus  resiguari  in  vtilitatem  dicti  monasterii  conver- 
tendum :  Datum  Tictauie  uouis  Jauuarii,  poutificatus  nostri  auuo  tertio. 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


55 


35.    BULLA  EA  QUE  DE  BOXIS  PER  PaTKICIUM  CALEXTER. 

EuGENius  episcopus  seruus  seruorum  Dei,  venerabili  fratri  episcopo  Dunbla- 
nensi  salutem  et  apostolicam  benedictionem  :  Ad  audienciam  nostram  peruenit 
quod  tam  dUecti  filii  Patricius  abbas  et  conuentus  monasterii  Sancte  Marie  de 
CambuskjTineth,  ordiuis  Sancti  Augustini,  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  quam  pre- 
decessores  eorum  qui  fueruut  pro  tempore,  decimas,  terras,  domos,  veuias, 
grangias,  piscarias,  castra,  villas,  casalia,  prata,  stagna,  lacus,  pascua,  nemora, 
molendina,  redditus,  possessiones,  jura,  jurisdictiones  et  cpiedam  alia  bona 
ipsius  monasterii,  datis  super  hoc  literis,  confectis  exinde  publicis  instrumentis, 
iuterpositis  juramentis,  factis  renunciationibus  et  penis  adiectis,  ia  grauem 
ipsius  monasterii  lesionem,  nonnullis  clericis  et  laicis,  aliquibus  eorum  ad 
vitam,  quibusdam  vero  ad  non  niodicuni  tempus  et  aliis  perpetuo  ad  firmam 
vel  sub  censu  annuo  concesserunt,  cpiorum  aliqui  dicunt  super  hiis  confirma- 
tionis  iiteras  in  forma  communi  a  sede  apostolica  impetrasse  :  Qma  vero 
nostra  interest  super  hoc  de  oportuno  remedio  prouidere,  fraternitati  tue  per 
apostolica  scripta  niandamus  cpiatenus  ea  cpie  de  bonis  ipsius  monasterii  per 
concessiones  huiusmodi  alienata  iuueneris  illicite  vel  distracta,  non  obstautibus 
literis,  instrumentis,  juramentis,  renunciationibus,  penis  et  confirmationibus 
supradictis  ad  jus  et  proprietatem  eiusdem  monasterii  legitime  reuocare 
procures,  contradictores  per  censuram  ecclesiasticam,  aj^ii^ellatione  postposita, 
compescendo  ;  testes  autem  cpii  fuerunt  nominati  si  se  gracia,  odio,  vel  timore 
subtraxerint  censura  simili,  appellatione  cessante,  compellas  veritati  testimo- 
nium  perhibere :  Datum  Eome  apud  Sanctum  Petrum,  anno  incarnationis 
Dominice  millesimo  cpiadringentesimo  tricesimo  tertio  pridie  nonas  Junii, 
pontificatus  nostri  anno  tertio. 


56 


IIEGISTRUM  MONASTEEII 


BALCORMOK.  36.    DONATIO  QUATUOR  BOCATAEU.M  TEKEAEUM  DE  B.VLCOEMOK. 

Walteeus  filiu.s  Pliilippi  de  Luudin,  vniiiersis  saucte  niatris  ecclesie  filiis  salu- 
tem:  Sciant  presentes  et  futuri  me  dedisse  et  coucessisse  et  hac  cartamea  coufir- 
masse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte  Llarie  de  Striueling  et  aLliati  et  canonieis  ibidem 
Deo  seruieutibus  quatuor  bouatas  terre  cum  plenario  tofto  in  villa  de  Balcormok, 
et  communem  pasturani  totius  terre  mee,  quicunque  eam  tenuerit,  vbicunque 
propria  animalia  siue  lioniinum  meorum  pascunt,  nominatim  quiugentis  oui- 
bus  et  viginti  vaccis,  et  vni  carucate  boum  et  equis  et  ceteris  que  ad  Lec  per- 
tinent,  et  propriam  luulturam  doudnii  <puetam,  et  tres  acras  prati,  sicut  eas 
perambulaui,  pro  saluteauime  mee,  et  animepatris  mei,  et  pro  auimabus  ante- 
cessorum  meoruui,  ad  teneudum  de  me  et  Iieredibus  meis  in  perpetuam 
elemosiuam,  iu  aqiiis  et  pascuis,  ita  libere  et  quiete  et  liouorifice  sicut  aliqua 
elemosiua  iu  totaterraab  omni  seruicio  seculari  liberius  et  quietius  et  honori- 
ficentius  tenetur  et  possidetur  :  Testibus  hiis,  Johaune  abbate  de  Calcho,  li, 
abbate  de  Abirbrothok,  Duuecauo  comite,  Michaele  clerico,  Petro  de  Opijido, 
Willeluio  filio  Thore,  jNIacbeth  de  Mestriu,  Patricio  filio  eius,  Ace  de  Sterueliug, 
Eadulpho  presliytero,  et  aliis. 


37.  All\  carta  de  Balcoemok. 
TnoMAS  filius  Walteri  de  Liuidin,  vuiuersis  sancte  matris  ecclesie  filiis  saluteni : 
Sciaut  preseutes  et  futuri  me  concessisse  et  hac  carta  mea  confirmasse  Deo  et 
ecclesie  Sancte  Marie  de  Striueling  et  abbati  et  cauouicis  ibidem  Deo  seruieu- 
tibus  quatuor  bouatas  terre  cum  pleuario  tofto  iu  villa  de  Balcormok,  et  com- 
nmuem  pasturam  totius  terre  mee  quicuuque  eam  teuuerit,  vbicuuque  propria 
aniuialia  siue  homiuum  meorum  pascuut,  nominatim  quiugeutis  ouibus,  et 
^•igiuti  vaccis,  et  vni  carucate  boum,  et  equis  et  ceteris  que  ad  hec  pertiueut, 
et  propriam  multuram  domiuii  quietam,  et  tres  acras  prati  sicut  pater  meus 
eas  perambulaiut  pro  salute  auime  mee  et  aniuie  patris  mei  et  pro  animabus 


DE  CAMBUSKEXXETH. 


antecessomiu  meorurn :  ad  tenenduni  de  me  et  beredibus  meis  in  perpetuam 
eleniosinam,  iu  aquis  et  ptascuis,  ita  libere  et  quiete  et  honorifice  sicut  carta 
predicta  patris  mei  Walteri  testatur ;  hiis  testibus,  Philippo  de  Stichill,  Dauid 
de  Balcormok,  Andrea  de  Stradhelm,  Galfredo  de  jMaleuile,  Galfrido  vicecomite 
de  Karell,  Edwardo  filio  Patricii  de  Steruelin,  et  multis  aliis. 


BALCORMUK, 


38.   CONFIEMATIO  WlLLELMI  EEGIS  SDPEE  PEEDICTA  TEEEA  DE  EaLCOEMOK. 

WiLELMUS  Dei  gracia  Eex  Scotorum  omnibus  probis  hominibus  tocius  terre  sue, 
clericis  et  laicis,  salutem  :  Sciant  presentes  et  futuri  me  concessisse  et  hac  carta 
mea  confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte  Marie  de  Striueling  et  canonicis  ibidem 
Deo  seruientibus  donationem  illam  quam  Walterus  filius  Philippi  de  Lundin 
eis  fecit  de  quatuor  bouatis  terre  cum  vno  plenario  tofto  in  villa  de  Balcormac, 
cum  communi  pastura  tocius  terre  sue,  ita  quod  vbicunque  propria  animalia 
ipsius  Walteri  siue  hominum  suorum  pascunt  habebunt  predicti  canonici 
pasturam,  nominatim  ad  quingentas  oues,  et  ad  viginti  vaccas  et  ad  unam 
carucatam  boum,  et  ad  equos  et  ad  cetera  que  ad  hec  pertinent :  Tenendam  sibi 
de  predicto  Waltero  et  heredibus  suis  in  liberam  et  quietam  et  perpetuam 
elemosinam  cum  propria  multura  dominii  sui  libera  et  quieta,  ita  libere  et 
quiete,  plenarie  et  honorifice,  sicut  carta  predicti  Walteri  testatur,  saluo  ser- 
uicio  meo :  Testibus  comitibus  (comite)  Gilleberto ;  Eicardo  de  Prebenda, 
clerico  meo ;  Eoberto  de  Quinci ;  Philippo  de  Valoniis  camerario  meo ; 
Alexandro  vicecomite  meo  de  Striueling ;  Philippo  de  Limdin  ;  Eadulpho  de 
Camera ;  Eicardo  filio  Hugonis,  apud  StriueHug. 


39.  Carta  de  Beewico. 
Umueesis  sancte  matris  ecclesie  filiis  presentes  literas  inspecturis,  Johannes 
de  Londone  maior  Berwici  super  Tuedam,  salutem  in  Domino  :  Cum  nobis  per 
fidelem  inquisitionem  vicinie  constitisset  religiosos  viros  abbatem  et  con- 

8 


58 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


uentum  de  Cambuskyuneth  anuuatim  pacis  temporibus  recepisse,  recipere- 
que  debere  de  quadam  terra  in  villa  de  Berwico  in  vico  Sancte  Marie 
jacente  inter  terram  quondam  Tliome  Stremistone  ex  parte  occidentali,  et 
terram  quondam  Willelmi  Caldronar  ex  parte  orientali,  viginti  solidos  Ster- 
liiigorum  eisdem  religiosis  legitime  in  puram  liberam  et  perpetuam  datam 
elemosinam  ab  antiquo,  ac  mota  demum  discordia  inter  dictos  religiosos  ex 
parte  vna,  et  Jacobum  de  Colonia  tenentem  suum  de  eadem  terra  ex  altera, 
super  dicta  pensione  annua  viginti  solidorum  ejusque  arreragiis,  a  cujus  pen- 
sionLs  annue  solutione  aliquibus  annis  cessatum  fuerat  ob  causam  turbationis 
guerre  inter  Scotie  et  Anglie  regna,  mote  ipsa  dissentionis  causa  quieuit  in 
liunc  modum;  videlicet,  cum  redditus  ipsius  terre  non  modicum  dimiuuti 
essent  propter  guerram  idemque  Jacobus  dominus  ejusdem  terre  nomine 
firme  de  dicta  terra  leuare  nou  poterit  nisi  viginti  sex  solidos  et  octo  denarios 
annuatim  cuius  redditus  consueuerunt  multo  amplius  habundare,  idem  abbas 
et  conuentus  huiusmodi  diminutionem  in  redditibus  prefate  terre  consider- 
antes,  eidem  omiua  arreragia  remiseruut  et  ab  eodem  Jacobo  et  Thoma  dicto 
Walkar  tenente  suo,  heredibus  suis,  successoribus  suis  et  assignatis  tresdecim 
solidos  et  quatuor  denarios  nomine  viginti  solidorum  predictorum  ad  duos 
terminos  annuatim  recipere  concesseruut,  videlicet,  niedietatem  ad  festum 
sancti  Martini  in  hieme,  et  aliam  medietatem  ad  festum  penthecostes  :  Et  si 
contingat  redditus  et  emolumenta  ipsius  terre  eidem  Jacobo,  eius  heredibus, 
successoribus  vel  assiguatis  excrescere  in  futurum  vltra  viginti  sex  solidos  et 
octo  denarios  annuatim,  totius  incrementi  huiusmodi  prefati  religiosi  habeant 
partem  dimediam  imperpetuum,  et  qui&juid  possessionis,  dominii  vel  juris 
alterius  obuenerit  vel  obueuire  poterit  eidem  Jacobo  suis  heredibus,  succes- 
soribus  vel  assignatis  de  eadem  terra,  parciarii  fiant  idem  religiosi  cura  dicto 
Jacobo,  eius  heredibus,  successoribus  et  assignatis  ac  totius  juris  quod  idem 
Jacobus  prius  in  solidum  habebat  in  eadeni  terra  exnunc  idem  Jacolius  pre- 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


59 


dictis  religiosis  coucessit  et  donaiut,  vt  cum  ipso,  lieredibus  suis,  successoribus 
vel  assignatis  fuit  (sint)  imperpetaum  domini  parciales,  vt  de  eisdem  reKgiosis 
in  posterum  in  parte  teneatur  sicut  de  ipso  Jacobo  prius  in  solidimi  tenebatur, 
et  bene  licebit  eisdem  religiosis  eorumque  successoribus  et  attornatis  dictum 
teuementum  quociens  necesse  fuerit  distriugere  pro  annuo  redditu  supradicto  : 
lu  cuius  rei  testimonium  parti  liuius  indenture  penes  predictos  religiosos 
remanenti  idem  Jacobus  sigilluni  suum  appo.suit,  et  sigillimi  commune  dicte 
ville  Berwici  causa  maioris  securitatis  appoui  procurauit,  alteri  vero  parti  penes 
dictum  Jacobum  remanenti  predicti  religiosi  commune  sigillum  capituli  sui 
appouebaut,  datum  apud  Beruicum  predictum  anno  Domini  millesimo  triceu- 
tesimo  vicesimo  quarto  ;  Testibus  Jolianue  de  London  tunc  maiore  de  Berwico, 
"Willelmo  Scberar,  Egidio  de  Muudrum,  Johanne  Korniand,  Roberto  "\'iched, 
tuuc  balliuis,  et  multis  aliis. 


40.  Caeta  de  terea  Beem-ici. 

Uniuersis  sancte  matris  ecclesie  filiis  presentes  literas  inspectuiis  Johannes 
de  Loudou  maior  ville  Beruici  super  Tuedam  salutem  in  Domino  :  Cum  nobis 
per  fidelem  inquisitiouem  viciuie  constitisset  religiosos  vii-os  abljateui  et 
conuentum  de  Cambuskynneth  pacis  temporibus  recepisse  recipereque  debere 
de  quadam  terra  in  villa  de  Berwico  in  vico  Sancte  Marie  jaceute  inter  terram 
quondam  Thome  de  Streminstone  ex  parte  occidentali,  et  terram  quondam  Wil- 
lelmi  Caldroner  es'  parte  orientaH,  viginti  solidos  sterlingorum  eisdem 
religiosis  legitime  in  puram  et  perpetuam  liberam  datam  elemosinam  ab 
antiquo,  ac  mota  demum  discordia  inter  dictos  religiosos  ex  parte  vna  et 
Jacobum  de  Colonia  tenentem  suum  de  eadem  terra  ex  altera,  super  dicta 
pensione  annua  viginti  solidorum  eiusque  arreragiis  a  cuius  pensionis  annue 
solutione  aliquibus  annis  cessatuni  fuerat  ob  causam  turbationis  guerre  inter 


60 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


Scotie  et  Anglie  regna  mote,  ipsa  disseutionis  materia  quieuit  in  luinc  modum  : 
videlicet,  cum  redditus  ipsius  terre  non  modicum  diminuti  essent  propter 
guerram,  idemque  Jacobus  dominus  eiusdem  terre  nomine  firme  de  dicta 
terra  leuare  non  poterit  nisi  vigiuti  sex  solidos  et  octo  denarios  annuatim 
cuius  redditus  consueuerunt  multo  amplius  babundare,  concesserunt  idem 
abbas  et  conuentus  dicto  .Jacolno  et  Thome  dicto  Walker  teuenti  suo  pro  se 
heredibus  suis  successoribus  et  assignatis  se  ad  solutiouem  per  fidem  obli- 
gantibus  et  predictam  terram  recipere  singulis  annis  de  eadem  tresdecim 
solidos  et  quatuor  denarios  ad  duos  anui  termiuos,  videlicet,  medietatem  ad 
festum  Sancti  Martini  in  hienie,  et  aliam  medietatem  ad  festum  Penthecostes  ; 
et  si  contingat  redditus  et  emolumenta  ipsius  terre  eidem  Jacobo  eius  here- 
dibus,  successoribus  vel  assignatis  excrescere  in  futurum  vltra  viginti  sex 
solidos  et  octo  denarios  annuatim,  totius  incrementi  huiusmodi  prefati  reli- 
giosi  habeant  partem  dimediam  inperpetuum,  et  quicquid  possessionis  dominii 
vel  juris  alterius  obueuerit  vel  obuenire  poterit  eidem  Jacobo,  suis  heredibus, 
successoribus  vel  assignatis  vel  eius  tenentibus  de  eadem  terra  parciarii  fiant 
iidem  religiosi,  cum  dicto  Jacobo,  eius  heredibus,  successoribus  vel  assignatis, 
ac  totius  juris,  quod  idem  Jacobus  prius  in  solidum  habebat  in  eadem  ten-a, 
oxnunc  idem  Jacobus  predictis  religiosis  concessit  et  donauit,  vt  cum  if)so, 
herediVnis  suis,  successoribus  suis  vel  assignatis  suis  (sint)  imperpetuum  domini 
parciales,  vt  de  eisdem  i-eligiosis  in  posterum  in  parte  teneatur  sicut  de  ipso 
Jacobo  prius  in  solidum  tenebatur,  et  bene  licebit  eisdem  religiosis  eorumque 
successoribus  et  attornatis  dictum  tenementum  quotiens  necesse  fuerit  dis- 
tringere  pro  annuo  redditu  supradicto :  In  cuius  rei  testimoniuni  parti 
huius  indenture  penes  predictos  religiosos  remanenti  sigillum  dicti  Jacobi  est 
appensum,  et  sigilhim  commune  dicte  ville  Berwici,  idem  Jacobus  causa 
maioris  securitatis  apponi  procuravit ;  alteri  vero  parti  peues  dictum  Jacobum 
remaneuti  predicti  religiosi  commuui  sigillum  capituli  sui  appouebant :  Datum 


%Vfl  jiu^Cffm^  XffHiififftitn^  ja^nf^^  ^(fc^nt^ 


1)E  CAMBUSKENXETH. 


Gl 


;ipud  Berwicum  predictum  vicesimo  die  Octobris  anuo  Domini  millesimo 
tricentesimo  vicesimo  quarto ;  Testibus  Joliaune  de  Londoue  tuuc  JSIaiore 
de  Berwico,  Willelmo  Scherar,  Egidio  de  Mindriuii,  .Tohanue  Normand, 
Koberto  Wiched,  tunc  balliuis,  et  multis  aliis. 


■41.    BUTHKEXNER  SOLUEXDI  rKECEPTUJI. 

ROBERTUS  Dei  gracia  Eex  Scotonim  vicecomiti  et  balliuis  suis  de  Striueling 
liui  pro  tempore  fuerint  sahitem :  Mandamus  vobis  et  precipimus  quatenus 
religiosis  viris  abbati  et  couuentui  de  Cambuslcynneth  annuatim  persolui 
laciatis  decimam  firmarum  nostrarum  de  Buthkenner  et  de  Atliray,  tam  in 
frumento,  quam  iu  deuariis,  per  manus  firmariorum  terrarum  predictarum, 
sicut  percipere  consueuerunt  tempore  Eegis  Alexandri  predecessoris  nostri 
vltimo  defuncti  integraliter  et  sine  cUminutione  in  escambium  decimarum 
dominiorum  nostrorimi  de  StriueUng,  que  por  antecessores  nostros  Eeges  Scotie 
eis  priniitus  fuerant  collate,  et  nos  ipsas  decimas  vobis  iu  comjDotis  vestris 
faciemus  annis  singulis  plenius  allocari :  Teste  meipso,  apud  Edinburgh  decimo 
septimo  die  Septembris  auno  regui  uostri  duodecimo. 

42.  Preceptum  vicecomitibus  de  Striueling  perDauid  Eegeji  de  octo 
libeis  £t  quinque  denaeiis  et  sex  celdris  frumenti  de  both- 

KEXXEE  ET  DE  DECIMIS  FIEMAUUM  DE  Atheray. 
Dauid  Dei  gracia  Eex  Scotorum  omnibus  probis  homiuibus  suis  ad  quos 
presentes  litere  peruenerint  sahitem :  Sciatis  nos  inspexisse  ac  veraciter 
iutellexisse  literas  recolende  memorie  domini  patris  nostri  non  abolitas  non 
cancellatas  nec  in  aliqua  sui  parte  viciatas  iu  hec  verba :  Eobeetus  Dei 
gracia  Eex  Scotonmi  vicecomiti  et  balliuis  suis  de  Striueling  qui  pro  tempore 
fuerint  sahitem :  Mandamus  vobis  et  precipimus  quatenus  reUgiosis  viris 
abbati  et  couuentui  de  Cambuskynneth  annuatim  persohii  faciatis  octo  libras 


BUTHKENNER. 


G2  REGISTEUM  MOXASTERIl 

argenti  et  quinque  denarios,  sex  ceklras  frumeuti  de  Bothkeuner  et  decimaiu 
firme  de  Atlieray  per  mauus  firmariorum  terrarum  predictarum  sicut  percipere 
consueueruut  tempore  Eegis  Alexaudri  jiredecessoris  nostri  vltimo  defuncti 
integraliter  et  sine  diminutioue  in  excambium  decimarum  dominiorum  nos- 
trorum  de  Striueling  que  per  autecessores  nostros  Eeges  Scotie  eis  primitus 
fuerant  collate  :  Et  quid  in  hoc  apposueritis  vobis  in  compotis  vestris  annis 
singulis  faciemus  plenius  allocari :  Teste  meipso  apud  Perth  decimo  nono  die 
Augusti  anno  regui  nostri  decimo.  Quas  quidem  literas  predicti  domini 
patris  uostri  nos  iu  omuibus  et  per  omnia  forma  pariter  et  effectu  appro- 
bantes  et  ratificantes,  ac  pro  nobis  et  heredibus  nostris  imperpetuum  coutir- 
mantes,  vicecomiti  et  balliuis  suis  de  Striueliug  qui  pro  tempore  fueriut  dis- 
tricte  precipiendo  mandamus  quod  predictos  Eeligiosos  de  octo  libris  quinque 
denariis  sex  celdris  frumenti,  et  de  decima  firme  de  Atheray  ad  terminos 
consuetos  juxta  teuorem  literarum  domiui  patris  nostri  eisdem  religiosis 
superius  coucessarum  faciant  annuatim  deseruiri :  In  cuius  rei  testimo- 
nium  has  literas  nostras  eisdem  religiosis  imperpetuum  duraturas  sibi  fieri 
fecimus  patentes,  apud  Striueling  viccsimo  die  Nouembris  anuo  regui  nostri 
sextodecimo. 


43.    BUTHKENNER  FKUMENTO  ADDITUR  CELDRA  PER  DOMINUM  AbBER- 
CORNUM. 

Vniuersis  Cristi  fidelibus  ad  quorum  noticiam  preseutes  litere  perueuerint, 
Willelmus  More  dominus  de  Abircorne  salutem  in  omnium  Saluatore  :  Nouerit 
vniuersitas  vestra  quod  cum  religiosi  viri  abbas  et  conuentus  monasterii  beate 
Marie  de  Cambuskynneth  ab  olim  infeodati  fueruut,  in  puram  et  perpetuam 
elemosinam,  per  cartas  recolende  memorie  diuersorum  regum  Scotorum  traus- 
actorum,  de  sex  celdris  frumenti  anuui  redditus  percipieudi  de  terra  de 
Bothkenner  nunc  nobis  jure  hereditario  coutingente  :     Nosque    dictis   reli- 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETIL 


63 


giosis,  et  ipsi  mouasterio,  tam  zelo  deuotionis  quam  ex  aliis  causis  variis 
afticiamur  corJiter  et  multipliciter  teneamur,  damus,  concedimus  et  presentis 
scripti  seu  carte  nostre  serie  confirmamus,  et  in  puram,  liberam  et  perpetuam 
elemosinam  prefato  monasterio  de  Cambuskynneth  et  religiosis  ibidem  Ueo 
et  beate  Marie  semper  virgini  seruientibus  et  in  perpetuum  seruituris,  iu 
augmentationem  dicti  auuui  redditus  vnam  ceklram  frumeuti  auuue  peusionis  : 
Tenendam,  habendam  ac  percipieudam  dictam  celdram  frumenti,  nnacum 
sex  celdris  preuominatis,  eisdem  religiosis  a  nobis,  heredibus  et  assignatis 
nostris  annis  singulis  imperpetuum  adeo  pure,  grate,  promjite  et  libere  sicut 
aliqua  pura,  libera  et  perpetua  elemosina  alicui  loco  religioso  ab  alicjuo  dari 
poterit,  per  modum  pariter  infrascriptum,  videlicet,  quod  totas  septem  celdras 
frumenti  prenominatas  de  adeo  bono  frumento  vannato,  sicut  crescit  infra 
territorium  de  Bothkenner,  de  bona  et  legali  meusura,  ad  locum  qui  dicitur 
Mouth  of  Carounc  iufra  quindenam  quamcuuque  inter  pascha  scilicet 
et  penthecosten  a  tempore  quo  per  ipsos  premuniti  fuerimus  eas  recipere 
volueriut,  faciemus  nostris  sumptibus  cariari  et  ipsorum  seruientibus  liberari, 
conditione  communis  guerre  allocanda  dumtaxat,  si  coutigerit,  prout  vt  jus 
exigit  in  hoc  casu :  ad  quamquidem  deliberatiouem  et  solutiouem  septem 
celdrarum  frumeuti  modo  quo  premittitur  facieudam  et  perimplendam  in  omni- 
bus,  necnon  ad  restitutionem  laborum,  expensarum  et  dampnorum,  si  quos, 
quas  vel  que  ipsi  religiosi  seu  eorum  seruientes  pro  defectu  deliberationis 
prenominate  incurrerint,  integre  perficiendam,  uos  heredes  et  assignatos 
nostros,  terrasc|ue,  redditus,  possessiones  ac  omnia  bona  nostra  vbicunque 
existunt,  ad  voluntatem  dictorum  religiosorum,  siue  per  miuistros  regios,  siue 
per  suos  proprios,  siue  ecclesiastice  censure  rigorem  obligamus  quauto  firmius 
possumus  per  preseutes,  nullo  proponendo  obstante :  In  cuius  rei  testimouium 
sigiUum  nostrum  presenti  scripto  seu  carte  nostre  est  appensum ;  testibus 
reuerendis  in  Christo  patribus,  domiuis  Willehno  et  Willelmo  Sauctiandree 


BUTHKENNER. 


64 


HEGISTRUM  MOXASTERII 


liUTHKENNER,  et  Glasgueiisis  ecclesianim  Dei  gratia  cpiscopis,  domiiiis  Eoberto  de  Erskin  et 

Alexaudro  Llorn,  militibus,  Eeginaldo  More  tilio  et  lierede  nostro,  Gliilcrist 
ilore  fratre  nostro,  Forsith  clerico,  et  Willelmo  de  Barde,  ac  multis  aliis : 
Datum  apud  Abircorne,  quarto  die  mensis  Octobris  anno  Domini  millesimo 
tricentesimo  sexagesimo  tercio. 

44.    BUTHKENNEK  SEPTEM  CELDRARUM  FRUMENTI  REDDEXDO  PRECEPTUM. 

Jacobus  Dei  gracia  Eex  Scotorum,  vicecomiti  nostro  de  Striueliug,  salutem  : 
Quia  per  religiosos  viros  abbatem  et  comientum  monasterii  de  Cambus- 
kynnetli  nostros  oratores  coucepimus  quod  de  fii-mis  terranmi  de  Butlikenner 
certa  eis  aunua  pensio,  videlicet,  septem  celdrarum  frumeuti,  ex  uostrorum 
progenitoram  concessione  debetur ;  Vobis  igitur  stricte  precipimus  et  man- 
damus  quod  dictarum  terrarum  incolas  ad  integram  realem  dicte  pensionis 
solutionem  debite  et  juris  ordine  compescatis,  sic  quod,  saluo  jnre  cuiuslibet, 
de  vestra  uegligeucia  nullam  iustam  querimoniam  habeamus :  Datum  apud 
Ediuburgli  sub  nostro  secreto  sigiUo,  secundo  die  mensis  Septembris  anno 
regni  nostri  decimo  uouo. 


45.   BUTHKENNER  FRUMENTUM  SEPTEM  CELDR^VEUM  PEO  QUINQUE  MITTATUR. 

Jacobus  Dei  gracia  Eex  Scotorum,  omnibus  probis  Lominibus  tocius  terre  sue 
clericis  et  laicis,  salutem  :  Sciatis  quod  in  plenariam  conteutatiouem  venera- 
bilis  iu  Cliristo  patris  et  religiosorum  virorum  abbatis  et  conuentus  mouas- 
terii  uostri  de  Cambuskyuuetli  pro  quadam  auuua  peusione  septem  celdrarum 
frumenti  de  terris  nostris  de  Butlikenner  cum  pertinenciis  jaceutibus  infra 
vicecomitatum  nostrum  de  Striueling,  quam  pensionem  dicti  abbas  et  con- 
uentus  de  dictis  terris  annuatim  antique  mensure  veudicarunt  et  clamarunt, 
pro  perpetuo  dedimus  et  concessimus  ac  presentium  tenore  damus  et  conce- 
dimus   dictis   abbati   et   conueutui   anuuam   pensiouem   quinque  celdrarum 


w      ^,/^^%^fg^  ^f^^oBQn^i  tt^nHcJi^ 

^a  nniUuf)  mi^ffj  <mci^ffi»yff<^  iy<x€cctfff^^:^^f^ 
^fn^  ibffi£ni^^^  fnv^ffi^a  Q^v^ihy  fn^f^  (ccff^fbv^e 
tffCffH  (cpi^ffW2i^^fHh>  '"^ffrff  /Mjkn  .S^i>^^t*^>*o 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


65 


frumeuti  annuatiin,  de  clictis  terris  de  Botbkenuer  uiensure  currentis  et 
consuete  die  coufectionis  presentis  carte  :  Teueudam  et  habendam  dictam 
annuam  pensionem  quinque  celdrarum  frumenti  meusure  nuuc  currentis,  pro 
dictis  septem  celdris  autiquitus  clamatis,  predictis  abbati  et  conuentui  et 
eorum  successoribus,  de  dictis  terris  de  Botbkenner  anuuatim,  ad  termiuum 
beati  Martini  iu  liieme,  leuandam  et  percipieudara  in  purara  et  perpetuam 
elemosinam,  ac  in  feodo  et  bereditate  imperpetuum,  libere,  quiete,  plenarie, 
integre,  bonorifice,  bene  et  iu  pace,  siue  aliquo  rctiuemento  seu  reuocatione 
([uacunque  :  facieudo  anuuatim  dicti  abbas  et  couuentus  et  eorum  successores 
imperpetuum.pro  uobiset  successoribus  uostris,  orationum  suffragia  deuotarum : 
quare  vicecomiti  uostro  de  Striueliug  et  deputatis  suis,  ac  camerariis,  firniariis, 
et  officiariis  nostris  quorum  iuterest,  qiii  pro  tempore  fuerint,  stricte  precipiendo 
mandamus  quatenus  dictis  abbati  et  conueutui  et  eorum  successoribus  et 
intromissoribus  dictam  annuam  pensionem  quinque  celdrarum  frumenti  ad 
predictum  terminum  annuatim  de  dictis  terris  pro  perpetuo  persolui  faciant, 
sub  omni  peua  C|ue  competere  poterit  in  bac  parte:  Datum  sub  magno  sigillo 
nostro  apud  Striueling,  vicesimo  tertio  die  meusis  Septembris,  anuo  Domiui 
millesimo  c|uadringentesimo  cpiinquagesirao  nouo,  et  regni  nostri  vicesimo. 


BUTHKEKKER. 


46.   DONATIO  WlLLELMI  EpISCOPI  SANCTI.\yDPvEE  SUPER  CENTUM  SOLIDOS 
ECCLESIE  DE  BlARE. 

WiLELJius  miseratione  diuina  ecclesie  Sauctiaudree  minister  humilis, 
vniuersis  sancte  matris  ecclesie  filiis  has  literas  visuris  vel  audituris, 
oternam  in  Domino  salutem  :  Nouerit  vniversitas  vestra  nos  diuine  cari- 
tatis  intuitu,  necnon  pro  anima  iuclite  recordatiouis  domini  Eegis  Wil- 
lelmi,  cujus  anime  propicietur  Deus,  dedisse  et  concessisse  Deo  et  abbati 
de  Cambuskynueth,  et  canouicis  ibidem  Deo  seruieutibus,  annuos  ceutum 
solidos    in    ecclesia    de    Blar,    in    puram    et    perpetuam    elemosiuam,   per 

9 


66 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


manum  persone  eiusdem  ecclesie  de  Blare,  nomine  simplicis  beneficii  perci- 
piendos,  scilicet,  quinquaginta  solidos  ad  Penthecosten  et  quinquaginta  solidos 
ad  festum  Sancti  Martini :  Quicunque  igitiir  fuerit  persona  predicte  ecclesie 
de  Blar,  tactis  sacrosanctis,  iurabit  se  predictos  annuos  centum  solidos 
predictis  canonicis  terminis  statutis  fideliter  soluturum :  Et  vt  hec  nostra 
donatio  rata  et  illibata  permaneat,  eam  presentis  scrijjti  patrocinio  cum  sigilli 
nostri  munimine  roborauimus :  Hiis  testibxis,  Eoberto  episcopo  Bossensi, 
magistro  Laurencio  archidiacono  Sanctiandree,  magistro  Stephano,  magistro 
Michaele,  magistro  Eoberto  de  Stichill,  magistro  A[dam]  Ouide,  magistro  Petro 
de  Driburght,  Symone  de  Nusy,  "NV^illelmo]  de  Galin,  Richardo  Camerario, 
et  aliis  multis. 

47.  CoNKiiiJiACio  rpjoras  Sanctiandkee  et  Conuentus  surEE  centum 
SOLIDIS  ecclesie  de  Blar. 
O.MNiBrs  sancte  matris  ecclesie  filiis  :  Dei  gracia  prior  Sanctiandree  et 

eiusdem  loci  conuentus,  salutem  in  Domino  :  Nouerit  vniuersitas  vestra  nos 
ratam  habere  et  gratam  donationem  centum  solidorum  quos  vcnerabilis 
W[illebnus]  Episcopus  Sanctiandree  dedit  canonicis  de  Striueling  in  ecclesia 
de  Blar  et  per  cartam  suam  confirmauit,  singulis  annis  imperpetuum  per 
raanum  persone  ecclesie  de  Blar  jjercipiendos,  sicut  carta  prefati  episcopi 
testatur :  hiis  testibus,  P.  et  G.  de  Dunfermlin  et  de  Abbirbrotliock  abbatibus, 
Y.  abbate  de  Lixndores,  Johanne  priore  de  ^lay,  magistro  L[aurentio]  archi- 
diacono  Sanctiandree. 


48.  Bulla  centum  solidoeum  ecclf.sie  de  Blae. 
Tnnocencius  Episcopus  seruus  seruorum  Dei,  dilectis  filiis  canonicis  de  Cam- 
busk}'nneth,  salutem  et  apostolicam  benedictionem  :  Cum  a  nobis  petitur  quod 
iustum  est  et  honestvim,  tam  vigor  equitatis  quam  ordo  exigit  rationis  vt  id 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


per  solicitiidiuem  officii  nostri  ad  debitum  producatur  effectum,  ea  propter, 
dilecti  iu  Domiuo  filii,  vestris  justis  precibus  grato  coucurreutes  asseusu, 
anuuum  redditimi  centum  solidorum  in  ecclesia  de  Blare  i^ia  vobis  liberalitate 
collatum,  sicut  eum  iuste  et  canouice  obtinetis  autoritate  vobis  apostolica  con- 
firmamus,  et  presentis  scripti  patrociuio  commuuiuius ;  nulli  ergo  liomiuum 
omnino  liceat  hanc  paginaui  nostre  coufirmaciouis  iufringere,  vel  ei  ausu 
temerario  coutraire ;  si  quis  autem  lioc  attemptare  presumpserit,  indigna- 
tionem  omuipoteutis  Dei  et  beatorum  Petri  et  Pauli  apostolorum  ejus  se 
nouerit  incursurum :  Datum  apud  Vrbem  Veterem,  nono  Maii  pontificatus 
nostri  anno  nouodecimo. 


49.  Badindath  carta. 
Omxibus  lioc  scriptum  visuris  vel  audituris,  Willelmus  de  Ivj-nmonde  et  filius 
et  lieres  Agnetis  filie  quondam  Willelmi  dicti  de  Ketilistoune,  salutem  iu 
Domino  sempiternani :  Nouerit  vniuersitas  vestra  nie,  in  Ijona  sanitate  et 
boua  memoria  coustitutum,  ac  mera  voluntate,  pro  salute  anime  mee  et  ante- 
cessorum  et  successorum  meorum  concessisse,  resignasse  et  cpiietum  clamasse 
pro  me  et  beredibus  meis  iuperpetuum,  totam  terram  de  Badindatli,  cum 
omnibus  juribus,  libertatibus  et  pertiueuciis  suis,  viris  religiosis  abbati  et 
conuentui  de  Cambuskynueth  veris  domiuis  dicte  terre  de  Badyudatli,  et  totum 
jus  et  clameum  quod  ego  seu  lieredes  mei  aut  quicunque  successores  habuimus 
vel  liabere  potuimus,  seu  in  posterum  liabere  poterimus  in  dicta  terra,  ac  iu 
totum  jus  qiiod  liabuimus  vel  habere  potuimus  seu  habere  poterimus  iu 
futurum  in  octo  marcis  cpuis  de  ipsis  rehgiosis  percipere  cousueui :  Quam 
quidem  ten-am  predictus  Willelmus  auus  meus  tenuit  de  dictis  abbate  et 
conuentu  sibi  et  vnico  tantum  heredi :  Et  quia  mater  mea  moriebatur  ante 
predictum  Willelmiuu  dictum  de  Ketylistoune  auum  meuni  que  mater  mea 
super  vixisset  lieredes  dicte  terre,  in  vita  sua  tantum  fuisset,  similiter  et  dictas 


BAniNDATU. 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


BADINDATH. 


octo  marcas  qiias  pro  tempore  siio  tantum  percipisset ;  ideo  dicta  terra,  cum 
predictis  octo  marcis,  miclii  tanquam  vni  lieredi  et  vltimo  in  vita  mea 
tantiunmodo  descendit,  necnon  et  totum  jus  et  clameum,  si  cpiod  miclii  seu 
heredibus  meis  aut  successoribus  quibuscunqiie  competat  aut  competere 
poterit  in  terris  de  Ketilistoune  et  de  Duglin  et  de  Bynyne  vel  earum  alic^ua, 
(|ue  omnia  sponte  et  absolute  mera  voluntate  mea,  pro  me  et  heredibus  et 
successoribus  quibuscunque  dictis  abbati  et  conuentui  inperpetuum  quietum 
clamaui,  et  per  fustim  et  baculum  in  vigilia  Sancti  Luce  euangeliste  in  tene- 
mento  de  Badindath  in  plena  curia  dictorum  abbatis  et  conuentus,  coram 
midtis  baronibus  ipsis  abbati  couuentui  iiitegraliter  resignaui,  vnacum  cartis 
omiiibus  et  instrumentis  et  munimentis  michi  et  antecessoribus  meis  supra- 
dictis  omnibus  et  singulis  confectis,  volens  et  concedens  pro  me  et  heredibus 
meis  et  successoribus  quibuscuncj^ue  quod  dicti  religiosi  et  eoriun  successores 
imperpetuum  dictas  terras  omnes  et  singulas,  cum  omnibus  juribus,  liber- 
tatibus,  asiamentis  et  pertinenciis  suis  habeant  tancpiam  earum  veri  dommi, 
libere  teneant  et  integraliter  possideant  sine  omni  cahimnia  mei  vel  heredum 
seu  successorum  meorum,  cpiod  quocjue  sint  de  cetero  liberi  et  penitus  im- 
m\uies  a  prestatione  et  sohitione  octo  marcarum  predictarum  et  cuiuscunque 
pensionis  seu  aunui  redJitus,  per  me  seu  per  heredes  meos  vel  successores 
quoscunque  petitis  vel  petendis :  Volo  eciam  et  concedo  quod  si  in  posterum 
aliquod  instrnmentum  reperiatur  vel  osteudatur  quod  miclii  vel  heredibus 
seu  successoribus  meis  aliquod  jus  tribuere  videatur  in  dictis  terris  vel  earum 
aliqua,  seu  eciam  in  dicta  pensione  octo  marcanun  vel  aliqua  alia,  vacuum  sit 
cassum  et  inane,  cuiuscunque  fuerit  tenoris  :  Et  si  contingat  in  posterum 
Cjuod  aliqua  persona,  cuiuscunque  sexus  vel  autoritatis  seu  conditionis,  in  dictis 
terris  vel  eariim  aliqua,  seu  in  pensione  predicta,  aliquod  jus  vendicet  vel 
clameum,  ratione  alicuius  instrumenti  hacteuus  confecti,  seu  ratione  aUcuius 
concessionis  seu  collationis  facte  dicto  AYillehno  de  Ketilistoune  auo  meo,  uel 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETE. 


69 


alicui  persoue  eum  attiuenti,  seu  ratione  alieuius  possessiouis  vel  sasiue  quod 
ipse  Willelmus  in  dictis  terris  vel  earum  aliqua  habuit,  ego  et  heredes  mei 
dictos  abbatem  et  conuentum  contra  omnes  tales  homiues  pariter  et  feminas 
nvarantizabimus,  adc^uietabimus  et  defendemus  et  indempnes  omiiino  conser- 
uabimus :  volo  eciam  et  concedo  pro  me  et  heredibus  meis  et  successoribus 
quod  si  coutiugat  in  posterum  quod  si  aliquis  nostrum  vel  aliquis  nomine 
nostro  in  dictis  terris  seu  pensioue  Vel  earum  aliqua  jus  vel  clamemu  vendi- 
care  presumat,  quod  absit,  aute  litis  ingressum  soluat  fabrice  ecclesie  Sancti- 
andree  nomine  pene  ducentas  libras  sterlingorum,  alioquin  non  audiatur  coram 
quocunque  judice  siue  ecclesiastico  siue  seculari,  nichilominus  rata  maneute 
predicta  quieta  chimatione ;  proniittoque  fideliter  dictis  abbati  et  conueutui 
qualemcuuqxie  securitatem  prouidere  sciuerint  et  voluerint  cum  consilio  suo, 
super  premissis  omuibus  et  singulis  obseruandis  quociens  voluerint  et  eis 
placuerint  facere  et  innouare :  ad  omnia  vero  et  siuguhi  premissa  pro  me  et 
heredibus  meis  et  successoribus  fideliter  et  inu.ioLabiliter  obseruanda,  me  pro  me 
et  ipsis  heredibus  meis  et  successoribus  fide  media  obligaui  et  corporale  nichilo- 
miuus,  tactis  sacrosanctis  ewangeliis,  prestiti  sacramentum,  subiciendo  me  et 
heredes  meos  et  successores  jurisdictioni  episcopi  Sanctiandree  qui  pro 
tempore  fuerit,  vel  eius  officialis,  vt  ipsi  et  eorum  quililjet  qui  super  hoc  fuerit 
requisitus,  nos  et  quemlibet  nostrum  possint  seu  piossit,  quociens  opus  fuerit, 
ad  premissorum  et  singulorum  omuium  obseruanciara  per  quamcunque  cen- 
suram  ecclesiasticam,  monitione  premissa,  compellere;  renunciando  pro  me  et 
heredibus  meis  et  successoribus  omni  cauillatioui,  exceptioni  doli  mali,  regie 
prohibitioui,  privilegio  crucesignatorum  et  fori  constitutioni  de  duabus  dietis 
edite  in  cousilio  generali  beneficio  diui  Adriaui,  et  omni  impetrationi  facte 
et  faciende,  ac  omni  juri  et  facti  remedio  nobis  vel  alicui  nostrum  contra  pre- 
missa  vel  [aliquod]  premissorum  competere  valenti :  In  cuius  rei  testimouium 
presenti  scripto  sigiUura  meum  apposui,  et   ad  iustanciam  meam  sigilhim 


BADINDATU. 


70 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


BAUINDATIi. 


veiierabilis  patris  Eoberti  Dei  gratia  Episcopi  Duublanensis  et  domini  Patrieii 
de  Graym  viceconiitis  de  Striueling  et  domini  Jobannis  de  Striueling,  militis,  et 
'Willelmi  de  Striveling  fratris,  vnacum  sigillis  commuuitatis  de  Striueliug  et 
Linlithqw,  sunt  appensa :  Acta  in  tenemento  de  Badindath,  in  vigilia  Sancti 
Luce  ewangeliste,  anno  Domini  millesimo  ducentesimo  octuagesimo  secundo  ; 
hiis  testiljus,  Eiehardo  de  Kaleder,  tunc  coustahuhirio  de  Striueling,  Xicliolao 
dicto  Tripena,  domino  Johanne  de  Varia  Capella,  vicario  de  Stobor,  Xigello 
filio  Colini  Campbell,  Eichardo  dicto  Prethir,  biirgensi  de  Striueling,  Gilcrist 
Magilmore,  Ginastop  fratre  eius,  Eichardo  dicto  Erimymare  de  Clacmannan,  et 
multis  aliis. 


50.  Cakta  okiginalis  et  confirmatio  Eegis  JIalcolmi  de  terkis 
Cambuskynneth  et  piscaria. 
CAMBusKYXNETH.  ]\Ialcoljius    Dci    gracia    Eex    Scotorum,    episcopis,    abbatibus,    comitibus, 

iusticiis,  baronibus,  vicecomitibus,  ministris,  et  omnibus  probis  homiuiljus 
suis,  clericis  et  laicis,  totius  regni  sui  quam  presentibus  tam  futuris,  sahttem  : 
Sciatis  me  concessisse  et  hac  mea  carta  confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte 
]\Iarie  de  Striueling,  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus,  donationes  Eegis 
Dauid  aui  mei,  quas  prefate  ecclesie  iii  elemosinam  dedit ;  scilicet,  terram  de 
Cambuskynneth  et  piscaturam  inter  eandem  terram  et  Pollemase,  et  vnum 
rete  in  aqua ;  terram  quoque  de  CoUin,  cum  nemore  suo  ad  eandem  terram 
pertinentem,  cimi  suis  rectis  diuisis  ;  terram  eciam  de  Tulibodevin  que  est 
inter  aquam  eiusJem  terre  et  terram  de  Login  ;  quadraginta  quoque  solidos 
de  redditu  meo  de  Striueling ;  et  canum  vnius  nauis  ;  et  vnam  salinam  et 
totidem  terre  quot  habet  vna  de  salinis  meis ;  et  decimam  firme  de  dominiis 
meis  de  Sterling  et  oblationes  que  in  predicta  ecclesia  oblate  fuerint ;  et 
iusuhxm  que  est  inter  Pohnase  et  Tulibodevin,  et  ^aginti  cudrinis  de  caseis 
redditus  mei  de  Sterling  ;  eandem  quoque  libertatem  et  consuetudinem,  qiiam 


^ 


-^ii^' 


^^a- 


—       I "/  7 


.^r^  S*^?!r^^  <W^1W&  £%-lkQ^^tf^  n^^ 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


71 


ceteris  ecclesiis  terre  mee  concessi  et  coafirmaui,  eiJem  ecclesie  concedo  et 
confirmo  :  Volo  itaque  vt  quicuuque  predictam  ecclesiam  iu  presenti  possidet, 
vel  iu  futuro  possessura  est,  ita  quiete  et  libere  possideat  sicut  aliqiia  ecclesia 
in  toto  reguo  meo  aliquam  elemosiuam  vel  possessionem  quiecius  et  liberius 
possidet  :  Hiis  testibus,  Herberto  Episcopo  de  Glasgw,  liichardo  electo  de 
Sancto  Andrea,  Eugelramo  Caucellario,  ^\'altero  filio  Alaui  dapifero,  Xicliolao 
Camerario,  Osberto  Abbate  de  Geddewrd,  AVillelmo  Abbate  de  Saucta  Cruce, 
Galfrido  Abbate  de  Duufermeliu,  Joliaune  Abbate  de  Kalchocli,  Willehuo 
Abbate  de  Melros,  Amfrido  Abbate  de  Newbottill,  Willelmo  de  .Sumervill, 
Randulj)lio  de  Swlis,  Willelmo  de  Liudesay,  Petro  Clerico  de  Striueliug, 
Hugoue  de  Camera,  Kodolfo  de  Camera,  apud  Oiipidum  ruellarum. 


CAMBUSKYNNETH. 


51.    PkIM.V    CaETA   Or.IGIXALIS    DaUID    PiEGIS    FUXDATOEIS    NOSTIII    DE 

Cambuskyxneth. 
In  nomine  Patris  et  Filii  et  Sj)iritus  Saucti,  ameu :  Ego  Dauid  Dei  gracia 
Pex  Scotorum,  asseusu  Henrici  filii  mei,  et  episcoporum  regui  mei  comi- 
tumque  et  barouum  coufirmatione  et  testimouio,  concedo  ecclesie  Sancte 
jNIarie  de  Striueliug  et  canonicis  in  ea  regulariter  viueutibus  ea  que  subscripta 
sunt,  et  pace  perpetua  coufirmo  :  hec  itaque  suut  (|ne  prefate  ecclesie  couccdo  ; 
terram  de  Cambuskynneth  et  piscaturam  iuter  eandem  terram  et  Pollemase, 
et  vnum  rethe  in  aqua  ;  terram  quoque  de  Colling,  cum  nemore  et  suis  rectis 
diuisis ;  terram  eciam  de  Duubodeuin,  que  est  iuter  aquam  eiusdem  terre  et 
terram  de  Lochin  ;  quadragiuta  quoque  solidos  de  redditu  meo  de  Striueliug ; 
et  cauum  vuius  uauis  ;  et  vuam  saliuam  et  totidem  terre  quot  liabet  vna  de 
salinis  meis  ;  et  decimam  firme  de  domiuiis  meis  de  Striueliug,  et  oblatioues  que 
in  predicta  ecclesia  oblate  fuerint ;  et  insulam  que  est  iuter  Pollemase,  et 
Dunbodeuin,  et  vigiuti  cudermis  de  caseis  redditus  mei  de  Striueling;  eanJem 
quoque  libertatem  et  consuetudiuem  quam  ceteris  ecclesiis  terre  mee  coucessi 


72 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


CAMBUSKYNNETH 


et  confirmaui,  eideni  ecclesie  concedo  et  coufirmo ;  volo  itaque  vt  quecunque 
predicta  ecclesia  in  preseuti  possidet  vel  iu  futuro  possessura  est,  ita  quiete 
et  libere  sicut  ego  prefatas  terras  possideo,  possideant ;  salua  defensione  regni 
etjusticia  regali,  si  prelatus  aliquo  impulsu  a  iusticia  exorbitauerit :  Huius 
confirmationis  testes  suut  comes  Henricus  filius  Eegis,  Eobertus  Episcopus 
Sanctiandree,  Gregorius  Episcopus  Dunkeldensis,  Herbertus  electus  de 
Glasgw,  G[alfridus]  Abbas  Dunfermelinensis,  [Alwinus]  Abbas  Sancte 
Crucis,  Eobertus  prior  Sancti  Andree,  Osbertus  prior  Jeddewrt,  Edwardus 
cancellarius,  Comes  Dunecauus,  Leod  de  Brechin,  Hugo  de  Moruille, 
Herbertus  Camerarius,  Willelmus  de  Sumerwill,  Eauulfus  de  Sules,  Wil- 
lebuus  de  Lindesi,  "Walterus  de  liidale. 


52.    CaMDUSKVXNETII    TEURARUM    ET    riSCAKIE    COXFIRMACIO    PEK    rbEGEM 
WlLELMUM. 

WiLELMUS  Dei  gracia  Eex  Scotoruin,  episcopis,  abbatibus,  comitibus,  jus- 
ticiis,  baronibus,  vicecomitibus,  ministris  et  omnibus  probis  liomiuibus  suis, 
clericis  et  laicis  totius  regni  sui,  tam  presentibus  quam  futuris,  salutem : 
Sciatis  me  concessisse,  et  hac  mea  carta  confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte 
Marie  de  Striueling,  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus,  donaciones  quas 
antecessores  mei  eis  in  elemosinam  dederuut ;  scilicet,  ex  donatione  Eegis 
David  aui  mei  terram  de  Cambuskynneth,  et  piscaturam  iuter  eandem  terram 
et  Pollemase,  et  vnum  rethe  in  aqua  ;  terram  quoque  de  Colling,  cum  nemore 
suo  ad  eandem  terram  pertinente,  cum  suis  rectis  diuisis ;  terram  eciam  de 
Tulibyene  que  est  inter  aquam  ejusdem  terre  et  terram  de  Login ;  quadraginta 
quoque  solidos  de  redditu  meo  de  Striueling  ;  et  canum  vnius  nauis  ;  et  vnam 
salinam,  et  tantum  terre  quautum  habet  vna  de  salinis  meis  ;  et  decimam 
firme  de  dominiis  nieis  de  Striueling,  et  oblationes  que  in  predicta  ecclesia 
oblate  fuerint ;  et  insulam  que  est  inter  Pollemase  et  Tulliboyene ;  viginti 


DE  CAMBUSKEXNETH. 


73 


cudermis  de  caseis  redditus  mei  de  Striueling  et  Katelistune  cum  suis  rectis 
diuisis ;  et  ecclesiam  de  Clackmanan  cum  quadraginta  acris  terre ;  et  toftnm 
sacerdotis  in  eadem  villa,  et  asiamenta  in  bosco  et  plano ;  et  decimas  placitorum 
et  lucrorum  meorum  de  Striueling  et  de  Striuelingschire  et  de  Calentyr  ;  et 
vfc  eorum  dominii  liomines  sint  quieti  de  toloneo  et  de  omnilDUS  rectitudinibus 
et  consuetudinibns,  et  vt  habeant  meam  firmani  pacem  juste  vljicunque 
\-enerint  in  tota  terra  mea  ;  et  ex  donatione  regis  INIalcolmi  fratris  mei,  totum 
molendinum  de  Clacmanan  preter  multuram  dominice  mense  mee  quotiens 
ad  opus  meum  molitur  contra  aduentum  meum  in  eandem  villam,  et  preter 
multuram  proprie  mense  prepositi  mei  ejusdera  ville,  multuram  eciani  et 
sectam  prouincie  de  Clacmannan,  cum  aliis  rectitudinibiis  suis  sicut  melius  et 
plenarius  habebant  cum  idem  molendinum  in  manu  mea  tenebam ;  et  vuum 
toftum  plenarium  in  burgo  meo  de  lunerkethin,  et  sexaginta  solidos  de  cano 
meo  de  Perth  singuHs  annis  habeudos,  et  pecuniis  abbacie  sue  comnniuionem 
pascue  vbicuuque  habuerunt  tempore  regis  Daiiid  aui  mei  melius  et  plenarius  ; 
volo  itaque  et  firmiter  precipio  quatenus  predicta  ecclesia  omnes  possessiones 
prenominatas  ita  libere  et  quiete  possideat  sicut  aliqua  ecclesia  in  toto  regno 
meo  ahquam  elemosinam  vel  possessionem  quietius  et  liberius  possidet,  et  vt 
carte  regis  Dauid  aui  mei  et  JMalcohni  regis  fratris  mei  testantur  et  confir- 
mant :  Testibus,  Xicholao  Cancellario,  Johanne  Abbate  de  Kelcho,  Vual  - 
leuo  Comite,  Eichardo  de  Moreuille,  Waltero  filio  Alaui,  Dauid  Ohfer, 
Plhhppo  de  VaUng  (Valoniis),  Eoberto  Auenell,  fratre  WiUelmo  de  Olepene. 


CAMBUSKYSNETH, 


53.    CaMBUSKYNNETH    XEREAKUJr    ET    nSCARIE    CONFIEMACIO    PEU    EEGEJI 

Alexandku.m,  filium  ■\Villelmi  kegis. 
Alexaxdek  Dei  gracia  Eex  Scotorum,  omnibus  probis  hominibus  totius  terre 
sue,  sahitem  :   ISToueritis  nos   inspexisse  confirmationeni  iuchte  recordationis 
Domiui    Eegis    "Willehni   patris    nostri    concessam    Canonicis    de   Cambus- 

10 


74 


EEGISTRUM  MONASTEPdl 


CAMBUSKYNNETH.  kyiiiietli   iu    liec  verba.     Wilelmus  Dei  gratia   Scotorum   Eex,   episcopis, 

abbatibus,  comitibus,  justiciis,  baronibus,  vicecomitib^is  ministris  et  omni- 
bus  probis  hominibus  suis,  clericis  et  laicis,  totius  regui  sui,  tam  presentibus 
i|uam  futuris,  salutem ;  Sciatis  me  concessisse  et  liac  mea  carta  confirmasse 
Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte  Marie  de  Striueliug,  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruien- 
tibus,  donationes  quas  antecessores  mei  eis  in  elemosinam  dederunt ;  scilicet, 
ex  donatione  Eegis  Dauid  aui  mei,  terram  de  Cambuskynneth  et  piscaturam 
inter  eandem  terram  et  Pollemase,  et  vnum  rethe  in  aqua ;  terram  quoque 
de  Colling,  cum  uemore  suo  ad  eandem  terram  pertinente,  cum  suis  rectis 
diaisis  ;  terram  eciam  de  Tulibotheuin  que  est  inter  aquam  eiusdem  terre  et 
terram  de  Login ;  quadraginta  quoque  solidos  de  redditu  meo  de  Striueling  et 
canum  vnius  nauis,  et  vnam  salinam,  et  tantum  terre  quantum  habet  vna  de 
salinis  meis,  et  decimain  firme  de  dominiis  meis  de  Striueling,  et  oblationes 
que  in  ijredicta  ecclesia  oblate  fuerint ;  et  insulam  que  est  inter  PoUemase  et 
Tulibotheuin,  et  viginti  cudrinis  de  caseis  redditus  mei  de  Striueling,  et 
Ketelistorme,  cum  suis  rectis  diuisis,  et  ecclesiam  de  Clacmanan  cum  quadra- 
ginta  acris  terre  et  toftum  sacerdotis  in  eadem  villa  et  asiamenta  in  bosco  et 
plano,  et  decimas  placitorum  et  hicrorum  meorum  de  Striueling  et  StriueHng- 
schhe,  et  de  Kalentyr ;  et  vt  eorum  dominii  liomines  sint  quieti  de  toloneo, 
et  de  omnibus  rectitiidinibus  et  de  consuetudinibus  ;  et  vt  habeant  meam 
firmani  pacem  juste  vbicunque  venerint  in  tota  terra  mea ;  et  ex  donatione 
regis  Malcolmi  fratris  mei  totum  molendinum  de  Clakmanan,  preter  multurani 
dominice  mense  mee,  quotiens  ad  opus  nieum  moletur,  contra  aduentum  meum 
in  eandem  villam,  et  preter  multuram  proprie  meuse  prej^ositi  mei  eiusdem 
ville;  multuram  eciam  et  sectam  prouiucie  de  Clacmanan  cum  aliis  recti- 
tudinibus  suis,  sicut  melius  et  plenarius  habebant  cum  idem  molendinum  in 
manu  mea  tenebam;  et  vnum  toftum  plenarium  in  burgo  meo  de  Innerketliin,  et 
quinquaginta  sohdos  de  cano  meo  de  Pertli  singulis  annis  habendos,  et  pecuniis 


DE  CAMBUSKENXETH. 


abbacie  sue  comnmnioiiem  pascue  vbicum|ue  liabueruiit  tempore  liegis  Dauid 
aui  mei  melius  et  plenarius  :  Volo  itaque  et  firmiter  precipio  quateuus  predicta 
ecclesia  omnes  possessiones  prenomiuatas  ita  libere  et  quiete  possideat,  sicut 
aliqua  ecclesia  in  toto  regno  meo  aliquam  elemosinam  vel  possessiouem  quie- 
cius  et  liberius  possidet,  et  vt  carte  regis  David  aui  mei  et  I\Ialcolmi  Eegis 
fratris  mei  testantur  et  confirmaut :  Testibus,  Nicholao  cancellario,  Johaune 
abbate  de  Kelkliow,  Valueuo  comite,  Eichardo  de  Moreuille,  Waltero  filio 
Alani,  Dauid  Olifard,  Pliilipjjo  de  Valingum  (Valoniis),  Eoberto  Auuenell,  fratre 
Wilielmo  de  Olipene.  Et  quia  venerabilis  pater  Clemens,  episcopus  Dun- 
blanensis,  dictam  confirmationem  quoad  redditum  dictorum  viginti  cudrinis 
casei  de  reditu  de  Striueling  in  nostra  presentia  cancellauit  eo  quod  per  nos 
et  per  cartam  nostram  fuerit  eisdem  canonicis  super  hoc  alibi  satisfactum,  ne 
dicta  cancellatio  eisdem  canonicis  noceat  iu  posterum  ad  eorum  iustanciam 
huic  dicte  confirmacionis  transcripto  sigillum  nostrum  apponi  fecimus  :  Tes- 
tibus,  venerabili  patre  Clemente  episcopo  Dunblanensi,  Alexandro  Cumyn 
comite  de  Buchaue,  Willelmo  comite  de  Marr,  Johanne  de  Striueling, 
Thoma  de  Lasdeles,  et  Bernardo  de  Dipjielere ;  apud  Striueliug,  duodecimo 
die  Februarii  anno  Domini  regis  trigesimo  quinto. 


CAMBUSKYNNETH. 


54.    CiVETA  UE  FRACTIONE  PISCAKIARUM  DE  CaMBUSKYNNETH  ET  DE 
EORUNDEM  NOMINIBUS  QUI  INUASERUNT  CROUAS. 

Dauid  Dei  gracia  Eex  Scotorum,  vicecomitibus  et  balliuis  suis  de  Striueliug, 
salutem :  Quia  per  decretum  consilii  nostri  in  pleno  parliamento  nostro, 
tento  apud  Sconam  vicesimo  septimo  die  mensis  Julii,  compertum  fuit  et  de- 
terminatum  quod  burgenses  de  Striueling,  videlicet,— Hugo  Vrry  et  complices 
sui  cum  armis  violenter  et  iniuste  inuaserunt  et  fregeruut  crouas  et  piscarias 
religiosorum  virorum  abbatis  et  conuentus  monasterii  de  Cambuskyuueth  in 


CAMBUi?KYNNETH. 


76 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


nostre  regie  maiestatis  offensam  et  dampnum  dicti  raonasterii  nou  modicum  et 
grauamen  ;  vobis  firraiter  precipimus  et  mandamus  quatenus  dictos  burgenses 
ex  parte  nostra  moueatis  et  districte  compellatis  quod  iufra  quadraginta  dies 
a  data  preseucium  numeraudo  predictas  crouas  et  piscaturas  reedificent  et 
coustruant  corapeteuter,  prout  autea  fuerant,  et  quod  plene  satisfaciant  de 
dampuis,  expensis  et  jactis,  que  et  quas  dicti  religiosi  ex  huiusmodi  mali- 
ficiis  sustiuuerunt,  secuudum  deeretum  cousilii  nostri  et  ordinationem  super 
nostram  plenariam  forisfacturam ;  et  hoc  nullo  uiodo  omittatis  uec  omittant, 
sicut  nostram  iudiguationem  volueritis  et  voluerint  euitare  :  In  cuius  rei 
testimonium  preseutibus  sigillum  nostrum  peues  predictos  religiosos  man- 
surum  et  vobis  osteudeudum  precipimus  apponi ;  apud  Scouaui,  vicesimo 
septimo  die  Julii  auno  regni  nostri  trigesimo  septimo. 


55.  Skquuntur  no.mina  illorum  qui  fregeeunt  ceouas  [de] 
Cambuskynneth. 
ISTA  suut  nomina  burgeusium  de  StriueUng  qui  iuuaseruut  crouas  et  pis- 
caturas  abbatis  et  conueutus  de  Cambuskynuetli :  lu  primis,  Hugo  Vrry, 
Eobertus  Eaa,  Eicardus  Tector,  Adam  Sissor,  Eobertus  Foster,  Willelmus 
Ker,  Willelmus  Bemys,  Johanues  de  Erskin,  Eogerus  Marcator  et  Ilenricus 
Marcator  frater  eius,  Gilbertus  Faber,  Thomas  Potator,  Johanues  Gollane, 
Johannes  Pelliparius,  Thomas  de  Yberuia,  Eobertus  Harrow,  Johanues  Brume, 
Adam  Gamilsone,  Johanues  Witste,  Thomas  de  Brigerakis,  Patricius  Marcator, 
Eobertus  Carnifex,  Thomas  Eubiginator ;  eciam  Piscatores,  videlicet,  Johannes 
filius  Hugonis,  Johauues  de  Calleuter,  Jolianues  filius  ]\Iichaell,  Johauues 
Tennand,  et  Philippus  filius  eius,  IMure  de  Corutoue  et  Gilielmus  frater  eius, 
Johaunes  filius  Heruot  et  multi  alii. 


Ifa^^  Gf^^*V  f^(f^^  nv'^  <^rctf^rf^  tefjac- 

^Jt^  tBaira^i^p^  n^Go(B>  ^^QifH>  t^^<nn{i4r  Cfntt} 
J^^k<y6iytfnfj  e^  ftttvinii^ntp  tn^^ytmnf^t  ^n^nytfnr^  ^^Se 
fByrfft^ni^  f^fif^  i^^  Qi^ett  tir^fnl  ^ftffny  ftj  9ffi^ 
dc  n^^^^S^  fB;>ffftffffi^  tt-£i£tffi-ivf^i)M}  nnfHKHitffiizpi^ 
■ — -4fmfff  dhffojtnjxff^'}^  ^^tt^^  ifm^  Cf^offm)  (i^ 
Qncft  Ktnfftfc  ^a^atfii^  <^mtf  (nf^nftftn^  ^flSciMtS 
ttt  z^c^iffonf^  -^ttfft^tffi^^x^^^/yi^  fWnfSf  tmyut^^ftcnf!  c^ 
t^^ff^fft^^.nfazcfff^  tVwi^so  ft^  ^^ffj  -^d^nf)^ 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


56.  Clacmannan  possessionis  preceptum  a  Decaxo  Eectori  de  Torrye. 

Bricius  Decanus  Cristianitatis  de  Fy£f  et  de  Fothriff,  Domino  Patricio  Picarde, 
rectori  de  Torry,  salutem  :  Quia  pluribus  et  diuersis  domiui  nostri  episcopi 
occupati  negociis  ad  iiistituendum  dominuni  Adam  abbatem  de  Cambus- 
kynnetli  in  vicariam  de  Clackmanuane,  secundum  preceptum  domini  nostri 
predicti  ad  presens  neqiiaquam  possumus  laborare,  vos  attencius  deprecamur 
quatenus  cum  dicto  domino  Adam  ad  prefatam  vicariam  personaliter  laboretis 
ipsumque  in  eadem  cum  jiertinenciis  vice  uostra,  secund\im  tenorem  litere 
domiui  nostri  Episcopi  sibi  inde  coufecte  instituatis,  et  ad  institucionis  testi- 
monium  sigillum  vestrum  presentibus  apponatis  :  Scriptimi  sub  sigUlo  officii 
nostri,  apud  Cuprum  in  Fy-ff,  vicesimo  secundo  die  mensis  Augusti  anno,  etc. 
[trijcentesimo  quinquagesimo. 


L'I>.\CKMANAN. 


57.  Clac.man.vn  ecclesia  ex  dono  Dauid  Eegis. 

Dauid  Ee.x;  Scotorum  omnibus  probis  homiuibus  tocius  terre  sue,  clericis 
et  laicis,  sahitem  :  Sciatis  me  concessisse  et  liac  mea  carta  confirmasse  abbati 
de  Striueling,  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus,  ecclesiam  de  Clacmanan, 
cum  quadraginta  acris  terre  et  toftum  sacerdotis  iu  eadem  villa,  et  asiamenta 
in  bosco  et  plano,  et  decimas  omnium  placitorum  et  lucrorum  meorum  de 
Striueling,  et  de  Striuelingscliire,  et  de  Kalenter,  et  vnum  toftum  in  burgo 
meo  de  Striueling,  et  aliud  toftum  in  Linlidcu  in  perpetuam  elemosinam,  ita 
Ubere  et  quiete  ab  omni  seculari  seruicio  vt  aliqua  elemosina  melius  et 
Hberius  iu  regno  meo  tenetur  :  Testibus  Willelmo  Morauiensi  episcopo,  et 
Hugone  de  Moreuille,  Waltero  filio  Alani,  Adam  de  Piogesburg,  Nicholao 
clerico,  Waltero  cancellario,  Johanne  capellano,  apud  Striueling. 


HEGISTRUM  MONASTEEII 


CLACKMANAN' 


58.  ViCAEiE  DE  Clakmanan  donatio. 
Uniuersis  sancte  matris  ecclesie  filiis  ad  quoriim  roticiam  presentes  litere 
peruenerint,  Willelmus  de  Landale  miseratione  diuina  ecclesie  Sanctiandree 
miuister  liumilis,  salutern  in  Domino  sempiternam  :  Pastoralis  officii  decel 
solicitudinem  gregis  sibi  commissi  statum  et  merita  diligenter  prospicere 
et  eius  necessitati  tanquam  dispensator  prouidus  pie  compaciendo  quantvim 
cum  Deo  possit  per  remedia  salubria  et  oportuna  subuenire,  vnde  considerantes 
statum  monasterii  beate  Marie  de  Cambuskynnetli  per  dirarum  guerrarum 
procellas  in  partibus  illis  diutissime  liabitas  in  tantum  fore  depressum,  et  quod 
dolenter  referimus,  per  quorundam  dialjolicorum  filiorum  manum  rapidam  in 
calicibus,  libris,  ceterisque  ornamentis  altaris  ac  aliis  bonis,  de  quibus  ibidem 
Deo  seruientes  debent  sustentari  sic  distructum  quod  nisi  eidem  monasterio 
citius  subueniatur,  bospitalitas  deficiet,  edificia  corruent  et  canonici  Deo 
iliidem  seruientes  et  seruituri  cogentur  mendicare :  Volentes  igitur  et  affec- 
tautes  premissis  dampnis  et  periculis  prout  possumus  occurrere,  et  dictum 
nionasterium  releuare,  integram  vicariam  de  Clacmanan  cuni  omnibus  suis 
possessionibus,  tenis,  fructibus,  oblacionibus  et  obuencionibus  ac  ceteris 
iuribus  et  pertinenciis  suis,  abbati  dicti  monasterii  beate  Marie  de  Cambus- 
kynneth,  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus,  et  in  futurum  seruituris,  de 
consensu  et  assensu  totius  capituli  nostri  damus  imperpetuum  et  concedimus 
in  proprios  vsus  ac  confirmamus  per  presentes :  Volentes,  concedentes  et 
ordinantes  quod  futuris  temporibus  dictus  dominus  abbas  de  Cambiiskynnetb, 
et  canonici  eiusdem,  prefate  ecclesie  de  Clacmanan,  cuius  rectoriam  ante 
istam  donationem  nostram,  concessionem  et  ordinationem  diu  in  proprios  vsus 
pacifice  possederunt,  per  vnum  capellanum  ydoneum  et  lionestum  quem  ad 
lioc  assumere  voluerint,  faciant  deseruire  in  diuinis ;  saluis  nobis  et  succes- 
soribus  nostris  ac  Arcbidiacono  nostro  Sanctiandree  et  suis  successoribus 
iuribus  episcopalibus  et  arcbidiaconalibus  cum  canouica  obediencia  et  sub- 


^<r:^^tfo  <s^^efWfl^  i^mTf  I3^itf6>t>ffffj  ^c  ^»ct^in^»t»^  tfi6.cjW 

*J^  (B:>fff^nSr^^>(if^ffftitHtrfi^ft^  ^irb>L^€cUl*f^r^i^^ff*i' 

^(hftv  ffl  ^f  rtd  ^A<i<»  ^  f^E^^H^^<i^ffib  ^yf^trfffffdt^ 

MKfv  ff^  ^f&txptHfnffj  ^^ffHffnmtfj  W^  »t«j:^»^^  ^  ^^i?***^ 

paiU^ff^  ^  Hhu>  ^fo^fffOZfiifHtt  i^t€^iSS<*6''^  ^«j^^«mF  >1wj£ 
^IMJ  <ii»f^js4Si*?M>  ^ff^oi^*i>^,,rHvz^i*ff(C/Hfti^i^^*^  tU<o  f  iw^ii^ 


DE  CAMBUSKENXETH. 


79 


iectione  :  In  cuius  rei  testimonium,  sigillum  nostrum  una  cum  sigillo  communi 
capituli  nostri  in  siguum  consensus  et  assensus  sui  ad  hoc  prestiti  preseutibus 
est  appensum.  Datum  apud  Sanctumandream,  quarto  die  mensis  Juuij  anno 
Domiui  millesimo  tricentesimo  quinquagesimo. 

59.    CONFIRMATIO   EOGEEI   EPISCOPI  DE   ClACMANAN  ET  DE  KiKK. 

UxiUERSlS  sancte  matris  ecclesie  filiis  presens  scriptum  inspecturis,  Eogorus  Dei 
gi-atia  Scotorum  episcopus,  salutem  in  Domino  :  Nouerint  tam  presentes  quam 
futuri  nos  dedisse  et  concessisse,  et  presenti  carta  confirmasse  ecclesie  Sancte 
Marie  de  Striueling,  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibrrs,  ecclesiam  de  Egles, 
et  ecclesiam  de  Clacmanan,  cum  omnibus  justis  suis,  tam  in  capellis  et  decimis 
et  obuencionibus  quam  in  ceteris  ecclesiasticis  beneficiis  in  liberam,  puram  et 
perpetuam  elemosinam :  Tenendam  et  possideudam  adeo  libere,  quiete  et  honori- 
fice  sicut  predicta  ecclesia  eas  liberius,  c^uietius  ethonorificentius  tempore  Dauid 
Eegis  et  episcoporum  Eoberti,  Arnaldi  et  Eicardi  pie  recordationis  predeces- 
sorum  nostrorum  tenuit  et  possidet;  saluis  episcopalibus :  Testibus,  "Willelmo 
abbatede  SanctaCruce;  Magistro  Eanulfo  archidiacono  Sanctiandree ;  Magistro 
Johanne  archidiacono  Laudonie,  et  Eicardo,  Eicardo  capellanis,  Magistro  "Wil- 
lehuo  de  lina,  Magistro  Stephano  de  Beuerlao,  Magistro  Isaac  Scoto,  ]\Iar- 
chesio  de  Ambini,  Eicardo  Clerico,  Eadulfo  Costcin,  W[illiehno]  de  Wiuille, 
Henrico  Truant,  militibus,  Eicardo  Matheo :  Datum  per  manum  Galfredi  de 
Crauford,  apud  Tynningham,  Kalendis  Julii  pontificatus  nostri  anno  tercio. 

60.  CoxFiEMATio  Eectoeie  de  Clacmaxan  Malcolmi  Eegis. 
^Malcolmus  Eex  Scotorum,  omnibus  probis  hominibus  totius  terre  sue,  clericis 
et  laicis,  sahxtem  :  Sciatis  me  concessisse,  et  hac  mea  carta  confirmasse  abbati 
de  StriueUng  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  eccle.siam  de  Clacmauan 
cum  quadraginta  acris  terre  et  toftum  sacerdotis  in  eadern  villa,  et  asiamentimi 
iu  bosco  et  plano,  et  decimas  omnium  pjlacitorum  et  lucronim  meorum  de 


CL.VCKM.WAN. 


80 


REaiSTRUM  MONASTERII 


CLACKMANAN 


Slriueling  et  de  Striuelingscliire  et  de  Kalentyr  et  vuum  toftum  in  Lurgo  meo 
de  Striueling  et  aliud  toftum  in  Linlidcu  iu  perpetuam  elemosinam  vt  melius 
et  liberius  temporibus  aui  mei  Dauid  Eegis  habuerunt  et  tenueruut :  Testibus. 
Willelmo  episcopo  de  Morauia ;  Osberto  abbate  de  Jeddew[rd] ;  Waltero 
cancellario ;  Hugone  de  Moreuill ;  Nicliolao  clerico ;  Waltero  Scriptore  : 
Apud  Seleschirche. 

6 1 .    CLACMANAN  PO.SSESSIOXIS  PEECEPTUM. 

WlLELMUS  miseratione  diuina  ecclesie  Sanctiandree  episcopus,  Decauo 
nostro  Cristianitatis  de  Fifi',  et  de  Fothriff,  salutem  cum  benedictione 
diuina  :  Quia  nos  volentes  et  affectantes  monasterium  beate  ]\Iarie  de  Cam- 
buskynueth,  qnod  quasi  irreparabihter  per  diabolicos  homines  nuper  damp- 
nificatum  est  et  deuastatum,  (|uantum  cum  Deo  possumus  releuare  vicariam 
de  Clacmanan  et  omnes  fructus,  redditus  et  prouentus,  obuenciones,  terras 
et  possessiones,  et  cetera  emolumenta  ad  ipsam  vicariam  spectantes  siue 
spectancia  prefato  monasterio  et  canonieis  if)idem  Deo  seruientibus  et  imper- 
petuum  seruituris  [in]  proprios  vsns  dedimus  et  concessimus,  ac  dominuui 
Adam  alibatem  eiusdem,  nomine  dicti  monasterii  et  canonicorum  eiusdem  per 
annuluni  nostrum  inuestiuimus  de  eadem ;  mandamus  vobis  et  precipimus 
quatenus  dictum  dominum  abbatem  de  Cambuskynneth  nomine  dicti  monas- 
terii  sui  instituatis  in  eandem  et  in  corporalem  possessionem  eiusdem  cum 
pertiuentiis  inducatis,  inductmnque  auctoritate  nostra  canonice  defendatis, 
contradictores  et  rebelles,  si  qui  fuerint,  per  censuram  ecclesiasticam  arcius 
compescentes  :  In  signum  vero  huiusmodi  iustitutiouis  per  vos  facte,  tra- 
diteque  sibi  possessionis  sigilUim  officii  vestri  presentibus  appouatis  et  j)enes 
ipsum  dominum  abbatem  et  monasterium  suum  perpetuo  remausuris  :  Datimi 
sub  sigillo  nostro,  apud  lacum  de  Le\yn,  vicesimo  secundo  die  Augusti  anno 
gracie  millesimo  tricentesimo  quinquagesimo. 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


81 


62.  BuLLA  Vnionis  Vicakie  Clacmanan  Monasterio  de 
Cambuskynneth. 

Clemens  Episcopus,  seraus  seraorum  Dei,  ad  perpetuam  rei  memoriam  : 
Apostolice  sedis  circumspecta  benignitas  vota  personarum  liumilium  ma.xime 
diuinis  laudibus  sacreque  religiouis  obseruancie  deditarum  gracioso  libenter 
fauore  prosequitur,  eoramque  uecessitatibus  occurrit  remediis  oportunis ; 
dudum  siqiddem  felicis  recordationis  Gregorius  Papa  se.xtus  predecessor 
noster  omnes  vicarias  perpetuas  ceteraque  beneficia  ecclesiastica,  cum  cura 
et  sine  cura,  quorumcunque  per  assecutionem  pacificam  archidiaconatuum, 
dignitatum,  personatuum,  officiorum  ac  beneficiorum  aliorum  ecclesiasti- 
corum  c[uorumlibet  per  eum  seu  eius  auctoritate  tunc  collatorum  et  in  antea 
conferendonmi  eisdem,  tunc  vacancia  et  in  posterum  vacatura  collationi  et 
dispositioni  sue  reseruans,  decreuit  extunc  irritum  et  inane  si  secus  super  hiis 
a  quoquam  quauis  auctoritate  scienter  vel  ignoranter  coutigerit  attemptari ;  et 
deinde  perpetua  vicaria  parrochialis  ecclesie  de  Clacmanan  Sanctiandree 
diocesis  ex  eo  vacaute  quod  dilectus  filius  Mauricius  de  Stratherne  arcliidia- 
conus  ecclesie  Dumblanensis,  tunc  dictam  vicariam  obtinens,  archidiaconatum 
dicte  ecclesie  Dumblanensis,  qui  dignitas  est,  tunc  vacantem  auctoritate  lite- 
rarum  dicti  predecessoris  sibi  collatum,  extitit  pacifice  assecutus,  prefatoque 
predecessore,  per  eum  de  dicta  vicaria  minime  disposito,  sicut  Domino  placuit, 
sublato  de  medio,  nos  diuina  fauente  clemencia  ad  apicem  summi  apostolatus 
assumpti,  cum  a  nounrdlis  reuocaretur  in  dubium  an  post  dicti  predecessoris 
nostri  obitum  aliquis  preter  Eomanum  Pontificem  de  vicariis  et  aliis  beneficiis 
supradictis  per  dictum  predecessorem  nostram  dispositioni  sue  reseruatis  et 
tempore  obitus  eiusdem  predecessoris  vacantibus,  disponere  potuisset  siue 
posset,  nos,  ad  huiusmodi  ambiguitatis  toUendum  dubium,  per  nostras  literas 
declarauimus  huiusmodi  vicarias  et  alia  beneficia   supradicta  que  tempore 

11 


CLACKJt.VNAN-. 


82 


REGISTEUM  MONASTEBII 


CLACKMANAN. 


obitus  eiusdem  predecessoris  nostri  vacabant,  vt  prefertur,  remansisse  et 
remauere  per  huiusmodi  reseruationem  et  decretum  affecta,  nullumque  de 
illis  preter  Eomanum  Pontificem  potuisse  vel  posse  disponere  quoquomodo  ; 
decernentes  extunc  irritum  et  inane  cpiicquid  iu  contrarium  a  quoquam  quauis 
auctoritate  scienter  vel  ignorauter  attemptatum  forsan  erat  tunc  vel  contigerit 
imposterum  attemptari,  et  deinde  exhibita  nobis  pro  parte  dilectorum  filiorum 
abbatis  et  conueutus  monasterii  beate  Marie  de  Cambuskynneth,  ordinis 
Saucti  Augustini  dicte  diocesis,  peticio  contiuebat  quod  tam  ipsi  quam  pre- 
dictum  eorum  monasterium  propter  guarras  que  diutissime  in  illis  partibus 
viguerunt  et  propter  quosdam  iniquitatis  filios  qui  calices,  libros,  ceteraque 
ornamenta  altaris  et  diuersa  alia  bona  i^isius  monasterii  rapuerunt  et  secum 
asportarunt,  ac  eciam  propter  quendam  ictum  tonitrui  et  fulguris  qui  supra 
campanile  ipsius  monasterii  cecidit,  sicut  in  magnis  erumpnis  et  necessitatibus 
constituti,  chorusque  dicti  monasterii  magnani  ruinam  patitur,  ad  quem 
reparandum  seu  reficiendum,  iidem  abbas  et  conuentus  suut  totaliter  impo- 
tentes  :  Quare  pro  parte  dictorum  abbatis  et  conuentus  nobis  fuit  humiliter 
supplicatum  quatenus  vt  eorum  erumpnis  et  necessitatibus  predictis  valeant 
obuiare,  predictam  vicariam,  cuius  rectoriam  iidem  abbas  et  conuentus,  vt 
asserunt,  in  i)roprios  vsus  obtineut,  et  ad  quos  ius  patrouatus  vicarie  predicte 
noscitur  pertinere,  cuiusque  valor  aunuus  decem  marcarum  sterliugorvim,  vt 
asserimt,  commuuiter  non  excedit,  ipsis  abbati  et  couueutui  ac  eorani 
monasterio  vnire,  annectere  et  incorporare  auctoritate  apostolica  dignaremur : 
Xos  eorundem  abbatis  et  conuentus  erumpnis  et  necessitatibus  pio  compa- 
cientes  affectu,  ipsorum  abbatis  et  conuentus  in  hac  parte  supplicationibus 
inclinati,  predictam  vicariam  sic  vacantem,  de  qua  nullus  preter  Eoma- 
num  Poutificem  dispouere  potuit  ueque  potest,  reseruatione,  decretis  et 
declamatione  obsistentibus  supradictis,  abbati  et  conuentui  ac  monas- 
terio   predictis   exnunc    imperpetuum    auctoritate   apostolica   incorporamus 


DE  GAMBUSKENNETH. 


83 


annectimiis  et  vnimus,  illamque  ijisis  concedimus  in  proprios  vsus  per- 
petuo  possidendam,  ita  quod  liceat  prefatis  abbati  et  conuentui,  per  se  vel 
alium  seu  alios,  possessionem  pacificam  eiusdem  vicarie  auctoritate  propria 
ingredi,  appreliendere  et  habere,  eiusque  fructus  redditus  et  prouentus  in 
suam  et  dicti  eorum  monasterii  vtilitatera  conuertere,  ordinarii  loci  vel  alterius 
cuiuscunque  licentia  minime  requisita ;  prouiso  quod  dicta  vicaria  cultu  diuino 
et  debitis  obsequiis  non  fraudetur,  et  animarum  cura  cui  illa  imminet  nulla- 
tenus  negligatur  :  Volumus  autem  quod  abbas  qui  est  et  erit  pro  tempore,  et 
conuentus  dicti  monasterii,  de  ipsius  vicarie  redditibus  et  prouentibus  cano- 
nico  dicti  monasterii  vel  presliytero  ydoneo  qui  curam  eiusdem  vicarie 
exercebit,  per  ipsos  abbatem  et  conuentum  ibidem  deputando,  necessaria 
congrue  ministrare  et  omnia  alia,  tam  pro  hixiusmodi  cultu  diuino  et  obse- 
ciuiis  inciunbencia  quam  alia  eiusdem  vicarie  consueta  onera,  supportare, 
et  iura  episcopalia  soluere  teneantur,  non  obstantibus  quibuscunque  con- 
stitutionibus  apostolicis  et  statutis  et  cousuetudinibus  monasterii  et  ordinis 
predictorum  contrariis,  iuramento,  confirmatione  apostolica  vel  quacunque 
firmitate  alia  roboratis ;  seu  si  aliqui  super  prouisionibus  sibi  faciendis  de 
huiusmodi  vicariis  vel  aliis  beneficiis  ecclesiasticis  in  illis  partibus  spe- 
ciales  vel  generales  dicte  sedis  vel  legatorum  eius  literas  impetrarunt, 
eciam  si  per  eas  ad  inhibitionem,  reseruacionem  et  decretum  vel  alias  quomo- 
dolibet  sit  processum,  quas  literas  et  processus  earum  auctoritate  habitos 
ad  dictam  vicariam  volumus  non  extendi,  sed  nuUum  per  hoc  eis  quoad 
assecutionem  vicariarum  ac  beneficiorum  aliorum  preiudicium  generare,  seu 
(j^uibuslibet  preuilegiis  indulgenciis  et  literis  apostolicis,  generalibus  vel  speci- 
alibus,  quoruncunque  tenorum  existant,  per  que  presentibus  non  expressa  vel 
totaliter  non  inserta  effectus  presencium  impediri  valeat  quomodolibet  vel 
deferri,  et  de  qnibus  quorumque  totis  tenoribus  habenda  sit  in  nostris  litteris 
mencio  specialis.     Nos  enim,  prout  est,  irritum  decernimus  et  inane  si  secus 


CLACKMANAN. 


84 


REGISTRUM  MONASTEHII 


CLACKMANAN" 


super  hiis  a  quoquam  quauis  auctoritate  scienter  vel  ignoranter  attemptatum 
forsan  est  hactenus,  vel  coutigeret  impostenun  attemptari  :  Nulli  ergo  omuiuo 
homiuum  liceat  hanc  paginam  nostre  incorporationis,  annectionis,  vnionis 
concessionis  et  voluntatis  infringere,  vel  ei  ausu  temerario  contraire :  Si 
quis  autem  hoc  attemptare  presumpserit,  indignationem  omnipotentis  Dei  et 
beatorum  Petri  et  Pauli  apostolorum  eius-  se  nouerit  incursurum :  Datum 
Auinione,  decimo  septimo  Kalendas  Octobris  pontificatus  nostri  anno  primo. 


63.    BULL.i   DECLABATIOXIS    YlCARIE    ClACJLVXAX  KON  0BSTA^'TIBUS  QUOD 
IX  ORIGIN.MI  BULLA  VERA  NOX  FUIT  FRUCTUUiM   EXPRESSIO. 

Clejiexs  Episcopus  seruus  seruorum  Dei,  dilectis  filiis  Abbati  et  Conuentui 
Monasterii  Beate  jMarie  de  Cambuskyuueth,  ordiuis  Sancti  Augustini  Sancti- 
andree  diocesis,  salutem  et  apostolicam  beuedictionem  :  Sincere  deuotionis 
affectus  quem  ad  nos  et  Eomauam  geritis  ecclesiam,  promeretur  vt  vos  et 
mouasterium  vestrum  fauoribus  apostolicis  prosequamur,  dudum  siquidem 
pro  parte  vestra  nobis  exposito  quod  tam  vos  quam  predictum  monasterium, 
propter  guerras  que  diutissime  in  illis  partibus  uiguerant,  ac  propter  quosdam 
iniquitatis  filios,  qui  calices,  libros,  ceteiaque  ornamenta  altaris,  et  diuersa  alia 
bona  ipsius  monasterii  rapuerunt,  et  secum  asportarunt,  et  eciam  propter  quem- 
dam  ictum  tonitrui  et  fulguris  que  supra  campanile  ipsius  monasterii  cecider- 
ant,  eratis  in  magnis  erumpuis  et  necessitatibus  constituti,  chorusque  dicti 
monasterti  maguam  ruinam  paciebatur,  ad  quam  reparandam  seu  reficiendam 
vos  eratis  totaliter  impotentes ;  nos  perpetuam  vicariam  parrochialis  ecclesie  de 
Clacmanan  dicte  diocesis  tunc  certo  modo  vacantem,  cuius  fructus,  redditus  et 
prouentus  decem  marcarum  sterlingorum,  vt  asserebatur,  valorem  annuum 
commuuiter  uou  excedebant,  vobis  ac  eidem  monasterio  imperpetuum  aucto- 
ritate  apostolica  per  alias  nostras  literas  \Tiiuimus  et  iucorporauimus,  prout 
iu  eisdem  literis  plenius  continetur :   Cum  autem  sicut  exhibita  nobis  nuper 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


85 


pro  parte  vestra  peticio  continebat  fructus,  redtlitus  et  prouentus  huiusmodi 
maioris  quam  predicitur  valoris  existaut,  licet  quiudecim  marcarum  dicte 
monete  secundum  taxationem  decime  valorem  non  excedant  annuatim,  et 
propterea  dubitetis  super  eadem  vicaria  posse  vos  imposteriuu  molestari ;  Nos 
volentes  vos  ac  dictum  mouasterium  fauore  prosequi  gracioso,  vestris  in  hac 
parte  supplicationibus  inclinati,  volumus  et  apostolica  auctoritate  vobis  con- 
cedimus,  quod  prefate  litere  et  quecumque  inde  secuta  perinde  a  data  pre- 
sencium  valeant,  plenaque  roboris  firmitate  obtineant,  ac  si  in  eisdem  literis 
quod  fructus,  redditus  et  prouentus  huiusmodi  quindecim  marcarum  dicte 
monete  secundum  taxationem  predictr.m  valorem  non  excederent  annuatim, 
specialis  et  expressa  mentio  facta  foret :  Nulli  ergo  omnino  honiinum  liceat 
hanc  paginam  nostre  vohmtatis  et  concessionis  iufriugere  vel  ei  ausu  temerario 
contraire,  si  quis  autem  hoc  attemptare  presumpserit,  indignationeni  omnipo- 
tentis  Dei,  et  beatorum  Petri  et  Pauli  apostolorum  eius  se  nouerit  inciu'suruni : 
Datum  Avinione,  quinto  Kaleudas  Februarii  pontificatus  nostri  anno  secundo. 


CLACKMANAN. 


64.  PerambuljVcio  aceaeum  de  Clacmanan. 
In  Dei  nomiue,  amen  :  Per  hoc  presens  publicum  instrumentum  cunctis 
paceat  euideuter  quod  anuo  incarnationis  Dominice  millesimo  quingentesimo 
quinto,  mensis  vero  Marcii  die  sexto,  indictione  nona,  pontificatus  sanctis- 
simi  in  Cristo  patris  et  domini  nostri,  domini  Julii  diuina  prouidencia  Pape 
secundi  anno  tertio,  in  mei  notarii  publici  et  testium  subscriptorum  presencia 
personaliter  constituti  Johannes  Eeid  de  Foresta,  Alexander  Eeid  de  eodem, 
Vrillelmus  Striueliug  de  Tulicultry,  Piobertus  Gray,  Johannes  Hutoun,  Man- 
ykyn  Henrisou  de  Salouchy,  Johanues  Wilson  de  Gartyuclare,  Eobertus 
Bauclery  de  Clacmanan,  Audreas  Meffen  de  eodem,  Johannes  Portaifeild  de 
Moleuduuo,  Johannes  Eobertsone  de  Geleam,  Johannes  Ade,  Johannes  Archi- 
bald  de  Tulibody,  Johannes  Johnnstoun  de  eodem,  Johanues  Sym  de  Bauchry, 


86 


BEGISTRUM  MONASTERIl 


CLACKMANAN. 


Thomas  Alexander  de  Menstray  et  Tliomas  Jamesone  de  "Wodheid,  assisores 
electi  inter  venerabilera  patrem  Danid  permissione  dinina  Abbatem  monas- 
terii  de  Cambuskynneth  et  coniientum  eiusdem  ex  parte  vna,  et  Dauid 
Bruse  de  Clacmanan,  militem,  ex  parte  altera,  super  diuisione  et  cogoitione 
ipiadraginta  acrarum  terrarum  de  Clacmanau  vt  magis  plenius  continetur  in 
eorum  fundacione,  vt  sint  seperate  et  diuise  a  terris  dominii  de  Clacmanan, 
per  ambas  partes  admissi  et  iurati  in  plana  curia  tenta  et  affirmata  per  Willel- 
mum  IMenteith  de  West  Kerss,  militem  ac  vicecomitem  de  Clacmanan,  in  vno 
orreo  eiusdem  penultimo  die  mensis  Februarii,  tactis  sacrosanctis  Dei  ewan- 
geliis,  corporalia  prestiterunt  iuramenta :  Qui  iurati  accesserunt  ad  vnum  inchi- 
satorium,  videlicet,  le  Fauld  iacens  prope  et  contigue  vnuni  orreum  ex  parte 
orientali  et  cum  longa  fouea  discendente  a  boreali  parte  vsque  ad  australem 
partem  eiusdem  ex  longitudine  mensurauerunt  per  cordam  et  vlnam  delibera- 
uerunt  et  decreuerunt  in  eodem  inclusatorio  triginta  cpiatuor  acras  terrarum 
in  se  continente,  marchiando  et  bondando  ab  orientali  fouea  vsque  ad  occiden- 
talem  foueam,  ascendendo  vsque  ad  capitalem  foueam  et  ad  verticem  rupis 
ex  parte  boreali,  et  marcliie  et  mete  facte  sunt  solite  et  consuete ;  et  in 
secundo  inchisatorio  iacente  in  cauda  eiusdem  inchisatorii  mensurauerunt  per 
vlnam  et  cordam  decreuerunt  et  deliberauerunt  sex  acras  terrarum,  et  sic  in  toto 
continente  quadraginta  acras  terrarum,  jirefatis  domino  abbati  et  conuentui 
antedictis,  videHcet,  bondando  a  fouea  orientali  vsque  ad  interlirium  capitale, 
cum  duobus  interliriis  paruis  wlgariter  vocatis  le  buttis  ex  parte  occidentali,  per 
omues  et  singulas  metas  bondas  et  diuisas  supradictas  nouas  et  antiquas  prout 
jacent  in  longitudine  et  latitudine  in  boscis,  planis,  viis,  semitis,  aquis,  stagnis, 
riuolis  et  lacubus :  De  et  super  quibus  omnibiis  et  singulis  dompnus  Johannes 
Eannaldson,  procurator  et  procuratorio  nomine  venerabilium  et  rehgiosoram 
virorimi,  Dauid  permissione  diuina  abbatis  monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth  et 
conuentus  eiusdem,  a  me  notario  publico  subscripto  sibi  fieri  petut  vnum  aut 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


87 


lilura  publicum  seu  publica  instrumeiitum  aut  instrumenta  :  Acta  erant  hec 
super  funduni  dictarum  terrarum  hora  prima  vel  eocirca  post  meridiem  sub 
anno,  die,  mense,  iudictione  et  pontificatu  quibus  suj-ira ;  presentibus  prouidis 
viris,  Johanne  Menteth,  Andrea  Hamiltoune,  Willebno  Dury,  Andrea  Colly  et 
Alexandro  Eeid,  testibus,  cum  diuersis  aliis  ad  preniissa  vocatis  specialiter  et 
rogatis. 

Et  ego  Jacobus  Fresare,  presbyter  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  publicus  sacra 
auctoritate  apostoliea  notarius,  premissis  omnibus  et  singulis  dum,  sic  vt 
premittitur,  dicerentur,  agerentur  et  fierent,  vna  cum  prenominatis  testibus 
presens  interfui,  eaque  omnia  et  singula  sic  fieri  vidi,  scivi  et  audivi,  ac  in 
notam  recepi ;  indeque  presens  publicum  iustrumentum  manu  mea  propria 
scriptum  confeci,  et  in  hanc  publicam  formam  redegi ;  signoque  et  nomine 
meis  solitis  et  consuetis  signaui,  rogatus  et  requisitus  in  fidem  ac  testimonium 
omnium  et  singulonmi  premissorum.  Jacobus  Fi;es.4EE,  notarius. 


CLACKMANAN. 


65.  Decim.v  C.uiBOCiDii  DE  Salquhye. 
Pee  dominum  Ofiicialem  Sanctiandree  principalem,  die  Martis,  videlicet, 
quarto  meusis  Februarii  anno  Domini  millesimo  quingentesimo  decimo;  quo  die 
appunctuatum  est  ititer  procuratores  firmarii  de  Clacmanan  quoad  vicariani 
eiusdem  et  Jacobum  Scliaw  in  hunc  modum,  videlicet,  quod  idem  Jacobus, 
luiles,  soluet  decimam  carbonum  prout  consueuit  temporibus  retroactis  vsque 
ad  festum  Pasche  proxime  futurum,  et  deinceps  relinquet  prefato  firmario 
disponere  de  suis  carbonibus  decimalibus  de  eius  carbocidio  prout  de  jure 
communi  disponere  habet  nec  desuper  impedimentum  per  se  vel  alium 
faciet  C|Uominus  desuper  disponere  habet:  Et  desuper  monitus  est  ad  pre- 
missa  perimplenda  sub  pena  excommunicationis ;  Et  monitus  est  Gilbertus 
Brady  ad  satisfaciendum  de  suis  carbonibus  decimalibus  iustis  secundum 
ratam  carbocidii  in  futurum,  sub  pena  excommunicationis ;    Et  raonitus  est 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


Dauid  Bruse  de  Kennet  in  personam  Stratliachin  eius  procuratoris  ad 
satisfaciendum  decimam  eius  carbonum  iiistam  iitsta  ratam  occupationis 
in  futurum,  sub  pena  excommunicationis,  et  Wiscliart,  per  mandatum  pro 
domino  Johanne  Clerk  canonico  ac  firmario  de  Clacmanan,  proposuit  contra 
Dauid  Bruse  de  Clacmanan  boji;or  pro  eo  libellum  peciit  ad  libellandum 
hodie  ad  quindenam.  Extractum  de  libro  actorum  domini  of&cialis  Sancti- 
andree  principalis,  et  sigillo  officii  officialatus  eiusdem  in  corroborationem 
premissorum  appenso,  apud  Sanctumandream,  anno,  die  et  mense  antedictis. 

QQ.  Maeca  .anntji  redditus  de  Cakel. 
WiLELJius  Eex  Scotorum,  episcopis,  abbatibus,  comitibus,  baronibus,  justiciis, 
ministris  et  omnibus  probis  hominibus  tocius  terre  sue,  clericis  et  laicis 
sahitem :  Sciant  presentes  et  futuri  me  concessisse  et  hac  carta  mea  con- 
firmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte  Marie  de  Cambuskynneth  et  canonicis 
ibidem  Deo  servientibus  in  liberam  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  vnam  marcam 
argenti  in  burgo  de  Carel  de  firma  ipsius  burgi  quam  A[da]  Comitissa  mater 
mea  eis  dedit  ad  luminare  ipsius  ecclesie ;  tenendam  ita  libere  et  quiete  et 
honorifice  sicut  carta  matris  mee  testatur  et  confirmatur  :  Testibus  A\'[altero] 
de  Bidun,  cancellario,  Hugone  capellano  meo,  rhiUj)po  de  ColeuiHe,  Thoma 
de  Muschampe,  apud  Linlidqw. 

67.  Confikjiatio  ecclesie  de  Ckethyn  tt  sit  solum  cueatis  jiaxualis. 
Vniueesis  Sancte  Matris  ecclesie  filiis  tam  presentibus  quam  futuris  ad  quos 
presentes  litere  perueneriut,  "Willelmus  miseratione  diuina  episcopus  Abir- 
donensis,  salutem  in  omniiuu  Saluatore  ;  Noueritis  quod  cum  nuper  ecclesiam 
parochialem  de  Creythy  in  ^Mania,  nostre  diocesis,  que  pleno  iure  pertinet 
ad  monasterium  de  Cambuskynneth  diocesis  Sanctiandree,  inter  alias  eiusdem 
diocesis  visitassemus,  inuenimus  fructus  ipsius  ecclesie  ita  tenues  et  exiles, 


#W^^^^  Qo6mfff^  t^c\S6<f^ 

-<tH  Ke^Yje  ^(^o^  tcno^^m^  ^s>ryfff>fftafjt^*^>ii^  t^rti^^ 

Qiff€ti.  ffft^\t%i.^iXi^f\Gf^C^ff\fit£f)  <tl^-<XCf\0^yU:^'^^^^ 

S^rtrtffy  /fffo^tn&f^  (ntftffti^  jft^r^cW  tpn^*^ftt>tfft!i.xprj 
^t*Vf^  -<fn*m>  A^^ffti^fl^ yffftt^it^yfff6^  «^♦^'Nj^v^ tw  Cytftri- 
tnwcf^tH^  «fcc^^"C<£»tC»t<>7  J^ftStiiMt.  e^<*tffe£i^&c^(yff0zi 
(tcC^Mtf^^rtt^^fH^f^tyftr^tff^t^j^^t^ffX  ^-ti^ytffrtyrtfattVz. 

::j^ip^^yffci>^ -ityCunW ^«m-m-^  fftii^^l0a^%^tf^ ^tt^^a^ 


DE  CAMBUSKEXXETII. 


89 


qnod,  deductis  oueribus  eiusdem,  modiciuu  restaLat  ad  releuaiidum  dictimi 
monasterium  quod  multis  calamitatibus  et  distructiouibus  subiacebat ;  Xos 
igitur  attendentes  tam  ipsius  ecclesie  quam  monasterii  paupertatem,  et  licet 
de  iure  quelibet  ecclesia  parrochialis  per  ciu'atum  perpetuum  debeat  gubernari, 
fructus  tameu  non  sufficiunt  ad  liuiusmodi  ouera  supportauda,  dispensatiue 
duximus  concedeudum,  et  ex  gracia  speciali,  quod  religiosi  viri,  abbas  et 
conuentus  ipsius  mouasterii  qui  pro  tempore  fuerint,  ipsam  ecclesiam  cum 
fructibus,  redditibus  eiusdem  ac  pertineuciis  vniuersis,  in  suos  proprios  vsus 
habeant  et  possideant  imperpetuum,  et  per  ydoneum  capellanum  temporalem 
in  eadem  ecclesia  faciant  ministrare,  et  ipsum  ammouere  quandocunque  pro 
sue  arbitrio  voluntatis  ;  saluo  tamen  noliis  et  successoribus  nostris  in  ecclesia 
predicta  iure  episcopali  quod  in  vicinis  ecclesiis  de  iure  vel  consuetudine 
possidetur :  In  cuius  rei  testimouium  sigillum  nostrimi  auctenticum  preseu- 
tibus  fecimus  apponi,  apud  Fethirneris,  vudecimo  die  mensis  Jauuarii  auuo 
Domini  millesimo  tricentesimo  quadragesimo  septimo. 


68.  Item  alia  Confiematio  eiusdem. 

Pateat  vniuersis  per  presentes,  nos  Malcolmum  de  Dromond  dominum  de 
MaiTe  inspexisse,  audiuisse  et  fideliter  intellexisse  diuersas  cartas  et  confir- 
mationes  diuersorum  predecessoruni  uostrorum,  videlicet,  domiuorum  Eichardi 
filii  Lugueni  et  Joachim  de  Kyubute,  militum,  bone  memorie,  reuerendis  viris 
et  religiosis  dominis  abbati  et  conuentui  monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth  con- 
fectas  super  donacione  et  confirmacione  vnius  domus  sex  acrarum  terre  arabilis 
cum  pasturis  duodecim  vaccarum  et  vnius  eque  et  vigiuti  quatuor  ouium  cum 
suis  fetibus  infra  villam  nostram  de  Causcliiui  in  pm'am,  perpetuam  et  paci- 
ficam  elemosinam  :  Nos  igitirr,  pro  sahite  anime  nostre,  predecessorum  et 
successorum  nostrorum,  easdem  donationem  et  confirmationem  in  omnibus  suis 
punctis  et  articulis  pro  nobis  et  heredibus  nostris  approbamus,  ratificamus, 

12 


90 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


et  imperpetuum  coufirmamus  tlictis  canonicis  et  eorum  successoribus :  In 
cuius  rei  testimonium  sigillum  nostrum  presentibus  est  appensum,  apud 
Cambuskynneth,  sexto  die  mensis  Mai"cii  anno  Domini  millesimo  tricen- 
tesirao  nonagesimo  quinto. 

69.    EeNUNCIATIO  rUTATIUI  lURIS  OMNIUM  DECIMARUM  MOLENDINORUM  DE 

Clacmanan. 

cLACMANAN.  Vniuersis  presentcs  literas  inspecturis,  Dauid  Brus,  domiuus  de  Clacmanan, 

miles,  salutem  in  Domino  serapiternam :  Cum  omnes  et  singule  decime 
molendinorum  meorura  de  Clacmanan  predictorum  ad  religiosos  viros  canonicos 
rcgulares  monasterii  de  Cambuskynnetli,  ordinis  beati  Augustini,  Sancti- 
audree  diocesis,  ratione  ecclesie  sue  parrocliialis  de  Clacmanan  predicto 
diocesis  supradicte,  de  iure  perpetuo  pertinere  dinoscuntur,  et  quas  quidem 
molendinorum  meorum  decimas  suas  nonnulli  predecessores  mei  doraiai  de 
Clacmanan  predicti  per  aliquos  annos  occupantes  nunquam  iuste  ab  eisdem 
detinuerunt :  Noueritis  me  pro  me  et  lieredibus  meis,  diuine  pietatis  intuitu, 
et  pro  salute  anime  mee,  heredum  meorum  et  omnium  predecessorum  et  suc- 
cessorum  meorum,  quietum  clamasse,  sursum  reddidisse  pureque  et  simpliciter 
resignasse,  ac  de  nouo,  propter  zelum  specialem  quo  dictis  canonicis  sum 
astrictus  et  habuudanciorem  huius  rei  firmitatcni,  dedisse,  concessisse  et  per 
presentes  confirmasse  omnes  et  singulas  ipsorum  molendinorura  meorum 
decimas  suas  prefatis  canonicis  et  suis  successoribus  imperpetuum :  Tenendas, 
habendas  et  percipiendas  omnes  et  siugulas  dictorum  molendinorum  meorum 
de  Clacmanau  decimas  suas  prefatis  canonicis  et  successoribus  suis  a  me  et 
heredibus  meis  siugulis  annis  et  terminis  imperpetuum,  cum  omni  suo  iure, 
clameo,  proprietate  et  possessione  que  et  cpias  predecessores  sui  habueruut, 
ipsi  habent  seu  habere  debeut,  vel  successores  sui  habere  poterunt  quomodo- 
libet  in  futurum,  vel  que  et  quas  ego  vel  heredes  mei  quacunque  occasione 


DE  CAMBUSKEKNETII. 


91 


liabere  potero  seu  poterunt  quoquo  modo,  adeo  libere,  iutegre,  pleuarie,  lionori- 
fice,  beue  et  in  pace  sicut  aliqui  religiosi  aliquas  decinias  infra  regnum  Scotie 
melius  liabent,  teuent  seu  percipiuut,  ita,  videlicet,  quod  nec  ego  Dauid,  miles 
predictus,  nec  lieredes  mei,  nec  aliquis  alius  uoniiue  nostro  aliquod  ius,  iuris 
clameum,  titidum  seu  calumpniamin  dictorum  moleudinorum  meoruni  deciniis 
habere  potero  seu  poterunt  quacunque  ex  causa,  sed  ab  ipsis  molendinorum 
decimis  suis  exclusi  et  immunes  ego  et  ipsi  erimus  imperpetuum  :  In  cuius 
rei  testimonium  sigillum  meuni  vuacmn  sigillis  quorundam  testium  subscrip- 
torum  presentibus  est  appensum.  Datum  apud  Clacmanan  predictum,  sexto  die 
mensis  Octobris  anuo  Domini  millesimo  quadringentesimo  sexto ;  biis  testibus 
nobilibus  viris,  dominis  Eoberto  Levingstoune  domiuo  de  Dalry,  Alexandro 
de  Cokburne  domino  de  Langtoune,  Jolianne  de  Cokburue  domino  de  jMor- 
toune,  mUitibus,  Alexandro  de  Levingstoune  doniino  de  Calentar,  Henrico 
de  Levingstoune  domino  de  jManerstoune,  armigeris,  et  multis  aliis. 


CL.\C.M.iXAN^ 


70.    D0X.A.TIO  TEKEE  DE  DUGLYN. 

Seheeus  de  Quinci,  comes  Wintonie,  omnibus  presens  scriptum  visuiis  vel 
audituris,  salutem :  Nouerit  vniuersitas  vestra  me,  pro  salute  anime  domini 
mei  Willelmi  illustris  Eegis  Scocie  et  autecessorum  et  successorum  eius,  et  pro 
salute  anime  mee  et  antecessorum  et  successorum  meonmi,  coucessione  et 
assensu  Eoberti  filii  mei,  dedisse  et  concessisse  et  hac  carta  mea  coufirmasse 
Deo  et  ecclesie  Saucte  Marie  de  Striueliug  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruien- 
tibus  et  seruituris,  totam  terram  de  Duglyu  per  easdem  diuisas  per  quas  Nesus 
filius  "Willelmi,  auus  meus,  eam  tenuit :  Tenendam  de  me  et  heredibus  meis  iu 
liberam  et  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam,  cum  omnibus  iustis  pertinenciis 
suis,  ita  libere  et  quiete,  pleuarie  et  honorifice  sicut  aliqua  elemosina  liberius 
et  quietius,  plenius  et  houorificentius,  ab  aliquibus  religiosis  viris  in  regno 
Scotie  tenetur  et  possidetur  :  Et  ego  Seherus  et  heredes  mei  warantizabimus 


92 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


eis  totam  predictam  terram  contra  Duncanum  filium  Hamelini  et  contra 
omnes  liomines  ;  liiis  testibus,  Roberto  filio  Seheri  comitis,  Eogero  priore  de 
insula  episcopi,  Waltero  capellano  Eegis,  Willelmo  de  Bosco,  Hugone  de 
Prebenda,  Gilberto  clerico  Eegis,  Willelmo  de  Selford,  Milone  Senescallo, 
Henrico  de  Brebot,  Roberto  Carnane,  Rogero  filio  Henrici,  Willelmo  de 
Burhame,  Willelmo  de  Finelei,  Willelmo  de  Salle,  Ricardo  clerico,  Johanne 
Waleram,  Willelmo  capellano  et  multis  aliis. 

7 1 .  Item  de  eadem. 
Seherus  de  Quinci,  omnibus  amicis  et  hominibus  suis,  salutem :  Sciant  pre- 
sentes  et  futuri  me,  pro  salute  anime  domini  mei  Willelmi  Regis  illustris 
Eegis  Scocie  et  antecessorum  et  successorum  eius,  et  pro  salute  anime  mee  et 
antecessorum  et  successomm  meorum,  dedisse  et  concessisse  et  hac  carta  mea 
confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte  IMarie  de  Cambuskynneth  et  canonicis 
ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  et  seruituris,  totam  terram  meam  de  Duglyn  per 
easdem  diuisas  per  quas  Nesus  filius  Willelmi,  auus  meus,  eam  tenuit :  Tenen- 
dam  iu  liberam  et  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam,  cum  omnibus  iustis  per- 
tinenciis  suis,  ita  libere  et  quiete,  plenarie  et  honorifice,  sicut  alias  elemosinas 
suas  liberius  et  quietius,  plenius  et  honorificentius,  in  regno  Scocie  de  aliquo 
barone  tenent  et  possident :  Testibus,  Willelmo  capellano  domini  Regis, 
Philippo  de  Valoniis  camerario  domini  regis,  Rogero  Vatingfehill,  AVillelmo 
de  Bosco,  clericis  domini  regis,  Roberto  de  Carnane,  Willelmo  de  Crupetune, 
Symone  de  Quinci,  Dauid  Giffard,  et  multis  aliis. 


72.  DOUGLIE  terrarum  confiematio. 
WlLELMUS    Dei    gracia    Rex    Scotorum,    omnibus   probis   hominibus   totius 
terre  sue,  elericis  et  laicis,  salutem  :  Sciant  presentes  et  futuri  me  concessisse 
et  hac  carta  mea  confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte  Marie  de  Cambus- 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


93 


kynnetli  et  canonicis  ibiclem  Deo  serixieutibus,  donationem  illam  quam 
Seherus  de  Quiuci  eis  fecit  de  tota  terra  sua  de  Duglyn  :  Tenendam  iu  liberam 
et  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  per  rectas  diuisas  predicte  terre,  et  cum 
omnibus  aliis  ad  eandem  terram  iuste  pertinentibus  ita  libere  et  quiete, 
plenarie  et  honorifice  sicut  carta  predicta  Seheri  iuste  testatur,  saluo  toto 
forinseco  seruicio  meo  quod  ad  dictam  teiTam  illani  pertinet ;  testibus  comite 
Patricio,  iusticiario,  Willelmo  capellano  meo,  Eicardo  de  Prebenda  clerico  meo, 
Philippo  marescallo  meo,  Dauid  marescallo  meo,  Alexandro  filio  Tliore, 
Eogero  de  WUtun,  Herberto  de  Camera,  apud  Edinburgh,  septimo  die  Julii. 


73.    PiESIGXATIO  TERRE  DE  DUGLYN. 

Seherus  de  Quinci,  comes  Wintonie,  omnibus  hoc  scriptum  visuris  vel 
audituris,  salutem :  Nouerit  \Tiiuersitas  vestra  Duncanum  filium  Hameliui 
et  Adam  heredem  suum  quietum  clamasse  pro  se  et  heredibus  suis  michi  et 
heredibus  meis  in  plena  curia  mea  apud  Locres,  totum  ius  qiiod  habuerunt 
vel  habere  poterunt  in  terram  de  Duglyn  et  omnes  cartas  suas  quas  inde 
habuerunt  michi  resignaueruut.  Et  ego,  concessione  et  asseusu  Eoberti  filii 
mei  coram  predicto  Duucano,  et  illo  eodem  Duncano  concedente  pro  se 
heredibus  suis,  dedi  et  concessi  et  hac  mea  carta  confirmaui  Deo  et  ecclesie 
Sancte  Marie  de  Striueling  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  et  seruituris, 
totam  terram  de  Duglyn :  Tenendam  de  me  et  heredibus  meis  in  liberam  et 
pmram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  per  easdem  diuisas  per  quas  Nesus  filius 
Willehui,  auus  meus,  terraiu  illam  tenuit,  et  cum  omnibus  aliis  ad  terram 
illam  iuste  pertinentibus,  ita  libere  et  quiete,  plenarie  et  houorifice  sicut 
aliqui  viri  religiosi  aliquam  elemosinam  liberius  et  quiecius  plenius  et  honori- 
ficencius  de  dono  alicuius  comitis  vel  baronis  in  regno  Scotie  tenent  et 
possident :  Et  ego  predicti  Duncani  quantum  faciam  pro  tercia  parte  terre 
de  Duglyn  quam  tenuerat :  Et  ego  et  heredes  mei  totam  terram  de  Duglyn 


94 


REGISTEUM  MOXASTERII 


predictis  canonicis  contra  omnes  liomines  warantizabimus  ;  testibus  Eoberto 
filio  Seheri  comitis  Wintonie,  Willelmo  comite  de  Salusbiri,  Eoberto  filio 
Walteri,  Baldewino  de  Wat,  Jobanne  filio  comitis  de  Fylf,  Willelmo  de 
Vepont,  W[illelmo]  de  Lacraie,  Willelmo  Senescallo,  Eoberto  Carnane, 
Duncano  filio  Hamilini,  et  Tereld  cognato  suo,  Eicardo  et  Willelmo,  capel- 
lanis,  Willelmo  filio  Lambur,  et  filio  suo  Lambur,  Hugone  cementario  et 
Hngone  clerico  cognato  suo,  Siward  de  Alwetb,  et  filiis  suis  Siward  et 
Thoma,  Eicardo  Sergant,  et  Eoberto  Stur  et  niultis  aliis. 


74,    COMPOSITIO  SUPER  DECIMIS  EIUSDEM. 

Axxo  ab  Incarnatione  Domini  millesimo  ducentesimo  quadragesimo  septimo, 
ita  conuenit  de  consensu  et  voluntate  capituli  Dunkeldensis  ecclesie,  inter 
venerabileni  patrem,  dominum  Galfridum  episcopum  Dunkeldensem,  qui 
noniine  ecclesie  sue  de  Forgound  decimas  petit  terre  de  Duglyu  ex  vna 
parte,  et  abbatem  et  conuentura  de  Cambixskynneth  ex  altera,  qui  totam 
terram  de  Duglyn  in  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  habent  et  possident. 
ita,  videlicet,  quod  dicti  abbas  et  conuentus  in  monasterio  de  Cambus- 
kynneth  Deo  et  beate  Marie  seruientes  et  imperpetuum  seruituri,  pro  omni- 
modis  decimis  terre  de  Duglyn,  siue  propriis  sumptibus  eam  excoluerint,  siue 
aliis  tradiderint  ad  firmam  integre,  tam  pro  maioribus  qiuim  pro  minoribus, 
exceptis  oblacionibus  et  exequiis  mortuorum,  imjierpetuum  centum  solidos 
argenti  nomine  pacis  mense  domini  Ejiiscopi  annuatim  ad  duos  terminos 
persoluent,  scilicet,  quinquaginta  solidos  ad  festum  Sancti  ]\Lartiui  in  hieme  et 
quinquaginta  solidos  ad  Penthecosten,  termino  iucipiente  dicte  firme  solutionis 
ad  festum  Sancti  Martini  in  hieme  eiusdem  anni :  et  ad  maiorem  securitatem 
Iiuius  instrumenti,  et  vt  robur  firmitatis  obtineat,  dictus  dominus  episcopus,  ad 
instanciam  dicti  abbatis  et  conuentus,  sigillum  suuni,  vnacum  sigillo  capituli 
Dunkeldensis,  presenti  pagine  fecit  apponi ;  teste  eodem  capitulo. 


DE  CAMBUSKEXXETH. 


95 


75.  Secunda  Citatio. 


JoHANXES  ile  Eglyntoune,  prior  prioratus  de  Blantyre,  Glasguensis  diocesis 
commissarius  ac  iudex  subdelegatus  ad  infrascripta  solus  et  in  solidum  a 
reuerendo  patre  in  Christo,  domiuo  Waltero  episcopo  Sanctiandree  speciali- 
ter  deputatus,  vniuersis  et  singulis  alibatibus,  prioribus,  prepositis,  decanis, 
archidiaconis,  cantoribus,  succentoribus,  thesaurariis,  scolasticis,  ceterisque 
ecclesiarum  canotiicis,  tam  cathedralium  qu.am  collegiatarum  ecclesiarum 
rectorihus  et  vicariis  paiTochialium  ecclesiarum  et  locatenentium  earundem, 
capellanisque  curatis  et  non  curatis,  exemptis  et  non  e.xemptis  clericis  et 
notariis  publicis  per  civitates  et  dioceses  Dunl^eldensem,  Sanctiandree  et 
Dumblanensem,  ac  aliis  jjer  regnum  Scocie  vbilibet  coustitutis,  ad  quos 
presentes  litere  perueneriut  vel  ad  quem,  salutem  in  Domino,  et  mandatis 
nostris  ymmouerius  apostolicis  firmiter  obedire :  Literas  commissionis  prefati 
reuerendi  patris  sub  ipsius  sigUlo  patenter  coufectas,  non  viciatas,  uec  in  aliqua 
sui  parte  suspectas  recepimus  tenorem  qui  sequitur  continentes  :  Walterus 
miseratione  diuina  episcopus  Sanctiandree  venerabili  viro  et  circumspecto 
domino  Johauui  de  Eglintouue  priori  de  Elautyre,  in  iure  canonico  liceuciato, 
salutem,  et  cum  beuedictione  diuina  :  Literas  sanctissimi  iu  Cliristo  patris  ac 
domini,  nostri  domini  Clementis  diuina  prouideucia  pape  septimi,  eius  vera 
bulla  plumbea  cum  cordula  canapis  more  Eomaue  curie  bullatas,  recipimus, 
formam  que  sequitur  contineutes :  Clemens  episcopus  seruus  seruorum  Dei, 
venerabili  fratri  Waltero  episcopo  Sanctiandree,  salutem  et  apostolicam 
benedictionem  :  Personam  tuani  uobis  et  apostolice  sedi  deuotam  tuis  exigen- 
tibus  meritis  patcrna  beneuolencia  honorare  volentes,  illa  tibi  libenter  con- 
cedimus  per  que  alii  ab  expensis  et  laboribus  valeant  releuari,  cum  itaque 
vniuersi  episcopi  regni  Scotie  Eomane  Ecclesie  immediate  subiecti  existant, 
ac  ab   eis  preterea  debeat   inmediate   ad   sedem  apostolicam  appellari,   et 


EXCOMJIUXICATIO. 


96 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERIl 


EXCOMMUXICATIO. 


sicut  exliibita  nobis  pro  parte  tua  petitio  continebat  interdum  ab  eis  et 
eciam  ab  aliis  ordiaariis  dicti  regni  necnon  a  delegatis  et  a  subdelegatis  per 
literas  apostolicas  in  dicto  regno  iudicibus  ad  sedem  eandem  pliuies  appellen- 
tur,  appellantes  buiusmodi,  propter  longam  locorum  distanciam,  virorumrpie 
pericula  ac  graues  labores  et  expensas  quas  in  persecutione  appellationum 
huiusmodi  eos  sulnre  oportet,  ius  suum  dimittunt  frequencius  indefensum 
pluraque  grauamina  et  oppressiones  sustineant,  et  contra  grauamina  et 
oppressiones  [eadem]  quandoque  a  seculari  potentia  remedia  implorantes  se 
et  siia  interdum  laicis  obligant  et  submittunt,  in  ecclesiastice  libertatis  pre- 
iudicium  et  grauamen  ;  nos  super  hiis  salubriter  prouidere  volentes  fraternitati 
tue  vt  possis  causas  quarumcunque  ijrinuirum  appellationum  quas  ab  eiusdem 
episcopis  et  aliis  ordinariis  ac  aliis  delegatis  et  subdelegatis  iudicibus  pro 
tempore  ad  sedem  eandem  interponi  contigerit,  vocatis  qui  fuerint  euocandi, 
audire,  et  auditis  hinc  inde  propositis  quod  iustum  fuerit  appellatione  remota 
decernere,  idque  quod  decreueris  auctoritate  nostra  firmiter  obseruari  facere, 
innouare  ad  hoc  si  opus  fuerit  auxilio  brachii  secularis  plenam  et  liberam 
concedimus  tenore  presencium  auctoritate  apostolica  facultatem.  Datimi 
Auinione,  decimo  quinto  kalendas  ]\Iarcu  pontificatus  nostri  anno  octauo.  De 
vestris  igitur  discretione,  sciencia  et  legalitate  plenius  confidentes,  vobis  ad 
cognoscendum  in  omnibus  causis  primariun  appeIlationum,ipsas  examinandum, 
decidendimi,  et  omnimoda  potestate  vobis  in  dictis  literis  apostolicis  concessa 
fine  debito  terminandum,  vices  nostras  committimus  per  presentes,  quousque 
eas  ad  nos  duximus  reuocandas.  Datiim  sub  nostro  sigillo,  apud  Inchomeyoth, 
octauo  die  mensis  Januarii  auno  Domiui  millesimo  tricentesimo  nonagesimo 
octauo.  Post  quarum  quidem  literarum  j)resentationem  et  receptionem, 
reuerendus  in  Christo  pater  domiuus  Willelmus  de  Blakburne,  abbas 
monasterii  de  CambuskjTineth,  ordinis  Saucti  Augustini,  Sanctiandree 
diocesis,  nomine  monasteru  sui  supradicti,  super  c^uibusdam  appellationibus 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


a  reuerendo  iu  Christo  patre,  domino  Eoberto  Dei  gracia  episcopo  Duukeld- 
ensi,  super  diuersis  grauamiuibus,  iniuriis  et  dampnis  sibi  et  monasterio  suo 
predicto  illatis,  ad  sedem  apostolicam  interpositis  et  vigore  commissionis 
apostolice  supradicte  nobis  nuper  in  iudicio  exhibitis  et  admissis,  et  ipso 
domiuo  episcopo  ad  hoc  legitime  vocato,  et  coutumaciter  absente,  ex  causis 
probabilibus  legitime  et  canonice  interpositis,  pronunciatis,  humiliter  peciit 
sibi  aliam  citationem  legitimam  contra  et  aduersus  dictum  dominum  epi- 
scopum  Dunkeldensem  in  forma  debita  et  consueta  per  nos  decerni,  iuxta  vim 
et  effectum  commissionis  supradicte,  necnon  et  desiderium  proximi  termini  iu 
ipsarum  appellatiouum  causis  per  nos  duduni  assignati :  Nos  igitur  Johannes 
commissarius  prefatus  attendentes  requisitiouem  liuiusmodi  fore  iustam  et 
consonam  rationi,  ac  cupientes,  dante  Domino,  partibus  predietis  super  pre- 
missis  iusticiam  ministrare,  vos  omnes  et  singulos  siipradictos  quibus  nostre 
litere  diriguntur,  et  vestrum  cuilibet  in  solidum  coniunctim  et  diuisim,  aucto- 
ritate  apostolica  qua  fungimur  in  hac  parte  tenore  presencium  requii'inius  et 
monemus  primo,  secundo,  et  tercio  et  peremptorie,  vobis  nichilominus  et 
vestrum  cuiUbet  in  vuiute  sancte  obediencie  et  sub  excommunicationis  pena, 
quam  ex  nuuc  prout  ex  tunc  in  vos  et  vestrum  quemlibet  canonica  mouitione 
premissa  ferimus  in  hiis  scriptis,  si  ea  que  vobis  in  hac  parte  committimus 
negleseritis  seu  contempseritis  adimplere,  vobis  et  vestrum  cuilibet  districte 
precipiendo  mandamus  quatenus,  receptis  presentibus,  vos  seu  A^estrura  quilibet 
qui  super  hoc  ex  parte  dictorum  abbatis  et  conuentus  fueritis  requisiti  seu 
aliquis  vestrum  fuerit  requisitus,  ita  tamen  quod  in  hiis  expquendis  alter 
vestrum  alterum  non  expectet,  nec  vnus  per  alium  se  excuset,  infra  sex  dierum 
spacium  post  presentationem  seu  notificationem  presencium  vobis  factam 
immediate  sequentium,  quorum  sex  dierum  duos  pro  primo,  duos  pro  secundo, 
et  reUquos  duos  dies  pro  tercio  et  peremptorio  termino  ac  monitioue  canonica 
\'obis  vniuersis  et  singulis  prefatum  dominum  Eobertmu  episcopum  Duu- 

13 


EXCOMMDNICATIO. 


98 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


EXCOMMUNICATIO. 


keldensem  in  eius  propria  persona,  si  eiiis  presenciam  commode  habere 
poteritis,  alioqnin  ipsum  in  domo  liabitationis  sue  vel  in  ecclesia  fratnim  de 
Tulylum  Duukeldensis  diocesis  intra  missarum  solempnia,  seu  in  aliis  locis 
vbi  expediens  fuerit,  et  prout  requisiti  fueritis  seu  aliquis  vestrum  fuerit 
requisitus,  publice  alta  et  intelligibili  voce  et  ex  parte  nostra  ymmouerius 
apostolica  peremptorie  citare  curetis,  quem  eciam  tenore  presencium  sic 
citamus  vt  vicesimo  quinto  die  mensis  Februarii  compareat  coram  nobis  per 
se  vel  per  procuratorem  legitime  et  sufficienter  instructum,  scilicet  in  ecclesia 
parrochiali  ciuitatis  Sanctiandree  hora  solita  caiisaruin  ad  recipiendum 
libellum  aut  libellos  in  causa  seu  causis  dictarum  appellationum,  ac  ad  omnes 
actus  et  alios  necessarios  in  causa  supradicta  gradatim  et  successiue  vsque  ad 
diffinitiuam  sentenciam  inclusiue  cum  predicto  domino  abbate  vel  eius 
legitimo  procuratore  processurus  et  procedi  visurus  atqne  dicturus,  facturus 
et  recepturus  et  super  premissis  responsurus  prout  iustitia  suaserit  et  ordo 
dictauerit  rationis,  certificantes  nichilominus  eidem  domino  episcopo  et  ei 
exprcsse  predicentes  quod  siue  in  dicto  citationis  termino  comparuerit  siue 
non,  nos  nichilominus  ad  premissa  omnia  et  singula  in  causa  predicta  ad 
instanciam  predicti  abbatis  vel  eius  procuratoris  procedemus,  ipsius  citati 
absencia  seu  contumacia  iu  aliquo  non  obstante,  diem  vero  huiusmodi  cita- 
tionis  atque  formam  et  quicquid  in  premissis  duxeritis  faciendum  nobis 
per  vestras  patentes  literas  seu  instnimentum  publicum  harum  seriem  seu 
designationem  in  se  continentes  seu  continens,  remissis  presentibus,  fideliter 
intimare  curetis,  absolucionem  omnium  et  smgulorum  qui  prefatas  nostras 
sentencias  vel  earum  aliquam  incurrerint  quoquomodo  nobis  vel  superiori 
nostro  tantummodo  reseruantes  :  volumus  ecianr  dicto  citato  copiam  fieri  de 
premissis  si  eam  pecierit,  petentis  tamen  sumptibus  expensis.  In  quorum 
omnium  testimonium  presentes  nostre  citationis  literas  nostri  sigilli  apposi- 
tione  fecimus   roborari,  apud  Sanctumandream,  vicesima  octaua  die  mensis 


DE  GAMBUSKENNETH. 


99 


Jaimani  anno  Domini  millesimo  tricentesimo  nonagesimo  secunJo,  indictione 
j)rima,  pontificatus  sanctissinii  iu  Christo  patris  ac  Domini  nostri,  domini 
Clementis,  diuina  pronidencia  pape  septimi,  anno  quinto  decimo. 

Et  ego  Thomas  Twy  clericus  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  publicus  auctoritate 
apostolica  notarius  premissis  omnibus  et  singulis  dum,  sic  vt  premittitur  fier- 
eut  et  agerentur,  vuacum  testibus  subscriptis  preseus  fui,  eaque  sic  fieri,  vidi 
et  audiui  ac  propria  manu  mea  scripsi,  signoque  meo  solito  et  consueto  sig- 
uaui,  rogatus  et  requisitus  iu  testimonium  omnium  premissorum ;  preseuti- 
bus  reuereudis  viris  domino  Johaune  Gourlaw  mouacho  de  Aberbrothok, 
domino  ^Yillehuo  de  Cunynghame  capellano,  domino  Johaune  de  Scoua 
capellano,  domino  Eolierto  de  Monros  capellauo,  et  phiribus  aliis  testibus 
ad  premissa  vocatis  specialiter  et  rogatis.  Easuras  iu  vicesima  Hnea  et  in 
vicesima  prima  linea  fideliter  approbo,  cum  premissis  etiam  verba  singulis  iu 
prefata  vt  sic  rasuram  in  xxxi  liuea  cum  ceteris  fidehter  approbo. 

TllO.MAS  Twv. 


EXCOMMUNICATIO. 


76.    EXCOMMUNICATIO  IX  EPISCOPUM  DUNKELDEXSEM. 

Nos  Johanne.s  de  Eglintoun,  prior  prioratus  de  Bhintyre  Glasguensis  diocesis, 
commissarius  ac  iudox  subdelegatus  ad  infrascripta  solus  et  in  sohdum  ;i 
reuereudo  in  Christo  patre  ac  domiuo,  domiuo  WaUero  Dei  gracia  episcopo 
Sanctiandree  speciaUter  deputatus,  vuiuersis  et  singuhs  quibus  Htere  nostre 
inhibitionis  reuocationis  presentibus  literis  affixe  diriguntur,  salutem  in 
Domino,  et  fidem  presentibus  indubiam  habere,  ac  mandatis  uostris  yramo- 
uerius  apostoHcis  firmiter  obedire  ;  vuiuersitati  vestre  notuni  facimus  per  pre- 
sentes  quod  presenti  vicesimo  quinto  die  men.sis  Februarii  in  parrochiali 
ecclesia  civitatis  Sanctiaudree,  pro  tribuuali  sedeutibus  ex  inspectione  cuius- 
dam  publici  instrumeuti  mauu  Thome  Twy  publici  uotarii  coufecti,  per 
reuerendum  in  Christo  patrem,  dominum  Willehuum  de  Blacburne,  abbatem 


100 


REGISTEUM  MONASTERII 


ExcoMMUNicATio.  inonasterii  de  Cambuskynueth,  ordinis  Sancti  Angustini,  Sanctiandree  diocesis, 

in  iudicio  coram  nobis  exliibita,  constitit  euidenter  dictas  literas  inhibitorias 
et  attemptatorias  iniuste  contra  et  post  appellationes  in  dictis  literis  coutentas 
reuocatorias  vltimo  die  mensis  Januarii  vltimo  iam  preterito  fuisse  domino 
Robeito  episcopo  Dunkeldensi  exhibitas  et  canonice  ac  legitime  executas  et  ex- 
tunc  plus  quam  octodecim  ymmo  viginti  quinque  dies  esse  elapsos  ut  animalia 
iu  dictis  literis  reuocatoriis  coutenta  per  ipsuin  episcopum  ablata  iniuste  uec 
restituta  prout  restitui  mandauimus,  pronunciamus,  declaranius,  et  tenore  pre- 
seucium  determinamus  jjredictum  dominum  episcopum  in  omues  et  singidas 
interdicti,  suspentionis  et  excommunicationis  seutencias  in  ipsis  literis  nostris 
reuocatoriis  coutentas  et  preseutibus  ad  dorsum,  vt  premittitur,  affixas  iucidisse  : 
Vobis  et  vestrum  cuilibet  quibus  dicte  litere  nostre  reuocatorie  diriguutur,  in 
virtute  sancte  obediencie  et  sub  excommunicationis  pena  iu  dictis  literis  con- 
tenta,  districte  precii^iendo  mandamus  vt  dictum  dounnum  episcopum  publice, 
iutra  missarum  solempnia,  et  alibi  vbi  maior  congregatio  populi  poterit  haberi 
excommuuicatum  nuncietis,  a  dicta  denunciatione  non  cessaute  douec  aliud  a 
uobis  habueritis  in  maudatis:  Acta  fueruut  hec  in  ecclesia  parrochiali  ciuitatis 
vicesimo  quinto  die  mensis  Februarii,  sub  appensione  sigilli  uostri  et  subscrip- 
tioue  et  signo  uotarii  publici  iufrascripti,  anno  Domini  millesimo  tricentesimo 
nonagesimo  secundo,  indictioue  prinia,  ijontificatus  sanctissimi  in  Christo 
patris  ac  domini  nostri,  domini  Clementis,  diuina  prouideutia  pape  septimi, 
auno  quinto  decimo ;  presentibus  discretis  viris  dominis  Joliaune  Gourlay 
uionacho,  Stephano  Bigly,  Johanne  de  Scona  vicario  de  Forgouuddeveny, 
Roberto  de  Monros  rectore  de  Quylk,  testibus  ad  premissa  vocatis  specialiter 
et  rogatis. 

Et  ego  Thomas  Twy  Sanctiandree  diocesis  publicus  auctoritate  apostolica 
notarius,  predictis  omnibus  et  singulis  dum,  sic  vt  premittitur  fiereut  et 
agerentur,  vnaciim  prenominatis  testibus  presens  interfui,  eaque  sic  fieri  vidi 


DE  CAMBUSKEXNETH. 


101 


et  audiui  et  in  hanc  publicam  formam  redegi,  ac  propria  maiiu  mea  scripsi, 
signoque  meo  solito  et  consueto  signaui,  rogatus  et  requisitus  in  testimonium 
omnium  premissorum. 

77-   EXCOMMUNICATIO  IN  EPISCOPUM  DUXKELDEXSEM  IN  lUDICIO  FACTA 
PER  JUDICEM. 

JoHANNES  de  Eglyntoune,  prior  prioratus  de  Blantyre  Glasguensis  diocesis, 
commissarius  ac  judex  subdelegatus  ad  infrascripta  solus  et  insolidum  a 
reuerendo  patre  in  Christo  domino  Waltero  episcopo  Sanctiandree  specialiter 
deputatus,  vniuersis  et  singulis  abbatibus,  prioribus,  iirepositis,  decanis, 
archidiaconis,  cantoribus,  succentoribus,  thesaurariis,  scolasticis,  ceterisque 
canonicis  tam  cathedrahum  quam  coUegiatarum  ecclesiarum,  rectoribus  et 
vicariis  parrochialium  ecclesiarum  et  locatenentium  earundem,  capellanisque 
curatis  et  non  curatis,  exemptis  et  non  exemptis,  clericis  et  notariis  publicis 
per  civitates  et  dioceses  Dunblanensem,  Sanctiandree  et  Dunkeldensem,  ac 
aliis  per  regnum  Scotie  vbilibet  constitutis,  ad  c[uos  presentes  litere  peruen- 
erint  vel  ad  qiiem,  salutem  in  Domino,  et  mandatis  nostris  ymmouerius  apos- 
tolicis  firmiter  obedire  ;  literas  commissionis  prefati  reuerendi  patris  sub  ijisius 
sigillo  patentes  confectas  non  viciatas  nec  in  aliqua  sui  parte  suspectas  recejii- 
mus  tenorem  qui  sequitur  continentes :  Walterus  miseratione  diuina  epi- 
scopus  Sanctiandree,  venerabili  et  circumspecto  viro  domino  Johanni  de 
Eglyntoune,  priori  de  Blantyre,  in  iure  canonico  licentiato,  sahitem  cum  bene- 
dictione  diuina  ;  literas  sanctissimi  in  Christo  patris  ac  domini  nostri,  domini 
Clementis  diuina  prouidencia  pape  septimi,  eius  vera  bulla  plumljea  cum 
cordida  canapis  more  Eomane  Curie  bullatas  recepimus  formam  que  sequitur 
continentes :  Clemens  episcopus  serui^s  seruorum  Dei,  venerabili  fratri 
Waltero  episcopo  Sanctiandree,  sahitem  et  apostoHcam  benedictionem  :  Per- 
sonam  tnam  nobis  et  apostolice  sedi  deuotara  tuis  exigentibus  meritis  paterna 


EXCOMMUNICATIO. 


102 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


EXCOMlIUNICATin 


beneuolencia  honorare  volentes,  illa  tibi  libenter  coucedimus  per  que  alii  ab 
expensis  et  laboribus  valeant  releuari,  cum  itaque  vniuersi  episcopi  regni 
Scotie  Romane  ecclesie  immediate  subiecti  existant  ac  ab  eis  preterea  debeat 
immediate  ad  sedem  apostolicam  appellari,  et,  sicut  exhibita  nobis  pro  parte 
tua  petitio  contiuebat,  interdum  ab  eis  et  eciam  ab  aliis  ordinariis  dicti  regni 
necnon  a  delegatis  et  subdelegatis  per  literas  apostolicas  in  dicto  regno 
iudicibus  quod  ad  sedem  eandem  pluries  appellentur,  ac  appellantes  huius- 
modi,  i^ropter  longam  locorum  distantiam  virorumqiie  pericula  ac  graues 
labores  et  expensas  quos  in  persecutione  appellationum  huiusmodi  eos  subire 
oportet,  ius  sunra  dimittunt  frequencius  indefensuin,  pluraque  grauamina  et 
oijpressiones  sustineant,  et  contra  grauamina  et  oppressiones  eadem  quan- 
doque  a  seculari  potencia  remedia  implorantes  se  et  sua  interdum  laicis 
obligant  et  submittiint  in  ecclesiastice  libertatis  preiudicium  et  grauamen ; 
nos  super  hiis  salubriter  prouidere  volentes,  fraternitati  tue,  vt  possis  causas 
quarumcunque  primarum  appellationum  quas  ab  eiusdem  episcopis  et 
aliis  ordinariis  ac  aliis  delegatis  et  subdelegatis  iudicibus  pro  tempore 
ad  sedem  eandem  interponi  coutigerit,  vocatis  qui  fuerint  euocandi,  audire 
et  auditis  hinc  inde  propositis,  quod  iustum  fuerit,  appellatione  remota, 
decernere,  idque  quod  decreueris  auctoritate  nostra  firmiter  obseruari  facere, 
innouare  ad  hoc  si  opus  fuerit  auxilio  brachii  secuhiris  plenam  et  liberam 
concedimus  tenore  presencium  auctoritate  apostolica  facidtatem  :  Datum 
Avinione,  decimo  quinto  kalendas  ]\Iarcii  pontificatus  nostri  anno  octauo. 
De  vestris  igitur  discretione  scientia  et  legalitate  plenius  confidentes,  vobis 
ad  cognoscendimi  in  omnibus  causis  primarum  appellationum,  ipsas  exami- 
nandum,  decidendum  et  omnimoda  potestate  vobis  in  dictis  literis  apostolicis 
concessa  fine  debita  tenninandum,  vices  nostras  committimus  per  presentes 
quousque  eas  ad  nos  duxerimus  revocandas  :  Datum  sub  sigillo  nostro  apud 
Inchem)'etli  octauo  die  mensis  Jauuarii  anno  Domini  millesimo  tricentesimo 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


103 


octuagesimo  octauo:  Post  quarum  quidem  literarum  presentationem  et  recep- 
tionem  reuerendus  in  Cliristo  pater  dominus  Willelmus  de  Blacburne  abbas 
monasterii  de  Cambuskynnetli,  ordinis  sancti  Augustini,  Sanctiaucbee  diocesis, 
nomine  monasterii  sui  supradicti,  super  quibusdam  appellationibus  a  reuerendo 
in  Christo  patre  domino  Eoberto  Dei  gracia  episcopo  Dunkeldensi,  super 
diuersis  grauaminibus,  iniuriis  et  damjjnis  sibi  et  monasterio  suo  predicto 
illatis,  ad  sedera  apostolicam  interpositis,  et  vigore  commissionis  apostolice 
supradicte,  nobis  nuper  in  iudicio  exliibitis  et  admissis,  et  ipso  domino  episcopo 
ad  hoc  legitime  vocato  et  contumaciter  absente,  ex  causis  jDrobabilibus  legit- 
time  et  canonice  interpositis,  pronunciatis,  ad  iustanciam  dicti  domini  abbatis 
prefatum  dominum  episcopum  auctoritate  nobis  apostolica  in  hac  parte  com- 
missa  fecimus  iterato  peremptorie  citari,  vt  vicesimo  c^uinto  die  mensis  Feb- 
ruarii  hora  causarum  compareret  coram  nobis,  per  se  vel  per  procuratorem 
legitime  et  sufficienter  instructum,  iu  ecclesia  parrochiali  ciuitatis  Sancti- 
andree  ad  recipiendum  libelhim  seu  libellos  in  causa  seu  causis  dictarum 
appellationum,  dicturus,  facturus  et  recepturus  et  super  premissis  responsurus 
prout  iusticia  suaserit  et  ordo  dictauerit  rationis,  et  facta  nobis  fide  per  pub- 
licum  instrumentum  dictum  dominumepiscojmm  prefata  citatione  personaliter 
apprehensum  ipsum  ad  valuas  ecclesie  predicte  per  preconem  curie  coram 
publico  notario  et  testibus  alta  et  intelligibili  voce  fecimus  euocari  ad  satis- 
faciendum,  termino  supradicto,  qui  non  comparuit  sed  se  contumaciter  absen- 
tauit ;  cuius  contumaciam  dictus  dominus  abbas  instancius  accusauit,  petens 
humiliter  prefatum  episcopum  propter  suam  manifestara  conturaaciam  et 
contemptum  excommunicationis  sentencia  innodari :  Nos  igitur  Johannes  com- 
missarius  antedictus,  attendentes  petitionem  huiusraodi  fore  iustam  et  consonam 
rationi,  prefatum  dominum  episcopura  pronunciantes  contumacem,  ipsuraque 
propter  dictam  suam  manifestam  contumaciam  auctoritate  apostolica  qua  fungi- 
mur  in  hac  parte  in  hiis  scriptis  excomraunicationis  sententiara  innodanius^ 


EXCOMMUNICATIO. 


104 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERU 


ExcoMMUNiCATio.  vos  oinnes  et  singulos  supradictos  quibus  presentes  nostre  litere  diriguntur,  et 

vestruni  quemlibet  insolidum  coniunctim  et  diuisim,  auctoritate  apostolica 
supradicta  tenore  presencium  requirimus  et  monemus  primo,  secundo  et  tertio 
et  peremptorie  vobis  nicliilominus  et  vestrum  cuilibet,  in  virtute  sancte  obe- 
diencie  et  sub  excommunicationis  pena,  quam  ex  nunc  prout  ex  tunc  in  vos 
et  vestrum  quemlibet  canonica  monitione  premissa  ferimus  in  hiis  scriptis, 
si  ea  que  vobis  in  liac  parte  committimus  neglexeritis  seu  contempseritis 
adimplere,  vobis  et  vestrum  cuilibet  districte  precipiendo  mandamus  quatenus, 
receptis  presentibus,  vos  seu  vestrum  quilibet  qui  super  lioc  ex  parte  dic- 
torum  abbatis  et  conuentus  fueritis  requisiti,  seu  aliquis  vestrum  fuerit 
requisitus,  ita  tamen  quod  iu  biis  exequendis  alter  vestrum  alteruui  uon 
expectet,  uec  vnus  per  alium  se  excuset,  infra  sex  dierum  spaciuui  post  pre- 
seutationem  seu  notificationem  presencium  vobis  factam  immediate  sequen- 
cium,  quorum  sex  dierum,  duos  pro  primo,  duos  pro  secundo,  et  reliquos  duos 
dies  pro  tertio  et  peremptorio  termino  ac  monitione  canonica  vobis  vniuersis 
et  singulis  prefatum  dominum  Eobertum  episcopum  Dunkeldeusem  in  eius 
projiria  persoua  si  eius  presenciam  commode  liabere  poteritis,  alioquin  ipsum 
ad  domum  liabitationis  sue  vel  in  ecclesia  fratrum  de  Tulylum  Dunkeldensis 
diocesis,  intra  missarum  solemp)uia,  seu  in  aliis  locis  vbi  expediens  fuerit  et 
prout  requisiti  fueritis,  seu  aliquis  vestrum  fuerit  requisitus,  publice  alta  et 
intelligibili  voce  ex  parte  nostra  ymmouerius  apostolica  peremptorie  citare 
curetis,  quem  etiam  tenore  presencium  sic  citamus  ut  decimo  sexto  die  mensis 
Aprilis,  compareat  coram  nobis,  per  se  uel  per  jirocuratorem  legitime  et  sufficien- 
ter  iustructum,  scilicet  in  ecclesia  parrochiali  ciuitatis  Sanctiandree  hora  solita 
causaruui,  ad  recipiendum  libellum  seu  libellos  in  causa  seu  causis  dictarum 
appellatiouum,  et  ad  omues  actus  et  alios  necessarios  in  causa  predicta  grada- 
tim  et  suecessiue  vsque  ad  diffinitiuam  seuteutiam  inclusiue  cum  predicto 
domino  abbate  vel  eius  legitimo  procuratore  processurus  et  i^rocedi  visurus 


DE  GAMBUSKENNETB. 


105 


alque  dicturus,  facturus  et  recepturus  et  super  premissis  responsurus  prout 
iusticia  suaserit  et  ordo  dictauerit  rationis,  certiticautes  nichiloruiuus  eideni 
domino  episcopo  et  ei  expresse  predicentes  cjuod  siue  in  dicto  citationis  ter- 
mino  comparuerit  siue  non,  nos  nicliiloniinus  ad  premissa  omnia  et  singula  in 
causa  predicta  ad  instanciam  predicti  abbatis  uel  eius  procuratoris  procedemus, 
ipsius  citati  absencia  seu  contumacia  in  aliquo  non  obstante,  diem  vero  liuius- 
modi  citationis  atque  formam  et  quicquid  iu  premissis  duxeritis  faciendum, 
nobis  per  vestras  patentes  literas  seu  instrumentum  publicum  harum  seriem 
seu  designationem  in  se  continentes  seu  continens,  remissis  presentibus,  fideliter 
intimare  curetis,  absolucionem  omnium  et  singulorum  qui  prefatas  nostras  sen- 
tencias  vel  earum  aliquam  incurrerint  quoquomodo  nobis  vel  superiori  nostro 
tantummodo  reseruantes ;  volumus  eciam  dicto  citato  copiara  fieri  de  premissis 
si  eam  petierit,  petentis  tamen  sumptibus  et  expensis.  In  C|uorum  omnium 
testimonium  presentes  litere  nostre  citacionis  nostri  sigilli  appensione  fecimus 
roborari,  apud  Sanctum  Andream,  vicesimo  c^uinto  die  mensis  Februarii  anno 
Domini  millesimo  tricentesimo  nonagesimo  secundo :  Acta  fuerunt  liec  apud 
Sanctum  Andream  anno,  mense,  die  quibus  supra,  iudictioue  prima,  poutificatus 
sanctissimi  in  Christo  patris  ac  domini  nostri,  domini  Clementis  diuina  prouiden- 
cia  pape septimi, anno quinto decimo ;  presentibus, discretis  viris dominoJohaune 
Gourlay  monacho  de  Abirbrothok,  domino  Stephano  Bligly,  domino  Johanne 
de  Scona  vicario  de  Forgouuddevyny  Duukeldensis  diocesis,  domino  Iloberto 
de  Monros  rectore  de  Quylt,  testibus  ad  premissa  vocatis  specialiter  et  rogatis. 
Et  ego  Thomas  Twy,  clericus  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  publicus  auctoritate 
apostolica  notarius,  predictis  omnibus  et  singidis  dum  sic  vt  premittitur 
fierent  et  agerentur  vnacum  prenominatis  testibus  presens  interfui,  eaque  sic 
fieri,  vidi  et  audiui,  et  in  hanc  publicam  formam  redegi,  ac  propria  manu  mea 
scripsi,  signoc^ue  meo  solito  et  consueto  signaui,  rogatus  et  requisitus  in  testi- 
monium  omnium  premissorum.  Thomas  Twy,  Notarius. 

14 


EXCOMMUNICATIO. 


106 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


EXCOMMUNICATIO 


78.  Instrumentum  executioxis  ExcoMJa"N'iCATioxis  iN  Episcopum 

DUNKELDENSEM  ET  CITATIONIS. 

In  Dei  nomine  amen  :  Per  presens  publicum  instrumentum  eunctis  pateat 
euidenter  quod  in  festo  annunciationis  dominice,  secundum  cursum  et  com- 
putationem  ecclesie  Scocie,  anno  Domini  millesimo  tricentesimo  nonagesLmo 
tercio,  videlicet,  vicesimo  quinto  die  mensis  Marcii,  indictione  prima,  pontificatus 
domini  Clementis  pape  septimi  anno  quinto  decimo,  in  ecclesia  conuentuali 
fratriun  Carmelitamm  de  Tulylum  Dunkeldensis  diocesis,  in  testium  sub- 
scriptorum  et  mei  notarii  publici  presencia  personaliter  constitutus  discretus 
vir,  niagister  Malcolnius  rector  ecclesie  parochialis  de  Fortevj-ot,  presbj^ter 
Sanctiandree  diocesis,  et  ibidem  intra  missarum  solempnia  palam  legi  fecit 
(^uasdam  literas  sigiHatas  patentes  sigillo  domini  Johannis  de  Eglintoune, 
prioris  prioratus  de  Blantyre  Glasguensis  diocesis  et  subdelegati  domini 
episcopi  Sanctiandree,  et  virtute  literarum  ipsarum  dominum  Eobertum 
Sinclare  episcopum  Duukeldensem  publice  excommunicauit,  pro  causis  in 
ipsis  litteris  contentis  et  expressis,  ac  eciam  eundem  dominum  episcopum 
Dunkeldensem  citauit  tenore  et  virtute  ipsarum  literarum  ad  comparendum 
coram  dicto  domino  Johanne  subdelegato,  per  se  vel  procuratorem  legi- 
time  et  sufiicienter  instructum,  in  ecclesia  parrochiali  ciuitatis  Sancti- 
andree,  decimo  sexto  die  mensis  Aprilis  proximo  tunc  futuri,  hora  solita 
causamm,  ad  recipiendum  libeUum  seu  libellos  in  causa  seu  causis  diuer- 
sarum  appellationum  per  dominum  Willelmum  de  B]acburne  abbatem 
monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth  a  dicto  domino  Eoberto  episcopo  Dunkeldensi 
ad  sedem  apostolicam  interpositarum,  et  ad  omnes  actus  et  alios  necessarios 
in  causa  seu  causis  supradictis,  gradatim  et  successiue,  vsque  ad  diffinitiuam 
sententiam  inclusiue,  cvim  predicto  domino  Willelmo  abbate  de  Canibus- 
kjTineth  vel  eius  legitimo  procuratore  processurus  et  procedi  visurus  atque 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


107 


dicturus,  facturus  et  recepturus,  ac  respousurus,  prout  iusticia  suaserit  et 
ordo  dictauerit  raciouis,  et  ad  omnes  causas  iu  dictis  literis  contentas  et  in 
testLmonium  executionis  premissonim  dictus  magister  Malcolmus  per  me 
notarium  subscriptum  sibi  petiit  fieri  publicum  instrumentum  :  acta  fuerunt 
liec  die,  anuo,  indictioue  et  pontificatu,  ac  loco  quibus  supra ;  presentibus 
discreto  viro  magistro  Jolianne  de  Graliame  rectore  ecclesie  de  Erole,  W 

de   Newbygynuis,  Georgeo   de    Gardin,  et    aliis  ad   premissa  vocatis 
specialiter  et  rogatis. 

Et  ego  Henricus  de  Wadellis  clericus  Glasguensis  diocesis,  publicus 
auctoritate  apostolica  et  iinperiali  notarius,  dum  omnia  premissa  agerentur  et 
fierent  vnacum  preuominatis  testibus  presens  interfui,  eaque  sic  fieri  vidi  et 
audiui,  et  in  aliis  occupatus  presens  instrumeutum  per  alium  miclii  fidum  scribi 
feci,  hic  propria  manu  subscripsi,  siguoque  meo  consueto  siguaui,  rogatus  et 
requisitus  in  fidem  .et  testimonium  omniimi  jireuiissorum.  Wedallis. 


EXCOMMUNICATIO 


79-    DONATIO  DIMIDIE  CARRUCATE  APUD  DUNVrAIS. 

Omnibus  Saucte  Matris  ecclesie  filiis  lioc  scriptum  visuris  vel  audituris 
Herbertus  filius  Herberti  de  Camera,  eternam  in  Domino  salutem  :  Sciant  tam 
preseutes  quam  futuri  quod  ego  Herbertus  filius  Herberti  de  Camera,  pro 
salute  auime  patris  mei  et  matris  mee  et  pro  salute  anime  mee  et  sponse  mee, 
et  pro  salute  omnium  antecessorum  meorum  et  successorum,  dedi  et  concessi 
et  hac  presenti  carta  mea  confirmaui  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte  INIarie  de  Cam- 
buskynnetli  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  et  sermturis,  dimediam 
carrucatam  terre  in  territorio  meo  de  Dunypais,  cum  tofto  et  crofto  in  eadeui 
villa  mea  in  competenti  loco  sito,  scilicet,  et  duas  bouatas  terre  adiacentes  terre 
ecclesie  ex  parte  orientali,  et  duas  bouatas  ex  altera  parte  aque  iuxta  Loucla- 
banc  incipientes  ad  Flores  et  tendentes  versus  occidentem  :  Tenendam  et  possi- 
dendam  in  puram  et  perpetuam  eleraosinam,  cum  communi  pastura,  introitu 


108 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


et  exitu  et  cum  omnibus  asiamentis  ad  tantam  ten-am  pertinentibus,  ita 
libere,  quiete  et  honorifice,  sicut  aliqua  elemosina  liberins,  quiecius  et  honori- 
ficentius  in  regno  Scotie  tenetur  et  possidetur;  hiis  testibus,  Jolianne  de 
Morham,  Bernardo  Frasar  vicecomite  de  Striueling,  Malcolmo  thane  de 
KalentjT,  Johanne  Wischart,  Johanne  de  Stanhous,  Thoma  clerico  fratre 
eius,  Ada  Franceis,  Andrea  preposito  de  Striueling,  W  filio  Jacobi, 

Richardo  de  Warwic,  Ada  Bonde,  et  multis  aliis. 

80.  De  duabus  bouatis  teere  de  Dunypais. 
Uniuersis  Sancte  Matris  ecclesie  filiis,  Gilbertus  de  Vmfrarauilla,  salutem : 
Sciant  omnes  presentes  et  futuri  me  dedisse,  concessisse  et  hac  carta  mea 
confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte  Marie  de  Cambuskynneth  et  canonicis 
ibidem  Deo  seruientibus,  duas  bouatas  terre  in  Dunypais  preter  illud  halach 
quod  aute  eis  donaui,  scilicet,  terram  que  iacet  in  occidentali  parte  riui  qui  de- 
scendit  per  tres  lapides  vsque  ad  frontem  collis  Saucti  Alexandri  et  ita  vsque 
per  summitatem  illius  collis  vsque  ad  ecclesiam  Sancti  Alexandri :  Tenendas  a 
me  et  heredibusmeis  in  liberam  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  in  pascuis  et  petris  et 
asiamentis  que  ad  tantam  terram  pertineant  ita  libere,  quiete,  plenarie  et 
honorifice  sicut  aliqua  elemosina  in  regno  liberius  et  quiecius  et  honori- 
ficencius  possidetur  ;   testibus  W  Abbate  de  Sancta  Cruce,  Eogero 

priore  de  Manuell,  Elia  clerico  de  Dunypais,  Ysaac  sacerdote,  Ynone  clerico, 
H  clerico,  Thoma  de  Lemhale,  Patricio  filio  Elye  et  fratre  eius  Alex- 

andro,  Willelmo  Apilgarth. 


81.  Donatio  terre  de  Duxypais  cum  quatuor  bovatis  terre  taji 

CITRA  QUAM  VLTRA  AQUAM  PER  AdAM  MORHAME. 

Omnibus    Christi   fidelibus   hoc   scriptum   visuris   vel    audituris,  Adam    de 
Morham,  miles,  salutem  eternam  in  Domino  :  Vniuersitati  vestre  notum  facio 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


109 


quod  ego,  caritatis  intuitii  et  pro  salute  aniine  mee  et  autecessorum  meoruin 
et  heredum  meorum,  dedi  et  concessi  et  presenti  carta  mea  confirmaui  Deo  et 
ecclesie  Sancte  Marie  de  Cambuskynneth  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruienti- 
bus  et  seruituris  et  eorum  successoribus,  omnes  illas  terras  et  totns  qiuis 
Marninus  Forestarius,  et  Patricius  Bercarius  et  filius  euisdem  Patricii,  et 
Willelmus  de  Eowe,  2>er  rectas  diuisas  et  extensas  infra  villam  et  extra  de 
Dunipais  tenuerunt,  vbicunque  iacent,  cum  communi  pastura,  et  cum  omnibus 
asiamentis  et  libertatibus  ad  dictam  terram  pertinentibus  et  in  ceteris  omni- 
bus  asiameutis,  exceptis  dominiis  meis  :  Tenendas  et  habendas  et  possidendas 
sibi  et  successoribus  suis  de  me  et  de  heredibus  meis  iure  perf)etuo  in  puram 
et  perpetuam  elemosinam,  libere  et  quiete,  bene  et  honorifice  et  plenarie  ab 
omni  seruicio  seculari,  exactione  et  demanda  et  consuetudine  :  Preterea  volo 
et  concedo  quod  dicti  canonici  et  eorum  homines  quicunque  pro  processu 
temporis  in  dictis  terris  moram  fecerint,  omnibus  prenominatis  asiamentis  et 
libertatibus  prenominatis  plenarie  et  pacifice  imperpetuum  gaudeant,  et  vt 
molant  blada  sua  de  prefatis  terris  proaeniencia,  libere  et  sine  multura  ad 
meum  molendinum,  et  quod  molant  post  prinuim  bladum  quod  inuenerint  iu 
tremulo,  cuiuscunque  fuerit :  Et  ego  Adam  de  Moram  et  heredes  mei  predictas 
terras,  cum  omnibus  libertatibus  et  asiamentis,  antedictis  canouicis  et  eorum 
successoribus  contra  omnes  homines  et  feminas  warantizabimus,  acipiietal limns 
et  defendemus  :  Et  vt  hec  mea  donatio  pro  me  et  lieredil)us  meis  firmitatis 
et  stabilitatis  robur  obtineat,  presenti  scripto  sigillum  meuni  apposui;  hiis 
testibus  domino  Dauid  de  Grame,  domino  Johanne  de  Striueling,  domino 
Willelmo  de  Arthe,  domino  Alwyno  de  Kalenter,  Stephano  de  Blantyre, 
Thoma  de  Dunipais,  Eicardo  de  Stikelwe,  Johanne  de  Glasgu,  Johanne 
filio  Alie  burgense  de  Lithqw,  Henrico  clerico  burgense  de  Striueling,  et 
multis  aliis. 


110 


REGISTRVM  MOXASTERII 


82.    SUPER  SASINA  FAGTA  DE  TEREA  DE  DUXYPAIS  PEK  DOMIXUM  AOAM 

DE  jMoram  Abbati  et  Coxuextui  de  Cambuskynseth. 

Omnibus  Christi  fidelibus  hoc  scriptum  visuris  vel  audituris,  Adani  de  Moram, 
miles,  salutem  in  Domino :  Nouerit  vniuersitas  vestra  me  constituisse  Joliannem 
Clericum  domlai  Hugonis  Giffard  procuratorem  meum  ad  iustituendum 
et  saisinandum  plenarie  dominum  Eicliardum  abbatem  de  Cambuskyunetli, 
et  conuentum  eiusdem  loci,  in  terras  quas  Marninus  rorestarius  et  Patricius 
Bercarius,  et  filius  eiusdem  Patricii  et  Willelmus  de  Eowe  per  rectas  diuisas 
suas,  et  exteusas  infra  'viUam  et  extra  de  Dunypais  tenueruut,  in  puram  et 
perpetuam  elemosinam,  et  ad  tradendum  dictis  abbati  et  conuentui,  nomine 
meo,  cartam  meam  eisdem  super  donatioue  mea  de  predictis  terris  confectam 
sicut  personaliter  interessem ;  gratum  et  ratum  et  firmum  habens  et  seraper 
habiturus  quicquid  predictus  Johanues  Clericus  inde  fecerit :  lu  cuiu.s  rei 
testimonium  presenti  scripto  sigillum  meum  apposui. 

83.  Item  de  eadem  tekka  caeta  de  Bikietoune. 
O.MNIBUS  Christi  fidelibus  ad  quos  presens  scriptum  perueuerit,  Adam  de 
Moram,  salutem  :  Nouerit  vniuersitas  vestra  me  dedisse,  concessisse  et  hac  pre- 
senti  carta  mea  confirmasse  Eichardo  de  Bikirtouue,  et  heredibus  suis  vel  suis 
assignatis,  pro  homagio  et  seruicio  suo,  totas  illas  terras  quas  j\Iarniuus 
Forestarius  et  Patricius  Bercarius  et  filius  eiusdem  Patricii  et  Willelmus  de 
Eowe  per  rectas  diuisas  et  extensas  infra  villam  et  extra  villam  de  Dimypais 
tenuerunt,  ubicunque  iacent,  cum  communi  pastura  et  cixm  omnibus  asiamentis 
et  Ubertatibus  ad  dictam  terram  pertiuentibus,  exceptis  dominiis  meis,  videlicet, 
iu  pratis,  pascuis  et  pasturis,  in  moris,  mossis  et  petariis,  in  bosco,  in  stagnis  et  in 
ceteris  omnibus  asiamentis  :  Teueudas  et  habendas  de  me  et  heredibus  meis  sibi 
et  heredibus  suis,  vel  suis  assiguatis  libere,  quiete,  hereditarie,  bene  et  in  pace  : 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


111 


EeJdendo  inde  anuuatim  niiclii  et  heredibns  meis  pro  se  et  lieredibiis  snis,  vel 
suis  assignatis,  tres  solidos  ad  duos  terminos  anni,  scilicet,  ad  Penthecosten 
octodecim  denarios,  et  ad  festum  Sancti  Martini  octodecim  denarios,  pro  omni 
seruicio  et  demanda  seculari :  Preterea  volo  et  concedo  quod  dictus  Piicliardus 
de  Bykirtoun  et  heredes  sui  vel  sui  assignati,  vel  eorum  homines,  Cjuicunque 
pro  processu  temporis  in  dictis  terris  moram  fecerint,  lilada  sua  de  prefatis 
terris  proueniencia,  libere  et  sine  multura  ad  meum  molant  molendinum,  et 
quod  molant  post  primum  bladum  quod  inuenerint  in  tremulo,  ciiiuscunque 
fuerit ;  et  ego  et  heredes  mei  predictas  terras  cum  omnibus  libertatibus  et 
asiamentis  antedictis,  dicto  Pacardo  et  heredibus  suis  vel  suis  assignatis  eontra 
omnes  homines  warantizabimus  et  defendemus  :  Et  vt  hec  mea  donatio  firmi- 
tatis  et  stabilitatis  robur  obtineat,  presenti  scripto  sigillum  apposui ;  hiis  testi- 
bus  domino  Henrico  de  Haliburtoune,  domino  Johanne  de  Lambertoune, 
Stephano  de  Blantyre  et  nuiltis  aliis. 


84.    QUIET.\  CLAIIATIO  DOMINI  DE  BlKERTOUNE  DE  DONYPAIS  PKO  EXCAilBIO 
TEERE  AeBATIS  ET  CONUENTUS  IN  BENYNE,  ETC. 

Omnibus  hoc  scriptum  visuris  vel  audituris,  Eichardus  de  Bikertoune,  miles, 
eternam  in  Domino  salutem  :  Nouerit  vniuersitas  vestra  me  quietum  clamasse 
pro  me  et  heredibus  meis,  abbati  et  conuentui  de  Cambuskynneth  totum  ius 
quod  habui  vel  habere  potui  in  terris,  quas  habui  ex  dono  domini  Ade  de 
Morham  in  VLlla  de  Dunipais,  quas  jMarninus  Forestarius  et  Patricius  Bercarius 
et  filius  eiusdem  Patricii  et  Willelmus  de  Rowe  per  rectas  dinisas  suas  et 
e.xtensas  infra  villam  et  extra  de  Dunipais  tenuerunt,  cum  communi  pastura 
et  cum  omnibus  aliis  asiamentis  ad  dictas  terras  iuste  pertinentibus,  pro  ex- 
cambio  terre  de  Bynnyne  quam  dicti  abbas  et  conuentus  habuerunt  de  dono 
quondam  "WUlelmi  de  Lindesay :  Et  ne  ego  nec  heredes  mei  aliquo  tempore 
contra  istam  quietam  clamationem  temere  venire  presumpserimus,  huic  scripto 


112 


liEGLSTRUM  MOyASTERIl 


sigillum  meum  apposui ;  testibus  domiuo  Willelmo  vicario  de  Linlitluj^w, 
Stepliauo  de  Blantyre  et  Joliaune  filio  Alie  et  Jobanue  clerico  de  Linlitbqw, 
Jobauue  clerico  domini  Hugonis  Gififard,  et  aliis. 

85.  iNQUISmO  FACTA  DE  ECCLESIA  DOXYPAIS. 

Omnibus  bas  literas  visuris  vel  audituris,  G[amelinus]  miseratione  diuina  epi- 
scopus  Sauctiandree,  salutem  iu  Domiuo  sempitemam :  Sciatis  quod  cum 
diligenter  inquiri  fecerimus  per  Eobertum  decanum  nostrum  de  Linlitqw  iu 
capitulo  nostro  eiusdem  decanatus  vtrum  ecclesia  de  Donj-pais  esset  matrix 
ecclesia  per  se  an  capella  ecclesie  de  Kirketoun,  et,  facta  diligenti  inquisitione 
per  ipsum  decanum  siiper  predictis,  inuenimus  ipsam  ecclesiam  de  Donypais 
capellam  esse  ecclesie  parrocliialis  de  Kirketoune,  et  non  matricem  ecclesiam  ; 
inuenimus  similiter  quod  dicta  capella  nunquam  consueuit  reddere  uobis  aut 
predecessoribus  nostris  episcopis  Sanctiaudree  procuratiouem  integram  seu 
particularem  :  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  sigillum  nostrum  appoui  fecimus  buic 
scripto  :  Datum  apud  Incbeomatb  octauo  idus  Aprilis  anuo  Domini  mUlesimo 
ducentesuno  sexagesimo  septimo. 

86.  De  decima  molendini  de  Donypais. 

GiLBERTUS  de  UmframuiUa,  onmibus  amicis  suis  propinquis  et  remotis.salutem : 
Sciant  tam  futuri  quam  presentes  me  concessisse  et  hac  mea  carta  confirmasse 
Deo  et  Sancte  ]\Iarie  et  ecclesie  de  Dunipais  decimam  molendini  mei  de 
Duuipais  iu  piuram  elemosiuam,  pro  sahite  auime  mee  ;  biis  testibus  Eogero 
priore  de  ]\Ianvell,  Isaac  sacerdote,  Herberto  de  Camera,  WiUelmo  Wiscbard, 
Adam  de  Stanus. 

87-  Dunypais  testimonium  assise  pko  Monasteeio. 
In  nomine  Domini  amen  :   Per  boc  presens  publicum  instrumentum  cunctis 
pateat  euidenter  quod  auuo  a  natiiiitate  eiusdem  millesimo  quadringentesimo 


DE  CAMBUSKENiXETH. 


113 


vicesimo  sexto,  inclictione  quinta,  die  vero  niensis  Jaiiuarii  vicesimo  primo, 
pontificatus  sanctissimi  in  Christo  jjatris  ac  domini  nostri,  domini  ilartini 
diuina  prouidencia  pape  quinti,  anno  decimo,  in  mei  notarii  puLlici  et 
testium  subscriptorum  presencia  personaliter  constitutus  venerabilis  pater, 
Patricius  permissione  diuina  abbas  monasterii  de  Cambuskyunetb,  ordinis 
beati  Augustiui,  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  omnes  et  singulos  iufrascriptos  viros 
tunc  presentes  et  vnumquemque  illorum,  videlicet,  Nicbolaum  le  Grabame  de 
Achincloch,  Johannem  Normawele,  Hugouem  de  Banochtyne,  Johannem  Ker 
fullonem,  Thomam  Watson  de  Stanhous,  Jobannem  Watson,  Joliaunem 
Thomsoun,  Mauricium  Scott,  Johaunem  Ker  de  le  Quattetar,  Donakluni 
Marschell  et  Kessogum  Fiudlausou  pulilice  cum  instaucia  requirebat  ut  eorum 
depositiones  et  deliberationes  super  quaudam  inquisitiouem  uuper  per  ipsos 
factam  apud  Duuipais,  iufra  baroniam  de  Harbertschire  et  iu  vicecomitatu  de 
Striueling,  penes  sex  bouatas  terre  infra  villam  et  extra  de  Duuypais  predicta 
iacentes,  bona  fide  mediante,  publice  declararent  vt  in  futurum  coram  quo- 
cunque  iudice  competente  cum  super  hoc  fuerint  onerati  siue  requisiti  fideliter 
responderent  veritati,  seclusis  odio  vel  amore,  fauore  vel  timore,  cum  pium  sit 
et  meritorium  testimoniiim  perhibere  veritati ;  quibus  auditis  et  iutellectis, 
omnes  supradicti  viri  super  dictam  iuquisitionem  pro  tunc  existeutes  presen- 
tes  vnanimi  deliberatione  vniuersaliter  deponebaut,  asserendo  quod  quidam 
Johannes  Keir  pater  quondam  Joliannis  Keir  nuiic  viuentis,  obiit  vestitus  et 
sasitus  vt  de  feodo  et  cum  de  duabus  bouatis  terre  predicte  cura  clausulis 
opportuuis,  et  has  duas  bouatas  terre  in  vno  volumine  siue  cedula  inscribi  cou- 
corditer  statueruut ;  cui  quidem  volumini  siue  cedule  predictarum  duaruni 
bouatarum  terrarum  sigilla  apponi  fecerunt  vt  eorum  quidam  fatebantur 
manifeste,  et  de  reliquis  vero  quatuor  bouatis  terre  inuenemnt  quod  olim 
predictus  Johannes  Keyr  senior  fuit  semel  requisitus,  sed  ante  mortem  suam 
per  dominum  superiorem  earundem  tribus  annis  et  vltra  penitus  expulsus 

15 


114 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


fuit  de  eisdem,  et  prefatum  domiuum  abbatem  in  predictis  quatuor  bouatis 
terre  integTaliter  inueneruut  viginti  sex  annis  leuantem  et  possidentem,  accla- 
mando  illas  sibi  et  monasterio  suo  supradicto  iure  liereditario  pertinere ;  et  has 
quatuor  bouatas  in  volumine  siue  cedida  vna  statuerunt  per  se,  ne  scrijitor  in 
predictis  aliqualiter  deuiaret.  Super  quibus  omuibus  et  singulis  depositioui- 
bus,  deliberationibus  et  assertionibus,  supradictus  dominus  abbas  a  me 
notario  publico  publicum  siue  publica  peciit  instrumentum  siue  instrmnenta  : 
xVcta  fuerunt  hec  in  cimiterio  ecclesie  parrochialis  de  Dunipais,  hora  quasi 
vndecima  ante  merediem,  anno,  die,  mense,  indictioue  et  pontificatu  prenotatis ; 
presentibus  noljilibus  et  discretis  viris,  videlicet,  Eoberto  de  Leuingstoune  de  le 
Calenter,  Johanne  de  Graliame,  armigeris,  doniLuis  Johanne  Cuthbertsoune, 
Alexandro  de  Faukirk  et  Willehno  Harrowar  capellanis,  Jacobo  Ysaac  et 
Nicholaio  de  Bertoun,  testiljus  ad  premissa  vocatis  specialiter  et  rogatis. 

Et  ego  Eobertus  Gardnar  presbiter  Dunblanensis  diocesis,  publicus  aucto- 
ritate  imperiali  notarius,  predictis  depositionibus  et  deliberationibiis  dum  sic 
ut  premittitur  fierent  et  agerentur,  vnacum  iu'enominatis  testibus  jjresens 
personaliter  interfui,  eaque  sic  fieri  vidi  et  audiui,  et  in  notam  recepi  et 
publicaui  et  in  hanc  publicam  formam  redegi,  manuque  mea  scripsi,  hicque 
rae  subscripsi,  signoque  meo  solito  et  consueto  signaui,  requisitus  et  rogatus  in 
fidem  et  testimonium  omnium  premissorum.  E.  Gardnar  Notarius. 


88.  DrxiPAis  possEssio  per  testes  probatur. 
In  nomiue  Domini  amen  :  Per  hoc  presens  publicum  iustrumeutum  cunctis 
pateat  euideuter,  quod  anno  a  Natiuitate  eiusdem  millesimo  quadringentesimo 
vicesimo  sexto,  indictione  quiuta,  die  vero  mensis  Januarii  vicesimo  primo, 
pontificatus  sanctissimi  in  Christo  patris  ac  domini  nostri,  domini  Martini 
diuina  prouidencia  pape  quinti,  anno  decimo,  in  mei  notarii  publici  et  testium 
subscriptorum  presencia  personaliter  constitutus  venerabilis  in  Christo  Patri- 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


115 


cius  permissioiie  diuiiia  abbas  monasterii  de  Cambuskpiuetli,  ordiuis  beati 
Augustini,  Sanctiaudree  diocesis,  publice  coram  multis  audieutibus  recitando 
proposuit  quod  olim  inclite  memorie  magnificus  et  potens  dominus,  domiuus 
Arcliibaldus  quondam  comes  de  Douglas,  pater  Archibaldi  comitis  nuper 
defuucti,  procurante  quodam  uuucupato  Jolianue  Keyr,  patre  quondam  Jo- 
hanuis  Keir  nuuc  viuentis,  ipsum  abbatem  conuentum  ct  monasterimn 
suum  super  quibusdam  quatuor  bouatis  terrarum  suarum  et  earum  pos- 
sessione  iacentibus  infra  villam  et  extra  de  Dunipais,  baroniam  de  Harbert- 
schii-e  et  infra  vicecomitatum  de  Striueling,  iudebite  molestauit,  grauauit 
atque  vexauit  ante  triginta  aunos  elapsos,  vel  eocirca,  per  aliquod  tempus, 
quamquam  idem  dominus  comes  postmodum  ad  instanciani  dicti  abliatis, 
visis  et  intellectis  diuersis  cartis  dicto  monasterio  super  douatione  et  coufir- 
matione  earuudem  terrarum  factis,  tanquam  superior  dominus  fundi  per 
nobilem  dominum  Dauid  Flemyng  dominum  de  Bigare  tunc  balliuum  suum 
ipsos  abbatem  conuentum  et  monasterium  in  dictarum  terrarum  realeui 
possessionem  reduxit  integre  cum  effectu,  ac  de  eisdem  terris  eundem  Ijalliuum 
suum  saisire  et  vestire  fecit  eosdem  abbatem  et  conueutum  uomiue  monas- 
terii  antedicti ;  verum  quia  de  dicta  saisiua  dictus  abbas  fatetm-  se  non  posse 
reperire  literas  testimoniales,  vel  quia  perdite  sunt  vel  alias  destructe,  et  iam 
sibi  et  monasterio  suo  per  quendam  Johannem  Keyr  filium  et  heredem  pre- 
dicti  Johannis  Keir  defuncti,  super  dictis  quatuor  bouatis  terrarum  questio 
verisimiliter  moueri  speratur  attentus,  nisi  dictam  sasinam  per  testes  pro- 
bauerit,exinde  iu  dicta  materia  monasterium  suum  preiudicium  vel  dispendium 
pacietur,  quamuis  post  sasinam  eaudem  idem  abbas  prefatas  terras  per  vigiuti 
sex  aunos  et  vltra  pacifice  possidebat ;  idcirco  ne  iu  hac  copia  probatiouis 
sibi  depereat,  requisiuit  cii-cumstantes  si  qui  essent  inter  lUos  qui  dationi  dicte 
sasine  Lnterfuerunt,  qui  possent,  si  opus  esset,  de  ea  testimonium  perhibere 
intuitu  caritatis,  cui  taliter  requirenti  respouderunt  incontiuenter  isti  viri 


116 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


subscripti,  videlicet,  Nicholaus  de  Graliame,  dominus  Alanus  Scot,  WiUelmus 
de  Menteth,  Joliannes  Normawile,  Johannes  Ysaac,  et  Willelmus  Inglis.dicentes 
se  personaliter  dationi  dicte  sasine  interfuisse  et  ipsam  vidisse  sic  fieri,  et  quod 
bene  sciuerunt  ipsum  abbatem  dictas  terras  per  viginti  sex  annos  pacifice  pos- 
sedisse  et  vsque  in  preseutem  annum,  quanquam  Johannes  Keir,  pater  illius 
Jolianuis  Keir  nunc  viuentis,  postquam  predictus  abbas  et  conuentus  nominatas 
terras  vt  premittitur  possederunt,  per  tres  annos  vixit  nec  regressum  potuitad 
eas  habere,  et  hec  omnia  omnes  prenominati  viri  nullo  discrepante,  concorditer 
affirmarunt,  promittentes  se  super  premissis  singulis,  si  et  quotiens  fuerint  per 
iudicem  competentem  onerati,  fidele  testimonium  perhibituros,  suis  medianti- 
bus  iuramentis  ;  inter  quos  etiam  duo  nobiles,  scilicet,  Nicholaus  Grahame 
et  Johannes  Ysaac  asseruerunt  se  veraciter  audiuisse  ante  tempus  dicte  sasine 
dationis  dictum  comitem  dicentem  se  vel  quemnis  alium  in  dictis  terris  nullum 
ius  habere,  sed  quod  solum  ad  dictum  monasterium  iure  hereditario  pertiner- 
ent ;  super  quibus  oranibus  et  singulis  recitationibus  et  assercionibus  predictus 
abbas  a  me  notario  puljlico  publicum  vel  publica  petiit  instrumeutum  vel  instru- 
menta :  Actafuerunt  hec  in  cimiterio  eeclesie  parrochialisdeDuuipais,  horaquasi 
vndecima  ante  merediem  anno,  die,  nieuse,  iudictione  et  poutificatu  prenotatis ; 
presentibus  nobilibus  et  discretis  viris  Eoberto  de  Leuingstoune  de  le  Calenter, 
domino  Johanne  Cuthbertsoun  capellano  parrochiali  eiusdem  ecclesie,  Jacobo 
Ysaac  et  Johanne  de  Grahame,  testibus  ad  premissa  vocatis  specialiter  et  rogatis. 
Et  ego  Eobertus  Gardnar  presbiter  Dunbhanensis  diocesis,  publicus 
auctoritate  imperiali  notarius,  predictis  omnibus  et  singulis  recitatiouibus 
et  assertionibus  dum,  sic  vt  premittitur,  fierent  et  agerentur,  vnacum  pre- 
nominatis  testibus  presens  personaliter  interfui,  eaque  sic  fieri  vidi  et  audiui, 
et  in  notam  recepi  et  publicaui,  et  in  hanc  publicam  formam  redegi, 
manuque  mea  scripsi,  hic  me  subscripsi,  signo  meo  solito  et  consueto  signaui, 
requisitus  et  rogatus  in  fidem  et  testimonium  oniuium  preniissorum. 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


117 


89.    DUNIPAIS  PACIFICATIO. 

In  Dei  nomine,  ameu  :  Per  lioc  presens  piiLlicum  instrumentiim  cunctis 
pateat  euidenter,  quod  anno  Incarnationis  dominice  niiUesimo  quadringente- 
simo  sexagesimo  secundo,  die  vero  mensis  Maii  penultimo,  indictione  decima, 
pontificatus  sanctissimi  in  Cliristo  patris  et  domini,  domini  Pii  diuina  proui- 
(lencia  pape  secundi  anno  quarto,  in  nostrum  uotariorum  publicorum  et  testiuui 
subscrijjtorum  presencia,  persoualiter  coustitutus  prouidus  vir  Johauues  de 
Keir  de  Ediuburgli,  coram  veuerabili  in  Christo  patre  Dauid  abbate  monasterii 
de  Cambuskyuuetli,  ordinis  sancti  Augustiui,  Sanctiaudreo  diocesis,  licet  alias 
vt  exposuit  idem  Johanues  a  pkuibus  auuis  iam  exactis  omui  iuri  clameo  et 
iuris  titulo  et  interesse  tam  petitorio  quam  possessorio  que  vendicauit,  clamauit, 
liabuit,  vel  liabere  potuit,  in  vel  ad  quatuor  bouatas  terrarum  cum  pertiueuciis, 
iacentes  in  Duuipais  infra  baroniam  de  Harbertschyre  et  vicecomitatum  de 
Striueliug,  et  uuper  die  Veneris  vltimo  elapso  in  plaua  curia  dicte  barouie  de 
Harbertsclrire  tenta  apud  Donypais  per  Willelmum  de  Morauia  de  Tulchadam, 
et  Johannem  Zouug,  balliuos  uobilis  et  poteutis  domiui  Willelmi  comitis 
Orcadie  et  Catauie,  ac  domini  dicte  baronie,  dicto  venerabili  patri  Dauid 
abbati  monasterii  predicti  peuitus  et  omuino  renunciauit,  prout  iu  rotula- 
meuto  et  acto  dicte  curie  pleuius  et  latius  exteuditur,  exprimitur  et  continetur, 
pro  tunc,  tamen,  coram  nobis  notariis  publicis  et  testibus  subscriptis,  primo 
iufra  burgiim  de  Striueling  iu  camera  posteriore  tenementi  et  hospicii  Mathei 
Forstare,  burgensis  dicti  burgi,  dicto  die  penultimo  meusis  Maii  ex  habundantia 
et  ad  maiorem  verificationem,  attestationem  et  securitatem,  deiude  in  crastiuum 
vltimo  die  dicti  meusis  Maii  in  refectorio  infra  dictum  mouasterium  de 
Cambuskyuneth,  coram  dicto  domino  abbate  et  conuentu  vniuersaliter  con- 
gregato,  dictus  Johanues  de  Keir  ad  geuua  prostratus,  recoguoscens,  vt  proprio 
ore  exposuit,  dictas  quatuor  bouatas  ten-arum  cum  pertiuenciis  dictis  domiuo 


118 


EEGISTRUM  MONASTEPdl 


abbati  et  conuentui  et  successoribus  suis  ac  ipsi  monasterio  in  proprietate 
pertinuisse,  et  si  quid  iuris  vel  clamei  sibi  in  dictis  quatuor  bouatis  terrarum 
cum  pertinenciis  compecierat  ipsos  abbatem  et  conuentum  dominos  superiores 
earundem  fuisse  et  esse,  ipsas  quatuor  bouatas  terrarum  cum  pertinenciis  non 
vi  aut  metu  ductus,  nec  errore  lapsus  sed  sua  mera  et  spontanea  voluntate 
per  fustem  et  baculum,  quos  tunc  manu  gestabat,  in  manibus  dicti  domini 
abbatis  pure  et  simpliciter  sursum  dedit,  ac  omni  iuri  et  iuris  titulo,  clameo 
et  interesse  suis  in  vel  ad  dictas  quatuor  bouatas  terrarum  cum  pertinenciis, 
pro  se,  heredibus  et  successoribus  suis,  penitus  et  omnino  ac  pro  perpetuo,  ut 
superius  est  expressum,  renunciauit,  promittensque  fide  media  pro  se,  lieredibus 
et  successoribus  suis  iUas  sursum  donationem  et  renunciationem  iuris  sui  ac 
clamei  et  interesse  in  vel  ad  dictas  quatuor  bouatas  terrarum  cuni  pertinenciis 
nunquam  quibuscunque  temporibus  seruituris  publice  vel  occulte  directe  vel 
indirecte  quouis  quesito  colore  reuocare,  nec  contra  eas  quoquomodo  deuenire, 
sed  se  lieredesque  et  successores  suos  ab  omni  iuri  et  iuris  titulo  tam  petitorio 
quam  possessorio  ac  clameo  et  interesse  in  vel  ad  dictas  quatuor  bouatas 
terrarum  cimi  pcrtinenciis  penitus  et  perpetuo  seclusit  et  absoluit :  Super 
quibus  omnibus  et  singulis  dictus  dominus  abbas  a  nobis  notariis  publicis 
subscriptis  sibi  fieri  petiit  instrumentum  aut  instrumenta,  publicum  seu 
publica  :  Acta  fuerunt  hec  in  locis  supradictis  sub  anno,  die,  mense  indictione 
et  pontificatu  quibus  supra,  presentibus  il.iidem  lionorabilibus  viris  Alexandro 
Brus  de  Stannos,  Eoberto  Brus,  Matheo  Forestare  burgeusi  burgi  de  Striue- 
ling,  Johanne  Lolcart,  Hugone  Zare,  Damd  Balfour  et  Thoma  Cragyngelt  de 
eodem  armigeris,  testibus  cum  multis  aliis  ad  hoc  vocatis  specialiter  et  rogatis. 
Et  ego  Joliannes  de  Atheray  thesaurarius  Dunblanensis,  publicus  auctori- 
tate  imperiali  notarius,  premissis  omnibus  et  singulis,  dum  sic  vt  premittitur 
dicerentur  et  fierent,  vnacum  prenominatis  testibus  et  notario  subscripto 
presens  interfui,  eaque  omnia  et  singula  sic  dici  et  fieri  vidi,  audiui  et  in 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


119 


notam  recepi,  iude.jue  preseus  puljlicuiu  iustrumeutum,  alterius  manu,  me 
aliis  prepedito  negotiis,  scriptum,  coufeci  et  hie  me  mauu  propria  subscribendo 
in  hanc  publicam  formam  redegi,  siguoque  et  nomine  meo  solitis  et  consuetis, 
vnacum  siguo  et  subscriptione  uotarii  publici  subscripti,  signaui,  rogatus  et 
requisitus  in  fidem  et  testimonium  omnium  et  singulorum  premissorum. 

Et  ego  Jobaunes  de  Speus  presbyter  Duublaueusis  diocesis,  publicus  auc- 
toritate  imperiali  uotarius,  premissis  oinnibus  et  siugulis  dum,  sic  vt  pre- 
mittitur,  dicerentur  et  fiereut,  vnacum  testibus  et  domiuo  notario  suprascriptis 
presens  interfui,  eaque  omnia  et  singula  sic  fieri  vidi,  audiui  et  iu  uotam 
recepi,  indeque  preseus  publicum  instrumeutum  mauu  alieua,  me  aliis  im- 
pedito  negotiis,  scriptum  confeci,  bic  me  mauu  propria  suliscribeudo  iu  hanc 
publicam  formam  redegi,  siguoque  uomine  et  subscriptioue  meis  solitiset  con- 
suetis,  vnacum  siguo  et  subscriptioue  notarii  publici  subscripti,  signaui,  rogatus 
et  requisitus  in  fidem  et  testimouium  omuium  et  siugulorum  premissorum. 


90.    DONYPAIS  TEKEAKUJI  REXUKCIATIO. 

In  nomine  Domiui  amen  :  Per  hoc  presens  publicum  insirumentum  cunctis 
pateat  euideuter  quod  auno  a  Natiuitate  eiusdem  millesimo  quadringentesimo 
vicesimo  nono,die  vero  meusisXouembris  decimo,  indictione  octaua,  pontificatus 
sanctissimi  in  Cliristo  patris  et  domini  ac  domini  uostri,  domiui  IMartini  diuiua 
prouidencia  jjape  quinti  anno  duodecimo,  in  mei  notarii  publici  et  testium 
subscriptoiiim  presencia  personaliter  constitutus  prouidus  vir  Jolianues  de  Keir, 
filius  et  heres  Johaunis  de  Keir  de  Eaudalstouue,  non  vi  aut  metu  ductus,  iiec 
errore  lapsus,  nec  mimere  aut  timore  deceptus,  sed  propria  et  spoutanea  vohm- 
tate  sua,  totum  ius  et  clameimi  quod  asserebat  se  habere,  habet  vel  habere 
potuit,  in  quatuor  bouatas  teiTarum  iacentes  iu  vHla  de  Douypais  iufra  vice- 
comitatum  de  Striuehug,  super  quibus  tam  ipse  cpiam  pater  ipsius  coutra  et 
aduersus  abbatem    et    conuentum    monasterii   de    Cambuskynuetli    mouebat 


120 


REGISTBUM  MONASTERII 


questionem  antiquitus  vel  de  nouo,  pure  et  simpliciter,  pro  salute  anime  sue 
et  animarum  predecessorum  suorum,  in  manibus  reuerendi  in  Christo  patris 
Patricii  penuissione  diuina  abbatis  monasterii  supradicti,  coram  conuentu 
eiusdem  loci  capitulariter  congregato,  resignauit  ac  sursum  reddidit,  per  fustem 
et  baculum  cum  suis  singulis  pertinenciis  pro  se,  lieredibus  et  assignatis  suis, 
nuuc  et  singulis  temporiljus  duraturis  ;  promittendo  firmiter  et  fide  media  quod 
nec  ipse  nec  heredes  sui  de  supradictis  terris  prefatmn  monasterium  uequa- 
quam  imposterum  vexabunt,  inquietabunt  nec  molestabunt  quoquomodo,  sed 
monasterium  penes  easdem  terras  defendent  pro  viribus  atque  posse ;  super 
quaquidem  promissione  in  manu  mei  notarii  publici  stipulantis  corporale 
prestitit  iuramentum,  et  pro  liuiusmodi  presentis  instrunienti  maiori  fide  et 
euidentiore  securitate,  p^refatus  Jobannes  eidem  instrumento  suum  proprium 
apposuit  sigillum,in  testimonium  omnium  premissorum :  Super  quibus  omnibus 
et  singulis  predictus  dominus  abbas  a  me  notario  publico  publicmn  sibi  fieri 
petiit  instrumentum  :  Acta  fuenmt  hec  in  domo  capitulari  dicti  monasterii, 
hora  quasi  secunda  post  merediem,  anno,  mense,  die,  indictione  et  pontificatu 
prenotatis ;  presentibus  honestis  viris,  videlicet,  Godfrido  Wricht,  Jolianue 
Sadillar  et  Hugone  Sadillar  ac  Johanne  de  Clune,  testibus  ad  preniissa 
vocatis  specialiter  et  rogatis. 

Et  ego  Eobertus  Garduar  presbyter,  publicus  auctoritate  imperiali  notarius 
Dunblanensis  diocesis,  predictis  resignationi,  sursum  traditioni  ac  ipsius  dicti 
Johannis  obligationi  et  iuramento  ac  omnibus  aliis  et  singulis  dum,  sic  vt 
premittitur,  fierent  et  agerentur,  vuacum  prenominatis  testibus  p>resens  per- 
sonaliter  interfui,  eaque  sic  fieri  vidi  ct  audiui,  et  in  notam  recepi  et  publi- 
caui,  manu  mea  propria  scripsi  hicque  me  subscripsi,  signoque  meo  solito  et 
consueto  signaui,  rogatus  et  requisitus  in  fidem  et  testimonium  omnium 
premissorum  ;  constat  lineatio  in  septima  linea  quam  approbo  et  ratifico  vicio 
et  suspicione  carere  vniuersis.  Gakdnar  Notarius. 


DE  CAMBUSKEXXETII. 


\-2\ 


91.    DONYPAIS  TEREAErai  QUATUOR  ACRARUII  LITIS  EENUNCIATIO. 

The  Court  of  the  Barouy  of  IlarLertscliire,  haldin  at  Douypais  on  Friday  the 
aucht  and  tuenty  day  of  the  nioneth  of  Maii,  the  zeir  of  God  ane  thousand 
foure  hundreth  sexty  and  twa  zeris,  be  William  of  Murray  of  Tidchadam, 
baiUie  to  tlie  richt  mychty  Lord,  William  Erle  of  Orknay  and  of  Katnes,  and 
Lord  of  the  said  barony,  the  suth  caUit  and  the  court  afBrmit,  etc.  The 
quhilk  day  comperit  in  the  said  court  Johnne  of  Keir  of  Edinburgh,  and 
askit  ane  breue  of  incjueist  to  be  seruit  directit  to  the  said  baiUie  fra  tlie  said 
lordis  chapell,  be  the  quliilk  inqueist  he  clamit  foure  oxingang  of  hand  Uand 
in  the  toun  of  Donypais,  pertenyng  to  the  hous  of  Cambuskynneth  ;  and  than 
comperit  ane  venerabUl  fader  in  Crist,  Dauid  be  the  permissioun  of  God 
abbot  of  Cambuskynneth,  and  his  foirspekar,  Alexander  the  Brus  of  tlie 
Stannos,  and  said  thair  aucht  na  inqueist  to  pas  apon  thair  landis,  becaus 
that  the  said  hous  wes  in  peciabiU  possessioune  of  thame,  and  thairattoure  tliai 
allegit  at  the  said  Johnne  of  Keir,  lang  tjme.  of  befoir,  in  the  dayis  of  abbot 
Patrik  of  Calender,  had  gevin  oure  aU  richt,  chime,  possessioun  and  proparte 
of  law  for  him  and  his  airis,  that  he  had  or  micht  haue  to  the  said  landis  for 
euirmare.  Tiian,  eftir  mony  and  diuers  aUegationis,  the  said  Johnne  grantit 
thairto  aud  tuke  ^^p  his  breue  of  inqueist,  and  referrit  him  to  the  said  Abbot 
Dauid,  and  the  convent  of  the  said  place  renunceand  in  iugement  for  him 
and  his  aris  all  richt,  clame,  possessioune  aud  propriete  of  law,  as  of  befoir  in 
or  to  the  said  landis  in  tyme  to  cum,  and  nevir  to  be  hard  in  that  court,  nor 
iu  nane  vthir  as  anent  that  actioune.  The  quhilkis  all  and  sindry  thinfis  the 
foirsaid  abbot  and  his  foh-speikar  askit  to  [be]  ackit  and  rolUt,  and  askyt  the 
copy  of  the  rolment  to  be  gevin  to  thame  vnder  the  said  bailUes  seill,  togidder 
with  the  seiU  of  WiUiam  Pardovyn,  beand  clerk  to  that  court  on  that  day. 
The  quhilk  ask  and  rolment  wes  grantit  and  gevin  under  the  sadis  selis,  zeir, 

16 


122 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


day  aod  place  befoir  writtin  ;  thir  personis  beand  witnes,  Tliomas  Gardnar 
ot'  Denovane,  William  Graliame  of  Auchiuclocht,  aud  Androw  Eeidheuch  of 
the  Quarell,  with  divers  utheris,  etc.  Willelmus  de  Pardovin 

manu  propria. 


92.  Dedicationis  ecclesie  testimoniale. 

Vniueksis  Sancte  Matris  ecclesie  filiis  presentes  literas  inspecturis,  Jacobus 
niiseratione  diuina  episcopus  Dunblanensis,  salutem,  et  fidem  presentibus 
adhibere  indubiam  :  Noueritis  nos,  die  date  presenciuni  ex  commissione 
venerabilis  in  Christo  patris  Johannis  permissione  diuina  prioris  ecclesie 
metropolitane  Sanctiandree,  sede  eiusdem  vacaute,  vicarri  generalis,  ad  iu- 
stantiam  Alexaudri  abbatis  monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth,  ecclesiam  monas- 
terialem  eiusdem  et  duo  illius  cimiteria  ad  finem  orientalem  et  occidentalem, 
capitulum  et  claustrum,  debitis  exhibitis  solemnitatibus,  dedicasse,  necnon 
maius  altare  eiusdem  ecclesie  consecrasse,  assistentibus  nobis  confratribus 
canonicis  et  ministris.videlicet.Georgeo  Newtoun  archidiacono,  Johanne  Ches- 
liolme  prehendario  de  Kippane,  et  Jacobo  AVilson  prebeudario  de  Glendowane; 
coucurreutibus  eciam  ad  illius  dedicatiouis  solemnitatem  nobili  et  poteuti 
domino  Johanne  domiuo  Erskin,  magistro  Petro  capellano,  sacrarum  literarmn 
professore,  Wilelmo  Lamb  canonico  Morauieusi,  de  Conveth  et  Kynnell 
rectore,  Jacobo  Haldene  de  Glenneges  milite,  Alexandro  Forestar  de  Drip 
preposito  bm-gi  de  Striueling,  Viirceutio  Tiuctoris,  priore  fratrum  predicatorum 
eiusdem,  et  Johanue  Tulydaf  gardiano  fratrum  minormn  de  Striueling,  dedi- 
cationis  etficaciam  iufra  missarum  solemuia  predicante,  cum  multis  uobilibus 
et  populis  circumuatiuis :  In  quorum  omuium  et  siugulorum  fidem  et  testi- 
mouium  premissorum  has  presentes  testimoniales  literas  exinde  fieri  et  per 
notarium  publicum,  scribam  nostrum  subscriptum,  subscribi  et  publicari  man- 
dauimus,  sigillique  nostri  rotimdi  iussimus  et  fecimus  appensione  communiri, 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


123 


apud  dictuin  monasteriuui,  vndecimo  die  mensis  Julii  anno  Domini  vicesimo 
primo  supra  millesimum  et  quingentesimum,  nostreque  consecratiouis  anno 
tricesimo  quarto  ;  prcsentibus  ibidem,  prouidis  viris  Jacobo  Clieishelme,  Hen- 
rico  Sincler,  Willelmo  Sincler,  Eduardo  Sincler  armigeris,  Johanue  Patersone, 
Johanne  Lauder  et  Dionisio  Rew  capellauis,  testibus  ad  premissa  vocatis  pari- 
terque  rogatis  et  requisitis. 

Et  ego  Jacobus  Blakwod  i^resbyter  Dunblanensis  diocesis,  publicus  sacra 
auctoritate  apostolica  notarius,  quia  predicte  ecclesie  cimiteriorum  capituli 
et  claustri  dedicationi,  .altarisque  maioris  consecrationi,  ceterisque  ad  hoc 
requisitis  et  factis  solemnitatibus  presens  personaliter  interfui,  eaque  omnia 
et  singula  sic  fieri  vidi,  sciui  et  audiui,  ideoque  hoc  presens  publicum  instru- 
mentum  manu  mea  propria  scriptum,  exiude  confeci,  et  in  hanc  publicam 
formam  redegi,  signoque  nomine  et  subscriptione  meis  solitis  et  consuetis, 
vnacum  appensione  sigilli  rotundi  prefati  reuerendi  patris  de  mandato  eiusdem 
signaui,  in  fidem  et  testimonium  omnium  et  singulomm  premissorum,  per  pre- 
fatum  Alexandrum  abbatem  rogatus  et  requisitus. 

Jacobus  Blakwod. 


93.  De  annuis  redditibus  de  Erth  et  de  Cambuskynneth. 
Dauid  Dei  gracia  Eex  Scotorum  omnibus  probis  hominibus  totius  terre  sue, 
salutem  :  Sciatis  nos  dedisse,  concessisse  et  hac  presenti  carta  nostra  con- 
firmasse  religiosis  viris  abbati  et  conueutui  monasterii  de  Cambuskjmneth 
annuum  redditum  quadraginta  solidorum  nobis  debitum  de  terris  de  Erth,  et 
annuum  redditum  quadraginta  solidorum  nobis  debitum  de  terris  de  Caml.nis- 
baroune,  vna  cum  dimedia  firma  nobis  aunuatim  debita  de  dictis  terris  de 
Cambusbaroune,  quam  in  manibus  nostris  nunc  habemus,  infravicecomitatum 
de  Striueling,  in  recompensationem  octo  librarum  et  quinque  denariorum 
sterlingorum  eisdem  antiquitus  debitarum  de  vicecomitatu  nostro  de  Striue- 


124 


REGISTBUM  MONASTEEII 


ling  nomiue  annue  pensionis :  Tenendos  et  liabeudos  predictos  duos  anuuos 
redditus,  vuacum  predicta  dimedia  firma  dictarum  terrarum  de  Cambus- 
baroune  ad  nos  pertinente,  predictis  religiosis  et  eorum  successoribus  imper- 
petuum  in  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam,  quousque  nos  vel  successores 
nostri  eisdem  religiosis  vel  eorum  successoribus  de  dictis  octo  libris  et  quiuque 
deuariis  aunue  peusionis  in  aliquo  loco  competenti  duxerimus  ordinare  :  In 
cuius  rei  testimonium  presentibus  sigillum  uostrum  precipimus  apponi;  testibus 
venerabilibus  in  Cliristo  patribus,  Willelmo  episcopo  Sanctiandree  et  Patricio 
episcopo  Brechinensi  cancellario  nostro,  Eoberto  Senescallo  Scotie  comite 
de  Stratherne  nepote  nostro,  Patricio  comite  Marchie  et  Morauie,  Willelmo 
comite  de  Douglas,  Koberto  de  Erskyn  et  Johanne  HeiTice,  militibus,  apud 
Ediubm'gh,  vltimo  die  Nouembris  auno  regui  nostri  tricesimo  septimo. 


94.  Caeta  Johannis  Qdhiting  facta  Martino  Wkicht  de  terea  sua 

ANTERIORI   NUNC   AbBATIS    ET   CoNUENTUS    DE    CaMBUSKYNNETH    DE 
VENDITIONE  EIUSDEM  in  buego. 

EDiNBURGH.  Omxibus  hauc  cartam  visuris  vel  audituris,  Johannes  Quhityne  filius  et  heres 

quondam  Eoberti  Quhiting  burgensis  de  Edinburgh,  salutem  iu  Domino 
sempiternam:  Nouerit  vniuersitas  vestra  me  de  aduisamento  consilii  aniicorum 
meorum  dedisse,  concessisse  ad  feodifirmam  et  hac  presenti  carta  mea  imper- 
petuum  coufirmasse  dilecto  amico  meo  Martino  Wricht  burgensi  dicti  burgi, 
totam  anteriorem  partem  cuiusdam  tenementi  mei  iaceutis  in  dicto  burgo, 
ex  parte  australi  vici  regii  eiusdem  inter  terram  Alani  de  Earnyle  ex  parte 
orientali  ex  parte  vua,  et  terram  Stephani  dicti  Eogersone  ex  parte  occidentah 
ex  parte  altera  :  Tenendam  et  habendam  totam  predictam  partem  anteriorem 
dicti  tenementi  cum  pertinenciis  dicto  Martino,  heredibus  et  assignatis  suis,  a 
me  et  heredibus  meis,  de  domino  nostro  rege  et  heredibus  suis,  in  feodifirma  et 


DE  CA  MB  USKEXXE  TH. 


125 


hereditate  imperpetuum,  per  omues  rectas  metas  et  diuisas  suas,  sicut  iacet  iii 
lougitudine  et  latitudiue,cum  omnibus  etsingulis  libertatibus,  commoditatibus, 
asiamentis,  rectitudiuibus  et  iustis  pertiueuciis  suis  quibuscunque,  tam  nou 
nomiuatis  quam  nominatis,  tam  sub  terra  quam  supra  terram,  tam  prope  quam 
procul,  ad  dictam  anteriorem  partem  cum  pertiuenciis  suis  spectantibus  seu 
iuste  spectare  valentibus  quomodolibet  in  futurum ;  libere,  quiete,  plenario, 
integre,  houorifice,  bene  et  iu  pace,  sine  aliquo  retinemento  :  Eeddeudo  iude 
anuuatim  dictus  Martinus,  heredes  sui  et  assignati  sui,  domino  nostro  regi 
et  heredibus  suis  firmam  burgi  inde  debitani  et  consuetam,  et  abbati  et  con- 
uentui  monasterii  Sancte  Cruci.s  de  Edinburgh  qui  pro  tempore  fuerint,  tres- 
decim  solidos  et  quatuor  denarios  argenti,  et  michi  lieredibus  et  assiguatis  meis 
triginta  solidos  vsualis  mouete  Scotie,  ac  dominis  posterioris  partis  dicti 
tenemeuti,  heredibus  vel  assignatis  suis,  tres  solidos  et  quatuor  denarios 
eiusdem  monete  Scotie  proportionaliter  ad  duos  anni  terminos  vsuales,  festa 
videlicet  Penthecostes  et  Sancti  Martini  in  hieme,  tantum,  pro  omni  alio  serui- 
cio  seculari,  exactione,  cousuetudine,  ouere  vel  demanda,  que  de  dicta  anteriori 
parte  dicti  tenementi  cum  pertinenciis  per  quoscunque  exigi  poterunt  aliqua- 
liter  aut  requiri :  Et  ego  vero  dictus  Johaunes  Quliyting,  et  heredes  mei  et 
assignati,  totam  predictam  anteriorem  partem  dicti  tenementi  ciun  pertinenciis 
dicto  Martino,  heredibus  suis  et  assignatis,  adeo  libere  in  omnibus  sicut  pre- 
dictum  est  contra  omnes  mortales  warantizabimus,  acquietabimus  et  imper- 
petuum  defendemus :  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  presenti  carte  mee  sigilhim 
meum  manibus  meis  propriis  apposui  ;  et  ad  maiorem  huius  rei  euidenciam  et 
roboris  firmitatem  sigillum  conimuue  dicti  burgi  presenti  carte  mee  appoui 
cum  instancia  debita  procuraui,  apud  Edinburgh,  secundo  die  mensis  Junii 
anno  Domini  millesimo  quadi-ingentesimo  vndecimo  ;  hiis  testibus,  prouidis  et 
discretis  viris  Alauo  de  Farnyle  tunc  preposito  dicti  burgi,  Georgeo  de  Laudre, 
Thoma  de  Beynyn  et  Jacobo  de  Lintoime  tunc  balliuis  eiusdem  burgi,  Wil- 


EDINBURGH, 


126 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


EDIKBURGH 


lelmo  Currour  et  Willelmo  de  Currour  ac  Jolianne  Rede  burgensibus  dicti 
burgi,  Tlioma  Moygnc,  Jobanne  de  Akynbeid  et  Eoberto  Gibsone  tunc 
seriandis  dicti  burgi,  cum  multis  aliis. 


95.  Edinburc.h  gabelle  vsus  jMoxastekio  conceditur. 
This  Indenture,  niaid  at  Edinburcbt,  tbe  first  day  of  Aprill,  tbe  zeir  of  oure 
Lord  ane  tbousand  foure  hundretb  fourty  tbre,  betwix  ane  ricbt  venerabil 
fader  in  Crist,  Dauid  tlirow  tbe  permissioune  of  God  abbot  of  Cambus- 
kynneth,  for  him  and  tbe  conuent  of  tbe  same  hous,  on  tbat  ane  part,  and 
aue  honorabill  man,  Clement  of  Farnile  of  Gogar,  burges  of  Edinburgb,  witb 
the  consent  and  assent  of  ane  nobill  and  micbty  lord,  schir  Jobne  Forstare, 
lord  of  Corstorphyn,  knicht,  and  vtheris  freindis  of  tbe  said  Clementis,  on 
the  totbir  j^art,  contenis,  jiroportis  and  beris  witnes  tbat  it  is  fuUely  accordit 
betwix  tlie  said  partiis,  in  maner  and  forme  as  eftir  followis  ;  tbat  is  to  say, 
tbat  tbe  said  Clement,  witb  his  said  emys  and  freindis  consent,  at  tbe 
reverence  of  God  and  oure  Lady,  bes  gevin  and  grantit,  and  be  tbeir  presentis 
gevis  and  grantis,  in  pure  and  perpetual  almos,  to  tbe  said  venerabill  fader 
and  conuent,  and  thare  succcessouris,  licence,  full  fredome  and  fre  faculte  on 
tbare  cost  to  brek,  big,  and  agane  rais  tbe  stane  gavill  betwix  thair  foirbous 
and  Clementis  foirbous,  at  the  west  nuke  of  tbat  foirbous,  tbe  said  abbot 
and  conuent  makaud  to  Clement,  on  his  sj^de,  ane  chymnay  of  stane,  and  to 
the  abbottis  syde  esement,  as  it  sall  like  to  the  same  venerabill  fader,  tbe 
said  gavill  beand  sufficient  to  serue  betwix  baith  tbe  fore  housis.  Alsa,  the 
said  Clement,  witb  tbe  consent  of  tbe  sadis  personis,  hes  frebe  gevin  and 
grantit,  and  be  tbir  indenturis  gevis  and  grantis  full  licence  and  fredome 
to  tbe  sadis  abbot  and  conuent  and  thare  successouris  to  brek  tbe  west  wall 
of  bis  hous  that  strekis  southwart  fra  tbe  west  nuke  of  his  fore  hous,  and  to 
big  and  bring  \^  the  haill  est  end  of  tlie  gaby  of  thare  foirhous  apoun  that 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


127 


wall,  witli  vtliir  esemeutis  aud  fredomes,  tbat  tliey  may  lefully  iu  liis  said 
west  wall,  in  twa  places  quhare  thame  lilcis,  betwix  tlie  west  nuke  of  his  foir- 
hous  and  the  kingis  wall,  sett  corballis  of  tre,  of  stane,  hiy  guttaris  of  leid, 
tre,  or  stane,  and  peud  brasis  to  be  flure  to  kechingis,  or  sic  small  housiug, 
the  said  venerabill  fader  garrand  be  maid  guttaris  of  leid,  stane,  or  tre,  sa 
that  the  said  Clementis  hous  be  watterticht,  and  haldin  harmless.  Alsa,  gif 
it  hapnis  the  said  Clement,  his  airis  or  assiguais,  to  big  or  brek  down  ony 
hous  or  wall  of  bis  before  said,  the  said  Clement,  his  airis  and  assignais,  sall 
gar  keip  the  said  abbottis  werk  harmles  that  he  or  his  successouris  biggis. 
The  quhilk  liceuce,  fuU  fredome  and  fre  faculte  before  nemmit,  tlie  said 
Clement,  his  airis  and  assiguais,  throw  the  said  cousent,  with  aU  esementis 
before  writtiu,  to  the  foirsaid  abbot,  conuent  aud  thare  successouris,  agane  all 
deidlie,  saU  warrand,  acquiete  and  euirmare  defend.  In  witness  heirof,  to  the 
part  of  tliir  iudentiuis  remanand  with  the  said  abbot  and  conuent  the  seiU 
of  the  said  Clementis,  thegidder  mth  the  seUI  of  the  said  schir  Johne  For- 
stare,  iu  witnessing  of  liis  said  conseut,  is  to  put,  and  to  the  tother  part  rema- 
nand  with  the  said  Clement,  the  seiU  of  the  said  veuerabiU  fader,  for  him  aud 
the  said  couuent,  is  put,  the  zeir,  day,  moueth  and  phxce  before  expremit. 


EUINBUHGH. 


96.  EriiNBURcai  tenementi  emptionis  carta  per  Dauid  Abbatem. 

Omnibus  hauc  cartam  visuris  vel  audituris,  Dauid  Wricht  burgensis  de  Ediu- 
burgh,  salutem  iu  Domiuo  sempiternam :  Noueritis  me  nou  vi  aut  metu  ductum, 
uec  errore  lapsum,  sed  mea  mera  et  spontauea  voluutate,  vtUitateque  mea 
vndique  preuisa  et  pensata,  dedisse,  coucessisse,  vendidisse  et  titulo  venditionis 
aUenasse,  et  hac  presenti  carta  mea  confirmasse,  necnon  dare,  concedere,  ven- 
dere  et  aUenare  et  hac  presenti  carta  mea  confirmare  venerabUi  in  Cristo  patri 
et  domino,  domiuo  Dauid  permissione  diuina  abbati  mouasterii  de  Cambus- 


128 


KEGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


EDINBURGH. 


kjmnetli  et  conuentui  eiusdeni,  totam  et  integram  terram  meam  iacentem  in 
villa  Edinburgh  ex  parte  australi  eiusdem,  inter  tenementum  dictorum  abbatis 
et  conuentus  ex  parte  posteriori  eiusdem  inter  terram  Clementis  de  Farnile  ex 
parte  orientali  ex  parte  vna,  et  terram  dictorum  abbatis  et  conuentus  ex 
parte  occidentali  ex  parte  altera,  incipiendo  a  parte  posteriori  constructionis 
domus  anterioris  eorundem  abbatis  et  conuentxis  predicti  tenementi,  et  sic 
trauseundo  ad  vicum  qui  dicitur  le  Cougait,  pro  certa  summa  pecuuie  miclii,  in 
mea  magna  et  cognita  necessitate,  per  dictos  dominos  abbatem  et  conuentum 
pre  manibus  gi-atanter  et  integre  persoluta  et  in  vsum  meum  totaliter  conuersa ; 
de  quaquidem  summa  pecunie  teneo  me  bene  contentum  et  totaliter  perso- 
lutuui,  et  dictos  domiuum  abbatem  et  conuentum  ac  successores  eorundem 
qui  pro  tempore  fuerint  quietos  inde  clamo  imperpetuum  tenore  presentis 
carte  :  Tenendam  et  babendani  totam  et  integram  predictam  terram  cum  perti- 
nenciis  predictis  domino  abbati  et  conuentui  ac  successoribus  eorundem  qui 
pro  tempore  fuerint,  de  domino  nostro  rege,  a  me,  heredibus  meis,  executoribus 
et  assignatis,  in  feodo  et  hereditate  imperpetuum,  per  omnes  rectas  metas  suas 
antiquas  et  diuisas  prout  iacent  iu  longitudine  et  latitudine,  cum  laiiidibus,  lapi- 
cidiis,  cum  domibus  et  muris,  lignis  et  edificiis,  ac  cum  omnibus  aliis  et  singulis 
libertatibus,  commoditatibus  et  asiamentis,  ac  iustis  prrtinenciis  suis  quibus- 
cunque,  tam  non  nominatis  quam  nominatis,  tam  sub  terra  quam  supra  ter- 
ram,  tam  prope  quam  procul,  ad  predictam  terram  cum  pertinenciis  spectautibus 
seu  iuste  spectare  valentibus  quomodolibet  in  futurum,  libere,  quiete,  plenarie, 
integre,honorifice,bene  et  in  pace  sine  aliquo  retinemento  seu  obstaculo  quocun- 
que  :  Et  ego  vero  j^redictus  Dauid  et  heredes  mei  totam  et  integram  predictam 
terram  cum  pertiuenciis  adeo  libere  in  omnibus  et  per  omniaut  predictum  est 
predictis  abbati  et  conuentui  de  Cambuskynneth  ac  successoribus  eorundem, 
qui  pro  tempore  fuerint,  contra  omnes  mortales  warautizabimus,  acquietabimus 
ac  imperpetuum  defendemus  :  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  presenti  carte  mee 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


129 


sigiUum  meum  est  appeusum,  apud  Edinburgh,  decimo  tertio  die  meusis 
Junii,  anno  Domini  millesimo  quadriugentesimo  quinquagesimo  quinto  ;  coram 
liiis  testibus,  Alexandro  Napare  preposito  dicti  burgi,  Willelmo  de  Carrilnis, 
Andrea  Crafurd,  balliuis  eiusdem,  Alexandro  Stanlie  decano  gild,  "Willelmu 
Cranstoune,  Willelmo  de  Libertoune,  Thoma  de  Prestoun,  Thoma  Bighohne 
et  Willehno  EoUaud  seriando,  cum  multis  aliis. 


EDINBURGH. 


97-  Edixbuegh  teere  possessio  pee  Abbatem  Dauid. 
In  Dei  nomine,  amen  :  Per  hoc  presens  publicum  instrumentum  cunctis 
pateat  euidenter,  quod  anno  ab  Incarnatione  eiusdem  millesimo  quadringeu- 
tesimo  quiuquagesiuio  quinto,  die  vero  meusis  Juuii  decimo  septimo,  mdictione 
tercia,  pontificatus  sauctissimi  in  Cristo  patris  et  domini  nostri,  domini  Calixti 
diuina  prouidencia  pape  tercii,  anno  primo,  in  mei  notarii  publici  et  testium 
subscriptorum  presencia  personaliter  constitutus  Dauid  Wricht  burgensis  de 
Edinburgh,  non  vi  aut  metu  ductus  nec  errore  lapsus,  sed  sua  mera  et  spon- 
tanea  voluntate,  vt  asseruit,  personaliter  accessit  ad  quandam  terram  suam 
iacentem  in  villa  Edinburgi  ex  parte  australi  eiusdem  et  in  posteriori  parte 
edificii  abbatis  et  conuentus  de  Cambuskyuneth,  iuter  terram  Clementis 
Farnile  ex  parte  orientali  ex  parte  vna,  et  terram  Willelmi  Scott  ex  parte  occi- 
dentaU  ex  parte  altera,  sibi  iure  hereditario,  vt  asseruit,  pertinentem,  quam  vero 
terram  cum  pertinenciis  prefatus  Dauid  in  mauibus  prouidi  viri  Eicardi  Paton- 
son,  vnius  baUiuorum  tunc  temporis  burgi  de  Edinburgh,  per  terre  et  lapidis 
traditionem  pure  et  simpUciter  resignauit  ac  sursimi  dedit :  Quaquidem  resig- 
nacione  sic  facta  et  habita,  idem  prefatus  balliuus  sasinam  hereditariam,  sta 
tum  et  possessionem  de  predicta  terra  cimi  pertinencus  venerabili  iu  Christo 
patri  et  domino,  doniino  Dauid  diuina  prouidencia  abbati  de  Cambuskynneth 
et  conueutui  eiusdem  per  huiusmodi  ten-e  et  lapidis  traditionem  tradidit  et 
exhibuit  hereditarie,  secundum  tenorem  carte  ipsis  superinde  coufecte  :  De  et 
17 


130 


REGISTRUM  MONJSTEUII 


EDiNBURGH.  super  quibus  omnibus  et  singulis  predictus  venerabilis  in  Christo  pater  a  me 

notario  publico  subscripto  sibi  fieri  petiit  publicum  instrumentum :  Acta  et 
facta  erant  hec  super  solum  dicte  ten-e,  hora  tercia  post  merediem  vel  eocirca, 
sub  anno.die,  mense,  indictione  et  poutificatu  quibus  supra;  presentibus  ibidem 
prouidis  et  honestis  viris  Willelmo  Libertouue  de  eodem,  Lauceloto  Abirnethy, 
Henrico  Libertoune,  Johanne  Libertoune,  domino  Daiiid  Gray,  Johanne  Sey- 
toune,  Andrea  Bell,  Thoma  Payntoure,  Patricio  Gray,  Eoberto  Houstoune, 
Johanne  Pyat,  Georgeo  Wricht  et  Johanne  Dicson,  cum  multis  aliis  ad 
premissa  vocatis  pariter  et  rogatis. 

Et  ego  Willelmus  Hoppiland  presbiter  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  publicus 
auctoritate  imperiali  notarius,  premissis  omnibus  et  singulis  dum,  sic  ut  pre- 
niittitur,  agerentur,  dicerentur  et  fierent,  ■siiacum  prenominatis  testibus  presens 
personaliter  interfui,  eaque  sic  fieri  vidi,  sciui  et  audiui,  ac  in  notam  sumpsi, 
ideoque  hoc  presens  piublicum  instrumentum,  manu  mea  propria  scriptum, 
signoque  nomine  et  subscriptione  meis  signaui,  vnacum  sigillo  predicti 
balliui  sasinam  dantis,  rogatus  et  requisitus  in  fidem  et  testimonium  omnium 
et  singuloruni  premissorum. 


98.  Electio  confiemaei  petita  a  Peioee  et  Capittjlo  Sancti  Andree. 

Uenerabilibus  viris  et  discretis  priori  et  capitulo  Sanctiandree,  Johannes  de 
Carrall  prior  monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth  et  eiusdem  loci  capitulum,  salutem, 
reuerenciam  et  honorem  :  Defuncto  bone  memorie  domino  Johanne  quondam 
abbate  monasterii  nostri  predicti  quintodecimo  die  mensis  Marcii  anno 
Domini  millesimo  tricentesimo  tricesimo  quiuto,  et  ij)siu3  corpore  cum 
reuerencia  decimo  nono  die  mensis  predicti  anni  eiusdem  ecclesiastice  tradito 
sepulture.ne  ipsuni  mouasterium  nostrum  viduitatis  sue  incommoda  diucius  de- 
ploraret,  f uit  a  nobis  presentibus  super  hoc  in  capitulo  nostro  specialiter  congre- 
gatis  vicesinius  quartus  dies  Apriiis  anni,  etc,  tricesirai  sexti  cum  continuatione 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


131 


dierum  sequentium,  coucorditer  assignatus  ad  electiouem  futuri  abbatis  cele- 
brandum,  legitime  interim  citatis  absentibus  ad  capitulum  nostrum,  et  cou- 
ueuientibus  ibidem  omuibus  iu  termiuo  nobis  ad  eligeudum  prefixo  C|ui 
debuerant,  volueruut  et  potueruut  commode  interesse,  C|ua  die  adueniente,  post 
missam  de  Saucto  Spiritu  liora  debita  celebratam,  campaua  pulsata  ad 
capitulum,  vt  moris  est,  interdictis  exclusis  et  excommuuicatis,  iuuocata 
Spiritus  Sancti  gratia,  placuit  uobis  omnibus  et  singulis,  nuUo  contradiceute, 
per  viam  Saucti  Spiritus  ipsi  monasterio  nostro  abbatem  eligere ;  vnde  nos 
omues  et  singuli  vnauimiter,  sine  quacuuque  contradictione,  fratrem  Johanneui 
de  Kiucardyn,  canonicum  uostrum,  ordinis  uostri  professum,  virum  prouidum 
et  discretum  iu  temporalibus  et  spiritualibus  plurimum  cu'cumspectum, 
de  legitimo  matrimouio  procreatum,  iu  sacerdotio,  et  legitima  etate  constitu- 
tum,  boua  vita  et  conuersatioue  bouesta,  multipliciter  commeudatum,  elegimus 
in  uostrum  et  mouasterii  nostri  abbatem  :  qua  electioue  sic  facta,  et  Te 
Deum  laudamus  alta  voce  cauentes,  euudem  electum  nostrum  ad  maguum 
altare  ecclesie  nostre,  vt  moris  est,  deportauimus,  ac  ipsam  electionem  sic 
de  ipso  factam,  per  dictum  priorem  nostruni  stattm  clero  et  popido  fecimus 
publicari,  ciii  electioui,  dictus  Johanues  sic  electus,  iu  preseucia  magistri 
Stepliani  de  Sanctoandrea  officialis  curie  arcliidiaconi  Sanctiaudree,  ad  lioc 
specialiter  vocati,  ad  magnam  nostrarum  precum  iustanciam,  iiifra  tempus  a 
jure  statutum,  licet  ciuu  magna  difficidtate  cousensit :  quocirca  discretioni 
vestre  reverende  supplicamus  humiliter  et  devote,  quateuus  dictam  elec- 
tionem  tam  coucordem  et  de  persoua  ydouea  taliter  celebratam,  auc- 
toritate  vestra,  ad  quos  sede  vacaute  spectat  electionis  coufirmatio,  confirmare 
velitis,  et  eidem  electo  nostro  literas  vestras  dimissorias  coucedere,  vt  a  quo- 
cuuque  episcopo  catholico  iufra  regnum  Scotie  officium  suum  exercente, 
muuus  beuedictionis  sibi  possit  impartiri,  vt  vestra  sibi  auctoritate  confirmatus, 
et  de  catholico  episcopo  benedictus,  auctore  Domiuo,  uobis  et  monasterio  nostro 


132 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


quod  quotidie,  propter  defectum  presidentis,  vt  temporalibus  et  spiritualibus 
non  modicum  patitur  detrimentum  velut  pastor  bonus  preesse  valeat  et  pro- 
desse,  et  vt  vestra  discretio  cognoscat  euidencius  electionem  ipsam  sibi  con- 
corditer  celebratam,  et  nos  omnes  iu  petitione  huiusmodi  existere  unanimos 
et  concordes,  et  predictum  electum  electioui  de  se  facte  modo  quo  predicitur 
consensisse,  huius  electionis  nostre  decretum  vobis  transmittimus  sigillo  com- 
muni  capituli  nostri  et  sigillo  predicti  magistri  Stephani  officialis  archidiaconi 
Sanctiandree  roboratum.  Datum  in  capitulo  nostro,  dicto  vicesirao  quinto  die 
Aprilis  anno,  etc,  tricesimo  sexto. 

99.    DONATIO  ECCLESIE  DE  FORTEriT. 

AViLLELMUS  Dei  [gracia]  rex  Scotormu,  vniuersis  probis  hominibus  totius  terre 
sue,  cunctisque  catholice  matris  ecclesie  filiis,  salutem  :  Sciant  clerici  et  laici, 
me  in  liberam  elemosinam  dedisse  et  presenti  carta  mea  confirmasse  Eichardo 
de  Striueling  capellano  meo,  ecclesiam  de  Fortheuiet,  cum  decimis  et  obla- 
tionibus,  et  cum  omnibus  aliis  rebus  et  rectitudinibus  ad  illam  pertinentibus, 
que  scilicet  mei  juris  et  donationis  mee  sunt :  Tenendam  et  possidendam  ita 
libere  et  quiete  sicut  alique  ecclesie  dominiorum  meorum  in  Scotia  liberius 
et  quietius  tenentur  et  possidentur;  testibus  Engelramo  electo  de  Glasgu, 
Waltero  filio  Alani,  dapifero,  M.  archidiacono,  Eoberto  capellano  regis, 
Willelmo  capellano  cancellarii,  Eicardo  clerico  de  Bedefort,  apud  Pertli. 


100.    DONATIO  ECCLESIE  DE  FOIITEUIETH. 

WiLLELMUS  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotorum,  episcopis,  abbatibus,  comitibus,  baro- 
nibus,  iusticiariis,  vicecomitibus,  prepositis,  ministris,  et  omuibus  probis 
homiuibus  suis,  clericis  et  laicis,  salutem :  Sciaut  presentes  et  posteri,  me  con- 
eessisse  et  dedisse,  et  hac  mea  carta  confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte 
jNIarie  de  Striueling,  [et]  canouicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus,  in  Uberam  et  per- 


^bx^ff-o^ 


tatiwz  atxuznwjt^ 


♦f  <ipi^  <<^G-pi^i^fj^  ^rytni^Qn^  Qaa^nU^n^^ 


^  ■<vm<mKJ'-|-^^ y^ — ^ f 

•(tHiU>H?i  \Uv^  i&\ytc  ttf  hyt€^<itttC£r^  ^tttt  fo/^nftj  C^irtzo/JU) 

^«m^  ^^^moitttfi^  ^^  (t^Ct»L  Ct-jttK^  :i^ttt\i^  tt  fyOtto 
ii4tet  CttMr*i4ux^  ^^tttff(trm4'  (ttfi^  fiScie^tH^  ^ttrtcetti4:y^ 
^yrytt4>  e^^stttiyz*(ftitttttt^  i^^^a^^^t^^^Btt^  ^u^pyn^  c^imH- 

ittit^^t^  ^^ttti^jl^S^^^tttt^-tfi^ffu^^-^tttti^^  (^ixt/ptzi^ 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


133 


petuarn  elemosinam,  ecclesiam  de  Forteuiet,  post  obitum  Eicardi  sacerdotis, 
cum  omuibus  iustis  pertinenciis  suis,  cum  capellis  et  terris  et  decimis,  cimi 
omnibus  asiamentis  ad  eandem  ecclesiam  iuste  pertiuentibus,  in  excambium 
decimarum,  placitorum  et  lucrorum  nieorum  de  Striueling  et  de  Striueling 
schiria,  et  de  Calanthir,  pro  anima  regis  Dauid  aui  mei,  et  Henrici  patris  raei, 
et  M[alcolmi]  fratris  mei,  et  ceterorum  antecessorum  et  successonun  meorum, 
ita  libere  et  quiete,  plenarie  ethonorifice,  sicut  ceteras  elemosinas  suas  liberius 
et  quietius,  plenius  et  houorificentius  tenent  et  possident ;  testibus  Winehiio 
(Waltero)  de  Bidun,  caucellario,  Waltero  filio  Alaui,  dapifero,  Eoberto  Aueuell, 
Willelmo  filio  Thoroldi,  Petro  de  Striuiling,  Eadulfo  de  Camera,  Eicardo  filio 
Hugonis,  Magistro  Johanne  de  Houeden,  Eogero  clerico,  Waltero  clerico, 
Eichardo  clerico,  Magistro  Tiu'piuo,  Sjinone  de  Liberatione,  apud  Striueliug. 


101.  DOXATIO  QUATUOR  ACRAEU.M  TERRE  IN  FORTEUIET  PEK  REGEM 
WlLLELMUM. 

WiLELMUS  Dei  gracia  Eex  Scotorum,  episcopis,  abbatibus,  comitibus,  baronibus, 
justiciariis,  \-icecomitibus,  prepositis,  ministris,  et  oranibus  probis  horaiuibus 
totius  terre  sue,  clericis  et  laicis,  salutem  :  Sciant  presentes  et  futuri  rae 
dedisse  et  concessisse,  et  hac  carta  mea  confirraasse,  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte 
Marie  et  StriueUng,  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus,  quatuor  acras  terre 
in  Fortheuiet,  et  vnum  toftum  et  croftum  ad  edificia  sua  facienda  :  Tenendas 
eis  in  liberam  et  perpetuam  elemosinara  ita  hbere  et  quiete,  plenarie  et  honori- 
fice,  sicut  alias  elemosinas  suas  liberius,  quietius,  plenius  et  honorificentius 
tenent ;  testibus,  Hugone  episcopo  Sanctiaudree,  comite  Dunecano  iusticiario, 
G[ilberto]  comite  de  Strathern,  Alano  dapifero,  Geruasio  Auenell,  Waltero  de 
Werk  (Berkeley)  caraerario,  Eanulpho  de  Soules,  W[illelrao]  de  Lascelis, 
Eoberto  de  Wilton,  apud  Perth. 


134 


BEGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


102.  NOVA  OBLIGATIO  DOMINOEUM  AbBATIS  ET  CoNUENTUS  MoNASTEEII  DE 
DUNFERMELING  SUPEK  SOLUTIONE  ANNUE  PENSIONIS  UNIUS  CELDEE 
FARRINE  AUENATICE  DE  POLMAIS  EeGIS. 

Pateat  uuiuersis  per  preseutes,  nos,  Willelmum  permissioue  domiuica  abbatem 
monasterii  de  Duufermeling,  et  eiusdem  loci  conuentum,  ordinis  beati  Benedicti, 
Sauctiaudree  diocesis,  firmiter  teneri,  et  per  preseutes  fideliter  obligari,  veuera- 
bilibus  et  religiosis  viris,  abbati  et  couuentui  monasterii  de  Cambuskynnetli, 
ordinis  beati  Aug-ustini,  diocesis  supradicte,  de  vna  celdra  farrine  auenatice 
placabilis  ratione  cuiusdam  annue  pensionis  quam  eiis  persoluere  debemus 
siugulis  annis,  prout  in  literis  auctenticis  inde  confectis  plenius  continetur, 
soluendo  eisdem  abbati  et  couueutui  de  Cambuskynneth.  annuatim,  in  dicto 
suo  monasterio,  vel  in  loco  qui  dicitur  Polmais  Eegis,  in  parrocliia  ecclesie 
de  Kirktoune  prope  Striueliug,  iufra  quiudecini  dies  proximo  et  immediate 
numeraudos  a  die  Penthecostes  ;  itaque  nos  nunciabimus  seu  nunciari  facie- 
mus  dictis  abbati  et  conuentui  de  Cambuskynneth  quo  die  infra  predictos 
quiudecim  dies  parati  sumus  soluere,  et  si  casu  aliquo  nos  uel  ipsos  impediri 
contigerit  quominus  die  nominato  fiat  sohitio,  hoc  non  obstante,  alio  die  infra 
eosdem  quindecim  dies  nichilominus  satisfiat :  ad  cuiusquidem  celdre  fariue 
solutionem  dictis  abbati  et  conuentui  de  Cambuskyuuetli  beue  et  fideliter 
siue  dolo  et  fi'aude,  cauillatione,  vel  ulteriori  dilatione  iu  termiuis  et  locis 
suprascriptis  faciendam,  fatemur  nos  et  successores  nostros  bona  fide  obligatos  : 
In  cuius  rei  testimonium  sigillum  commune  capituli  nostri  preseutibus  est 
appensum,  apud  monasterium  antedictum,  anno  Domini  millesimo  quad- 
ringentesuno  vicesimo  secuudo. 


103.  XovuM  Instkumentum  supee  solutione  faeine  de  Polmais  Eegis. 
In  Dei  nomiue  amen  :  Per  hoc  preseus  publicum  iustrumentum  cunctis  pateat 
euideuter,  quod  anno  Domini  millesimo  quadriiigentesimo  vicesimo  secxmdo, 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


135 


mensis  vero  Maii  die  vicesimo  tertio,  indictione  decima  rpinta,  pontificatus 
sanctissimi  in  Christo  patris  et  domini  nostri,  domini  Martiui  diuina  proui- 
dencia  pape  quinti,  anno  sexto,  in  mei  notarii  publici  et  testium  subscriptorum 
presencia  personaliter  coustituti  erant  venerabiles  et  religiosi  viri,  W[iUelmus] 
permissione  diuina  abbas  monasterii  de  Dunfermeling,  et  cum  eo  prior,  claus- 
tralis,  phiresciue  de  eius  connentu,  ordinis  beati  Benedicti,  Sanctiandree  diocesis, 
necnon  et  Patricius  eadem  permissione  abbas  monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth, 
ordinis  beati  Augustini,  predicte  diocesis  :  Post  multa  liinc  inde  locuta  super 
arreragiis  quatuor  celdranmi  farine  auenatice,  ratione  pensionis  annue  in  C|ua 
dictus  dominus  abbas  de  Cambuskynnetli  prefatos  abbatem  et  conuentum  de 
Dunfermeling  asserebat  sibi  et  monasterio  suo  teneri,  et  firmiter  obligari  de 
quatuor  terminis  tunc  transactis,  tandem  ad  instanciam  ipsoram  abbatis  et 
conuentus  de  Dunfermeling  sic  extitit  concordatum  quod,  videlicet,  idem 
abbas  et  conuentus  de  Dunfermeling  de  dicta  summa  farine  duas  celdras  infra 
quindecem  dies  immediate  sequentes  terminum  Penthecostes  anno  Doniini 
millesimo  quadringentesimo  vicesimo  tertio,  vnacum  celdra  farine  ratione 
pensionis  tunc  annuatim  concurrentis,  et  reliquas  duas  celdras  dicte  summe, 
vnacum  celdra  alia  similiter  annuatim  conciirrente,  infra  quindecim  dies  im- 
mediate  sequentes  terminum  Pentliecostes  proximo  inde  aduenientem,  plenarie 
persoluent  et  satisfacieut  cum  effectu.  Prefati  insuper  abbas  et  conuentus  de 
DunfermHng  quatuor  marcas  vsualis  monete  Scotie  pro  vna  celdra  farine 
auenatice  ratione  predicte  pensionis  summe  debite  de  termino  proximo  post 
datam  presentis  instrumenti  infra  C|uindecem  dies  immediate  sequentes  eundem 
terminum,  predictis  abbati  et  conuentui  de  Cambuskynneth  persohient,  sine 
fraude  vel  dolo  aHquah  :  ad  quasquidem  solutiones  tam  c^uatuor  celdrarum  de 
dictis  arreragiis,  \Tiacum  pensione  annuatim  concurrentes,  prefati  abbas  et 
conuentus  de  Dunfermeling  suas  Hteras  obhgatorias  patentes,  sigiho  suo 
communi  sigillatas,  vnacum  alia  htera  obhgatoria  in  bona  et  competenti  forma 


136 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


dicto  sigillo  niiuiita,  ad  soluendum  prefatam  pensionem  aunuam  singulis 
aunis  futuris  iufra  quindecim  dies  immediate  sequentes  terminum  Peuthe- 
costes,  exhibere  et  spoute  tradere  promiseruut.  Super  quibus  omuibus  et 
singulis,  prefatus  dominus  abbas  de  Cambuskyuueth  petiit  a  me  notario  pub- 
lico  sibi  fieri  publicum  instrumentum.  Acta  fuerunt  hec  in  domo  capitulari 
de  Duufermeliug,  hora  quasi  octaua  post  merediem,  auuo,  die,  meuse,  iudic- 
tioue  et  poutificatu  prenotatis,  preseutibus  honorabilibus  viris,  Dauid  Stewart 
domino  de  Hartschaw,  Johanne  Brus  domino  de  Clacmauau,  Alexandro 
Thayne  domino  de  Fordaill,  Willehuo  Walwod,  Johauue  Comyn,  et  multis 
aliis  testibus  ad  premissa  vocatis  specialiter  et  rogatis. 

Et  ego  Johauues  Gudeswaue  clericus  Sanctiandree  diocesis.publicus  imperiaU 
auctoritate  notarius,  omnia  suprascrij^ta  vidi  et  audiui,  iu  uotam  recepi  et 
publicaui,  et  hoc  presens  publicum  iustrumeutum  feci,  propriaque  mauu  scripsi 
liicque  me  subscripsi,  signoque  meo  solito  signaui,  requisitus  et  rogatus  in 
fidem  et  testimonium  omnium  premissoram :  approbo  me  interlineasse  hoc 
verbum  erant  iu  quarta  liuea. 


104.  Caeta  de  Fuleche. 
SciAKT  omnes  tam  presentes  quam  futuri  quod  ego  Malcohuus,  filius  Malcolmi 
filii  Eogeri,  cousnio  et '  asseusu  parentum  et  amicorum  meorum,  pro  salute 
auime  mee  et  autecessorum  meorum,  concessi  atque  hac  presenti  mea  carta 
confirmaui  donationem  quam  auus  meus  Eogerus  et  pater  meus  Malcohnus 
feceruut  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte  jMarie  de  Cambuskynneth  et  cauonicis  ibidem 
Deo  seruientibus,  scUicet,  totam  terram  penes  occidentalem  partem  adiacentem 
magne  vie  quadrigaram  abbatis  que  tendit  vsque  ad  prata  burgeusium,  et 
ita  vsque  ad  aquam  de  Forth,  et  sic  contra  aquam  de  Forth  desceudeutem 
vsque  iu  queudam  riuum  qui  vocatur  Fuleche  desceudentem  in  Forth,  et 
sic  contra  cursum  de  Fuleche  vsque  iu  queudam  paruum  sicum  ab  orieute 


BE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


137 


descendentem  in  Fuleclie,  et  tnnc  penes  orientem  vsque  ad  quamdam  petram, 
deinde  vero  penes  australem  plagam  vsipie  ad  alteram  petram,  et  deinceps 
penes  orientem  vsqne  ad  terciam  jjetram,  et  ita  in  prenominatam  magnam 
viam  quadrigarum  abbatis  :  Tenendam  et  possidendam  in  puram  et  perpetuam 
elemosinam,  adeo  libere  et  honorifice  ab  omni  exactione  sicut  alirj^ua  elemosina 
in  toto  regno  Scotie  liberius  et  quietius  tenetur  vel  possidetur  ;  liuius  itaque 
perambulatio  terre  et  sasina  facta  fuit  coram  domino  Henrico  arcliidiacono 
Dimkeldensi  et  Henrico  de  Lambertoune  constabulario  de  Striueling,  et  coram 
multis  burgensibus  de  Striueling,  sine  fraude  et  malo  ingenio  :  Vt  ergo  Iniius 
elemosine  iam  dicte  donatio  rata  sit  et  stabilis  et  nullatenus  possit  infringi 
per  me  vel  per  aliquem  lieredum  meorum,  illam  confirmaui  meo  iureiurando, 
et  fide  mea  quam  dedi  in  manu  domini  abbatis  de  Cambuslcynneth,  qui  rnichi 
sui  gracia,  consilio  et  assensu  conuentus  domus  perpetuam  concessit  fraternita- 
tem,  quoniam  vero  sigillum  proprium  non  habui  cartam  istam  munimine  sigilli 
domini  Alexandri  filii  Willelmi  filii  Thoraldi  et  munimine  sigilli  domini  AVil- 
lelmi  Kede  de  Camera  roboraui ;  hiis  testibus,  magistro  Henrico  archidiacono 
Dunkeldensi,  magistro  Eoljerto,  magistro  Alexandro  de  Sterling,  Alexandro 
vicecomite  de  Striueling,  Willelmo  de  Camera,  Henrico  de  Lambertoune, 
Willelmo  preposito,  Eoberto  Cambroun,  Adam  filio  Eegneri,  Willelmo  filio 
Jacobi,  Johanne  fratre  suo,  Waltero  fratre  prepositi,  Andrea  filio  prepositi, 
Hugone  et  Eicardo  et  W  de  Warwyc,  W  de  Collyne 

Baldiueno  clerico,  et  multis  aliis. 


1 05.    COMPOSITIO  INTER  NOS  ET  AbBATEM  DE  CuPRO  DE  ECCLESIA  DE 

Glenyleff. 

UxiUERSis  sancte  matris  ecclesie  filiis  presentes  litteras  visuris  vel  audituris, 
Fargusius  miseratione  diuina  Abbas  de  Cambuskynneth  et  eiusdem  loci 
conuentus  humilis,  salutem  in  Domino  sempiternam :  Vniuersitati  vestre  notum 

18 


138 


UEGISTBUM  MONASTERII 


facimus,  quod  cuin  ius  patronatus  ecclesie  de  Glenilef,  cum  terris  et  aliis  oui- 
uibus  rectitudiuibus  ad  ipsam  ecclesiam  de  Glenilef  spectantibus,  per  inclite 
memorie  dominum  Willelmum  dudum  regem  Scotorum  illustrem  monasteriu 
de  Cambuskynnetli,  et  cauouicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus,  in  liberam  et  perpe- 
tuam  elemosinam,  caritatis  intuitu,  fuerit  collatum,  et  deinde  per  veuerabilem 
in  Cristo  patrem,  dominum  Gregorium  bone  memorie  episcopum  Brecliinensem 
ipsius  loci  diocesanum,  pensio  aunua  decem  librarum  sterlingorum  in  ipsa 
ecclesia  monasterio  nostro  predicto  et  nobis  fuerit  assignata,  fueritque  in  solu- 
tione  seu  prestatione  ipsius  pensionis  iam  jjer  aliquos  annos  cessatum,  non  sine 
dampno  nostro  et  monasterii  nostri  memorati,  tandem  per  consilium  et  ordina- 
tionem  amicorum  commuuium,assensu  eciam  venerabilis  in  Cristo  patris  domiui 
Johannis  Dei  gracia  tunc  Brecliinensis  ecclesie  episcopi  accedente,  vtilitatem 
et  cj^uietem  monasterii  nostri  pi'edicti  et  etiam  monasterii  de  Cupro  in  Angus, 
cui  dicta  ecclesia  de  Gleuilef  est  vicina,  affectaucium,  quorum  consilium  et 
ordiuationem  approbiamus  et  suscepimus,  predictum  ius  patronatus  cum  terris 
et  aliis  omnibus  rectitudinibus  ad  prefatam  ecclesiam  de  Glenileff  spectantibus, 
et  omne  ius  quod  in  premissis  Labuimus  vel  occasione  ipsorum  habere  potui- 
mus,  sponte  et  pure  eisdem  Abbati  et  Conuentui  de  Cupro  coucessimus  et  plene 
transtulimus  in  eosdem  ;  salua  tamen  monasterio  nostro  predicto  et  nobis  annua 
pensione  decem  librarum  in  ecclesia  ipsa  de  Glenileff,  ad  cuiuscimque  seu 
(|Uorumcunque  manus  deueniat  in  posterum,  per  predictos  abbatem  et  con- 
uentum  de  Cupro,  eorum  sumptibus  et  periculo,  nobis  seu  nostro  procuratori  in 
domo  fratrum  predicatorum  de  Pcrtli  singulis  annis  ad  duos  auni  terminos,  vide- 
licet,  medietatem  ad  festum  Pentbecostes  et  aliam  medietatem  ad  festum  Sancti 
ilartiui  iu  liieme  integre  et  sine  dilatioue  seu  excusatione  persoluenda,  primo 
termino  solutionis  incipiente  in  festo  Pentliecostes  proximo  futuro ;  hoc  inter 
predictos  abbates  et  eorum  conueutus  specialiter  acto  et  couuento,  quod  si  con- 
tingat  pvedictos  abbatem  et  conuentum  de  Cupro  in  solutione  predicte  pensionis 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


139 


dictis  termiiiis  seu  eonun  aliquo,  ex  causa  manifesta  et  euidenti  non  impeditos, 
vltra  octo  dies,  quod  absit,  deficere,  oliligant  se  et  omnia  bona  sua,  presencia  et 
1'utura,  mobilia  et  inmobilia,  ad  ministrandum  seu  inueniendum  procm-atori 
predictorum  abbatis  et  conuentus  de  Cambuskynnetli  expensas  suificientes  pro 
tempore  quo  ipsam  solutionem  eum  coutigerit  expectare,  et  nicliilominns  ad 
soluendum  singulis  septimauis  c^uibns  ipsos  in  solutioue  alicuius  termiui  cessare 
contigerit  fabrice  ecclesie  Dunblanensis  dimediam  marcam  nomine  pene,  sup- 
ponentes  se  quantum  ad  lioc  iurisdictioui  seu  coliertioni  domiui  episcopi  Dun- 
blauensis,  renunciantes  in  lioc  facto  omnibus  priuilegiis  ordini  Cisterciensi  seu 
abbati  et  conuentui  de  Cupro  concessis  vel  iu  posterum  concedendis  per  que  pre- 
sens  conuentio  infirmari  poterit  iu  futurum  :  In  quorum  omnium  testimonium 
seu  probationem  parti  liuius  scrijiti  in  modum  cirograpbi  confecti  penes  alibatem 
et  conuentum  de  Cupro  remanenti  sigillum  commnne  capituli  de  Cambus- 
kynneth,  vnacum  sigillis  venerabilium  patrum  domini  Joliannis  Dei  gracia 
Brechinensis  episcopi  supradicti  et  domini  Nicholai  eadem  gracia  Duiiblanensis 
episcopi,  est  appensum,  parti  vero  penes  prefatos  abbatem  et  conuentum  de 
Cambusk^nmeth  remaneuti  sigiUum  conmiune  monasterii  de  Cujjro,  vnacum 
sigillis  predictorum  dominorum  Erechinensis  et  Duublauensis  episcoporum 
est  appositum  :  actum,  conuentum  et  datum  apud  Sanctum  Andream,  duodecimo 
die  mensis  Septembris  anno  ab  Incarnatione  Domini  millesimo  tricentesimo 
vndecimo. 


106.  Glenileiff  ecclesie  pensionis  soluexde  fikmitas. 
Pateat  vuiuersis  p)er  presentes  uos,  fratrem  'Willehnnm  permissione  diuina 
abbatem  monasterii  de  Cupro,  cum  consensu  et  assensu  eiusdem  loci  conuentus, 
teneri  et  firmiter  ac  fideliter  obligari  venerabilibus  et  religiosis  viris  domino 
abbati  et  conuentui  monasterii  do  Cambuskynneth  ad  sohiendum  eisdem 
domino  abbati  et  conuentui,  cpiamdiu  abbaciatus  officium  dicti  mona!3terii  de 


140 


BEGISTRUM  MOXASTERII 


Cupro  iios  exercere  contingat,  decem  libras  bone,  legalis  et  vsualis  nionete 
Scotie  ad  duos  anni  terminos,  videlicet,  medietatem  ad  festum  Pentliecostes  et 
aliam  medietatem  ad  festum  Saucti  Martini  iu  liieme,  in  domo  fratrum  pre- 
dicatorum  de  Perth,  sine  fraude  et  dolo,  cauillatione  seu  excusatioue  quacunque, 
pro  annua  pensione  nostre  ecclesie  de  Glenileiff  sibi  annuatim  per  nos  debita, 
siue  dicta  ecclesia  de  Gleuileiff  sterilis  fuerit  fructibus  siue  fertilis,  termino 
quidem  prime  solutionis  eiusdem  incipiente  ad  festum  Sancti  Martini  proxime 
sequens  datam  presencium,  prima  vero  et  antiqua  conuencione  inter  nos  et 
prefatos  dominum  abbatem  et  couuentum  de  Cambuskyunetb  peues  autedictam 
pensioneui  ecclesie  nostre  de  Gleuileiff  anuuatim  eisdem  debitam  in  omnibus 
et  per  omuia  nichilomiuus  iu  suo  r^jljore  perpetuis  temporibus  duratura ;  ad 
quodquidem  firmiter  faciendum,  agendum  et  vt  premittitur  fideliter  perim- 
plendum,  obligamus  n(js  ac  omuia  boua  nostra,  mobilia  et  immobilia,  ecclesi- 
astica  et  mundana,  vbicunque  fuerint  inuenta,  fore  distringenda,  namauda, 
capieuda  et  abducenda,  et  ad  voluutatem  dictorum  abbatis  et  conuentus  de 
Cambuskynneth  vel  eorum  procuratoris,  si  necesse  fuerit,vendenda,  sine  licencia 
alicuius  ministri  canonis  et  ciuilis,  quousque  tam  de  dampnis,  laboribus  et 
expeusis  si  que,  quos  vel  quas,  sustiuueriut  vel  sustinuerit,  feceriut  vel  fecerit, 
ob  defectum  solutionis  dictaruui  decim  libraruni  ad  dictos  termiuos  et  locum 
miuime  solutarum,  quam  de  dicta  aunua  pensioue  plenarie  et  integre  ac  paci 
fice  et  sine  litis  strepitu  totaliter  fuerit  satisfactum,  nullo  proponendo  in  con- 
trarium  obstante  :  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  sigillum  commune  monasterii 
nostri  supradicti  presentibus  est  appensum,  apud  mouasterium  nostrum  memo- 
ratum,  sexto  decimo  die  meusis  Septembris  anuo  Domiui  millesimo  quadrin- 
geutesimo  quinto  ;  hiis  testibus,  nobilibus  viris  dominis  Dauid  Flemyng 
domiuo  de  Bigar,  "Willelmo  de  Dalzell,  Johanne  de  Dalzell,  Johanne  de 
Cranstoun,  Johaime  de  Cliattow,  militibus,  Johanne  de  Vchiltre  armigero,  et 
multis  aliis. 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


141 


107.    QUITTANCIA  DE  GLEXYLEFF. 

Pateat  vniuersis  per  preseutes  nos,  Patricium  permissione  diuina  aLbatem 
monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth,  recepisse  per  mamis  reuerendorum  religiosorum 
domiuorum,  abbatis  et  conuentus  monasterii  de  Cupro  in  Angusia,  decem  libras 
monete  Scotie  nobis  debitas  per  eosdem  de  aauua  pensioue  nostra  ecclesie  sue 
de  Gleuileiff,  de  terminis  Peutbecostes  et  Sancti  Martini  in  hieme  vltimo 
transacto,  de  qua  quidem  siunma  contenti,  prefatos  religiosos  et  omnes  sibi 
pertinentes  imperpetuum  cpuetamus  :  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  sigillum 
nostrum  rotuudum  presentibus  est  afB.xum,  apud  dictum  nostrum  monas- 
terium,  duodecimo  die  meusis  Pebruarii  anno  Domini  niillesimo  quadi-ingeu- 
tesimo  tercio  decimo. 


108.  HospiTALis  Sancti  Jacobi  sasine  preceptum. 
EoBEETUS  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotorum  vicecomiti  et  balliuis  suis  de  Striueling, 
salutem  :  Quia  coucessimus  per  cartam  Deo  et  beate  Marie  virgini  ac  cauonicis 
in  monasterio  de  Cambuskyuneth  ibideni  Deo  seruientibus  et  imperpetuum 
seruituris  hospitale  beati  Jacobi  ad  fiuem  platee  pontis  de  Striueling  infra 
balUam  vestram,  cum  omnibus  et  singulis  terris  ac  possessionibus  suis,  tam 
sub  terra  quam  supra  terram,  mandamus  vobis  et  precipimus  quatenus  eisdem 
canouicis,  vel  eorum  certo  attornato  latori  presencium,  sasinam  dicti  hospitalis 
cum  pertinenciis  iuste  liberari  faciatis  et  sine  dilatione,  secundum  tenorem 
dicte  carte  nostre  quam  inde  habent;  saluo  Jolianni  Palmer  qui  dictam  plateam 
a  lougo  tempore  sustinuit  vsufructu  terrarum  dicti  hospitalis  in  recompensa- 
tiouem  expensarum  suarum  pro  toto  tempore  vite  sue,  et  hoc  nullo  modo 
omittatis ;  teste  meipso,  apud  castruni  nostrum  de  Eothesay,  decimo  die 
mensis  Marcii  amio  re<rni  nostri  tercio  decimo. 


142 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


109.  I^E  ECCLESIA  DE  KlKKETON  PRIMA  DONATIO  WlLLELMO  PRIMG  ABBATI 
DE  CaMBUSKYNNETH. 

KiRKETON.  Frater  Robertus,  \)Y\ov  ecelesie  .Sanctiandree  et  totius  conuentus  eiusdem 

ecclesie,  omnibus  sancte  matris  ecclesie  filiis  in  Domino,  salutem  :  Noscant  tam 
posteri  quani  presentes  dominuni  Eobertum  episcopum  Sanctiandree  concessisse 
abbacie  de  Striueling  et  Willelmo  primo  abbati  eiusdem  abbacie  et  successori- 
bus  suis  ecclesiam  de  Egles :  Tenendam  de  episcopo  Sanctiandree  et  successori- 
bus  suis  in  perpetuam  elimosinam,  consilio  et  concessione  capituli  nostri  et 
totius  synodi,  ita  quod  debitam  reuerenciam  exhibeant  ecclesie  Sanctiandree, 
etc,  et  episcopo  eiusdem  loci :  Valete. 

110.  DoN.VTio  teuee  de  Kikketon  peeDauid  episcopum  Sanctia]s'deee. 
Dauid  permissione  diuina  ecclesie  Sanctiandree  minister  liumilis,  omuibus 
Cliristi  fidelibus  preseus  scriptum  visuris  vel  audituris,  eternam  in  Domino 
salutem:  Nouerit  vniuersitas  vestra  nos  dedisse,  concessisse  ethaccarta  nostra 
confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancti  Niniani  de  Kirketoun,  nomine  dotis,  terram 
illam  que  iacet  prope  dictam  ecclesiam  in  parte  aquilonari,  inter  maguam 
stratam  que  se  extendit  de  Striueliug  vsque  Ivirketoun  et  semitam  que  pro- 
cedit  de  illa  magna  strata  et  se  extendit  usque  domos  episcojii  sitas  iuxta 
predictam  ecclesiam  ;  quare  volumus  vt  predicta  ecclesia  habeat  et  possideat 
dictam  terram  adeo  libere  et  quiete  ab  omni  seculari  exactione  sicut  aliqua 
elemosina  in  tota  diocese  nostra  ab  aliquibus  tenetur  liberius  vel  quiecius 
possidetur  :  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  presenti  scripto  sigillum  nostrum  apponi 
fecimus  ;  hiis  testibus,  magistro  Ilugone  de  Meleburne,  Alexandro  de  Sancto 
INIartino,  Willelmo  de  JMortuomari,  A  de  Malcai-mes,  Hugone  de  Striueling, 
Ilogero  de  Sulebi,  Gilberto  clerico,  et  aliis  ;  datum  apud  Inchemathach  anno 
gracie  uiiUesimo  ducentesimo  quadragesimo  secundo,  die  translatiouis  sancti 
Thome  martiris. 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


143 


111.  Institutio  yicarie  ecclesie  de  Kieketoun. 
Omsibus  lias  literas  visuris  vel  audituris,  decauus  Cliristianitatis  de  Liii- 
lithqw,  salutem  in  Domino  sempiternam  :  Cum  noViis  a  veneraljili  in  Cristo 
patre,  domino  TVillelmo  Dei  gracia  Sanctiandree  episcopo,  per  litteras  suas 
patentes  fuerat  precipiendo  mandatum  ^'t,  cum  nobis  constaret  discretum 
virum  magistrum  Willelmum  de  Fuulis  tuuc  temporis  perpetuum  viearium 
ecclesie  de  Kirkis  deeessisse  vel  dicte  sue  vicarie  sponte  sua  cessisse, 
reuerendum  patrem  in  Cristo  dominum  P[atricium]  Dei  gracia  abbatem 
de  Cambuskynneth,  nomine  suo  et  conueutus  sui,  quibus  dictus  reuerendus 
pater  domiinis  Sancti  Andree  episcopus  dictani  ecclesiam  de  Kirkis  cum 
omni  iuris  pleuitudine  et  fructus  omnes  et  singulos  ad  dictam  ecclesiam 
pertiuentes  seu  quoquomodo  pertinere  valentes  percipiendos  et  in  vsus  suos 
proprios  pro  voluntatis  sue  arliitrio  conuertendos  potestate  concessa,  in  dicta 
ecclesia  institueremus,  inductumcpie  auctoritate  ordiuaria  defenderemus  ;  con- 
stetque  nobis  per  litteras  dicti  magistri  "Willelmi  sigillo  suo,  vnacum  sigillis 
dicti  reuerendi  in  Christo  patris  domini  P[atricii]  Dei  gracia  abbatis  de  Cambus- 
kynneth  et  magistri  Nicholai  de  Balmyll  dicti  de  Sanctoandrea,  signatas,  dictum 
magistrum  W[Lllehnum]  dicte  sue  quondam  vicarie  sponte  sua  renunciasse,  uos 
iuxta  furmam  mandati  nobis  directi,  dictum  reuerendum  patrem  dominum 
P[atricium]  Dei  gracia  abbatem  de  Cambuslcynneth,  nomine  suo  et  conuentus 
sui,  in  dicta  ecclesia  de  Kirkis  cum  omni  iure  ad  dictam  ecclesiam  pertiuente 
plenitudine  vt  premissum  est  instituimus  et  in  corporalem  possessionem 
quietam  et  vacantem  eundem  induximus  ;  precipientes  sub  pena  caiionica 
ne  quis  euudem  in  dicte  ecclesie  possessionem  nomine  quo  supra  inductimi 
inquietare  aut  quoquomodo  perturbare  presumat :  In  cnius  rei  testimonium 
sigillum  nostrum  presentibus  Utteris  est  appensum  ;  datum  apud  Cambus- 
k}Tineth,  die  dominioa  in  crastino  sancti  Barnabe  apostoli  anno  gracie  mil- 
lesimo  ducentesimo  nonagesimo  quinto. 


KIRKEION. 


144 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


112.    COXFIEMATIO  ElCHAKDI  EPISCOPI  ECCLESIE  DE  EGGLES. 

EiCHAEDUS  Dei  gracia  ecclesie  Sanctiaudree  liumUis  minister,  vuiuersis 
sancte  niatris  ecclesie  filiis,  salutem  :  Sciant  tam  posteri  quam  preseutes  nos 
concessisse  et  mimimine  preseutis  scripti  coufirmasse  ecclesie  Sancte  Marie  de 
StriueHng  et  canouicis  ibidem  Deo  seruieutibus  ecclesiam  de  Egglis,  tam  in 
capellis  et  decimis  quam  in  ceteris  ecclesiasticis  beneficiis,  in  pei-petuam  ele- 
mosinam  :  Tenendam  adeo  libere  et  quiete  et  honorifice  sicut  predicta  ecclesia 
eam  possedit  liberius  et  quietius  et  lionorificentius  tempore  Dauid  regis  bone 
memorie  et  Eoberti  episcopi  et  episcopi  Arualdi  autecessorvim  uostrorum,  saluo 
iure  episcopali ;  liiis  testibus,  Willelmo  abbate  de  Saucta  Cruce,  AuUso  decano, 
Eoberto  fratre  episcopi,  Eoberto  cauonico  de  Sauctoandrea,  Eoberto  filio  Seulfi, 
Alexaudro  capellauo,  magistro  Harl;ierto,  magistro  Abraliamo. 


113.  DoNATio  ecclesie  de  Kirketgux. 
Wilelmus  rex  Scotoram,  omnibus  probis  hominibus  tocius  regni  sui, 
salutem :  Sciatis  me  concessisse  et  hac  carta  mea  coufirmasse  Deo  et  eculesie 
sancte  Marie  de  Striueliug  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  ecclesiam  de 
Egglis,  tam  in  capellis  et  decimis  quam  in  ceteris  ecclesiasticis  beneficiis, 
in  perpetuam  elemosiuam  :  Teneudam  adeo  libere  et  quiete  et  honorifice  sicut 
carta  Eicliardi  episcopi  Sauctiaudree  eis  douat  et  coucedit,  et  villam  de  Egglis 
cum  suis  rectis  diuisis,  in  bosco  et  plano  et  pascuis  et  omnibus  iustis  perti- 
nenciis,  sicut  carta  episcopi  eis  donat  et  coucedit ;  testibus,  Eichardo  can- 
cellario,  Dauid  Olifardo,  Philippo  de  Valoniis  camerario,  Eoberto  de  QuLiici, 
apud  Kingorue. 

114.  CoADUXATio  vicaeie  de  Kirketoun  cum  rectoria. 
UxiUEESis  sancte  matris  ecclesie  filiis  ad  quos  presentes  littere  peruenerint, 
WiUelmus  miseratione  diuiua  ecclesie  Sanctiaudree  minister  humilis,  salutem 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


145 


et  benedictionem  diuinam  :  Pastoralis  ofllcii  decet  solicitudiuem  gregis  sibi 
commissi  statum  et  merita  diligenter  inquirere,  \i,  benemeritos  affectione 
paterna  fouendo,  errantes  sue  correctionis  occasionem  possint  assumere  :  Nos 
igitur,  statu  monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth  nostre  diocesis  diligenter  perquisito, 
inuenientes  dictum  monasterium  vltra  quam  deceret  subuentione  bonoruni 
temporalium  indigere,  statuni  dicti  monasterii,  prout  possumus,  dignum  duxi- 
mus  releuandum,  vt,  dicto  mouasterio  per  bona  temporalia  releuato,  cultus  diui- 
nus  ibidem  suscipere  valeat  incrementum  ;  Volumus  igitur  et  de  gratia  nostra 
speciali  fauorabiliter  ordinamus  vtabbas  et  conuentusmonasterii  prelibatiomnes 
fructus,  oblationes,  et  obuentioues  ad  ecclesiam  de  Kirketoun  nostre  diocesis 
pertinentes  seu  quoc[uomodo  pertinere  valentes,  cuius  ecclesie  sola  rectoria  ad 
dictum  monasterium  vsque  ad  liec  tempora  pertinebat,  integre  et  plene  per- 
cipiant  et  in  vsus  suospro  suo  arbitrio  conuertant,  et  dicte  ecclesie  perydoneos 
capellanos  cpios  eligere  voluerint  honeste,  prout  loci  qiialitas  et  sahis  ani- 
marum  exposcit,  faciant  deseruiri :  Vohimus  autem  vt  si  opus  fnerit  et  dictis 
abbati  et  couuentui  vtile  visum  fuerit,  huic  nostre  concessioui  aliquid  addere 
vel  detrahere  quod  dicti  monasterii  commodum  respiciat  aut  cpiietem,  vel  si 
in  nouam  formam  penitus  eam  vohierint  immutare,quod  uostri  sigilli  muuimine 
sine  di£[icuhate  alicpia  hec  nostra  gracia  seu  ordinatio  roboretur  :  In  cuius  rei 
testimonium  has  htteras  uostras  patentes  per  quas  dictam  ecclesiam  de  Kirke- 
toun,  seu  fructus,  oblationes  et  obueutiones  predicte  ecclesie  dicto  monasterio 
integre  et  plene  conferimus,  sepedictis  abbati  et  couueutui  tradidimus 
patentes :  Datum  apud  Falkland,  decimo  septimo  kalendas  Junu  anno  ab 
Incarnatione  Domini  miUesimo  ducentesimo  nonagesimo  quinto ;  salua  nobis 
et  successoribus  nostris  canonica  obediencia. 


KIRKETOUN. 


19 


146 


EEGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


115.    De  INSTITUTIONE  ECCLESIE  DE  KlRKETOX. 

KiRKETOUN.  WlLELMUS  permissioiie  diuina  Sanctiaudree  episcopus,  dilecto  sibi  in  Cristo 

decano  Cristiauitatis  de  Linlithqw,  salutem  cum  benedictione  diuina :  Man- 
damu.s  vobis  sub  pena  canonica,  quatenus  cum  vobis  constiterit  magistrum 
Willelmum  de  Foulis  vicarium  ecclesie  de  Kirkis  decessisse  vel  vicarie  pre- 
dicte  ecclesie  siwnte  .sua  cessisse,  religiosum  virum  abbatem  de  Cambuskyn- 
neth,  nomine  suo  et  conuentus  ipsius  monasterii,  quibus  fructus,  oblationes,  et 
obuentionesad  dictam  ecclesiam  pertinentes  seu  quoquomodo  pertinere  valentes 
integre  et  plene  percipiendos  et  in  vsus  suos  proprios  conuertendos  de  gracia 
nostra  speciali  concessimus,  iu  forma  prescripta  instituatis,  in  possessionem  cor- 
poralem  eiusdem  ecclesie  nomine  quo  supra  inducentes  eundem,  institutumque 
et  inductum  auctoritate  nostra  canonice  defendatis ;  presentibus  penes  dictos 
abbatem  et  conuentum  perpetuo  remansuris  :  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  has 
literas  nostras  vobis  mittimus  patentes,  sigillo  nostro  signatas :  Datum  apud 
Falkland,  decimo  septimo  kalendas  Junii  anno  ab  Incarnatione  Domini  mille- 
simo  ducentesimo  nonagesimo  quinto. 


116.    COADUNATIO  ECCLESIE  DE  KlEKETOUX  EECTOEIE  CUM  VICAEIA. 

UNlUEiiSiS  sancte  matris  ecclesie  filiis  ad  quos  presentes  littere  peruenerint, 
WiUelmus  de  Lambertoun  miseratione  diuina  Sanctiandree  episcopus,  salutem 
in  Domino  :  Noueritis  nos  litteras  bone  memorie  domini  Willelmi  Fraser  pre- 
decessoris  nostri  inspe.xisse,  non  cancellatas  non  aboUtas  nec  in  aliqua  sui 
parte  viciatas,  sigillo  suo  autentico  signatas,  in  forma  que  sequitur  inspexisse  : 
Vniueksis  sancte  matris  ecclesie  fiHis  ad  quos  presentes  littere  peruenerint, 
WiUelmus  miseratione  diuina  ecclesie  Sanctiandree  minister  humibs,  salutem, 
gratiam  et  benedictionem  diuinam:  Pastoralis  ofticii  decet  solicitudiuem  gregis 
sibi  commissi  statum  et  merita  diligenter  perquirere,  vt  sic  intime  subiectorum 
suorum   wltus  agnoscens,  que  singulorum  saluti  et  quieti  oportuna  nouerit 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


147 


tanquam  dispeusator  domiis  Domiui  prouidiis  siugulis  caute  valeat  miuistrare ; 
cum  igitur  occasione  vicarie  ecclesie  de  Kirketouu  prope  Striueliug,  uostre 
diocesis,  religiosi  viri  abbas  et  couueutus  mouasterii  de  Cambuskynueth,  ad 
quos  dicte  ecclesie  rectoria  uoscitur  pertinere,  iam  frequenter  coutra  vicarios 
dicte  ecclesie  ad  eorum  presentationem  per  uos  institutos  labores  sustiuuerunt 
et  iu  eorum  detrimeutum  et  grauameu  expensas  feceruut  litigaudo,  uos,  statu 
dicti  mouasterii,  prout  ex  iuiimcto  uobis  iucumbit  officio,  diligeucius  perquisito, 
dictum  mouasterimu,  vltra  quam  status  eiusdem  et  persouarum  ibidem  Deo 
famulaucium  merita  requirebant,  bonorum  temporaliiim  subueutioue  iuuenimus 
iudigere,  vude  nos  statum  dicti  mouasterii  aliqualiter  releuare  cupieutes  vica- 
riam  dicte  ecclesie  cum  rectoria  eiusdem  coaduuauimus,  et  dictis  abbati  et 
conueutui  de  gracia  uostra  speciali  dispeusaudo  cimi  eisdem  caritatiue,  de 
vuanimi  conseusu  et  assensu  capituli  uostri,  tractatu  frequenti  ac  diligenti  super 
lioc  prius  habito,  coucessimus  vt  dictam  ecclesiam  de  Kirketoun  mouasterio  suo 
viciuam,  cum  omuibus  suis  pertineuciis,  integre  et  plene  habeant  et  imper- 
petuum  possideaut  iu  quiete,  fructus  omnes  et  singulos  et  obuentioues,  uecuou 
et  decimas  tam  maiores  quam  miuores  ad  dictam  ecclesiam  pertiuentes  seu 
quoquomodo  pertinere  valeutes,  iutegre,  plene  et  pacifice  percipiant  et  in  vsus 
suos  proprios  pro  sue  voluntatis  arbitrio  couuertaut,  vt  iu  hoc  ipsorum  com- 
moditati  pie  consulamus  pariter  et  quieti ;  et  quod  ipsi  dicte  ecclesie  per  duos 
capellanos  ydoneos  quos  ad  hoc  assumere  volueriut  honeste  faciant  deseruiri ; 
sakiis  episcopalibus  iuribus  et  archidiaconalibus  iu  omuibus  :  Volumus  eciam 
quod  de  procuratioue  ratione  dicte  ecclesie  nobis  debita  iu  dicto  monasterio 
uobis  deceuter  prouideatur,  vt  eorimi  expensis  et  tedio  graciose  parcamus  eciam 
in  hac  parte  :  In  cuius  rei  testimouium  has  literas,  sigillo  uostro  signatas,  per 
quas  dictis  abbati  et  conueutui  dictam  ecclesiam  de  Kirketoun  pleuo  iure  vt 
premissum  est  conferimus,  per  quas  eciam  procurationem  ratione  dicte  ecclesie 
nobis  debitam  in  dicto  suo  monasterio  singulis  anuis  recipere  eisdem  coucedi- 


KIRKETOUN 


148 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


KIRKETOUN. 


mus,  sepedictis  abbati  et  conuentui  concedimus  patentes  :  datum  apud  Falk- 
land,  decimo  septimo  kalendas  Junii  anno  gracie  millesimo  dueentesimo  noua- 
gesimo  quinto  :  Nos  igitur  collationem  dicte  ecclesie  de  Kirketoun  predicto 
monasterio  de  Cambuskynneth  in  forma  prescripta  tam  pie  quam  deuote  fac- 
tam,  et  quod  procurationem  ratione  visitatiouis  ipsius  ecclesie  de  Kirketoun 
nobis  debitam  in  ipso  monasterio  recipere  debuimus,  in  omuibus  predictis  arti- 
culis  approbamus,  acceptamus,  ratificamus  et  tenore  presencium  confirmamus ; 
et  si  quid  iu  predicta  coUatione  omissum  forsau  fuerit  quominus  perpetuam 
liabere  potuit  firmitatem,  hoc  pontificali  auctoritate  nostra  iu  omnibus  plene 
suplentes,  dicte  collationi  pro  nobis  et  successoribus  nostris  per^jetuam  tribui- 
mus  firmitatem  :  In  cuius  rei  testimuuium  presens  scriptum  sigillo  nostro 
autentico  fecimus  roborari;  Datum  apud  Sanctumandream,  vicesimo  qiuuto  die 
mensis  Decembris  anno  gi-acie  millesimo  tricentesimo. 


117.  De  peocuratioxibus  ecclesie  de  Kikketoun. 

Omnibus  hoc  scriptum  visuris  vel  audituris,  Dauid  Dei  gracia  episeopus 
Sanctiandree,  salutem  in  Domino  :  Xouerit  vniuersitas  vestra  quod  domiuus 
abbas  et  couuentus  de  Cambuskynneth  non  tenentur  nobis  nisi  ad  vnicam 
tantuni  procurationeni  per  vicarium  de  Kirketoun  faciendam  pro  matrice 
ecclesia  de  Kirketoun  et  capellis  suis,  scilicet  Dimipas  et  Larbert,  nec  volumus 
eisdem  canonicis  aliquod  preiudicium  generari  pro  eo  quod  nos  anno  gracie 
millesimo  ducentesimo  quuiquagesimo  primo  cum  nostram  visitaremus  par- 
rochiam,  apud  capellam  de  Duuipais  caritatiue  et  nou  causa  procurationis  ad 
supplicationem  dicti  abbatis  et  conuentus  hospitati  fuimus  :  lu  cuius  rei 
testimonium  presentes  literas  sigilli  nostri  appositione  fecimus  communiri ; 
Datum  apud  insulam  Murthach,  octauo  idus  Augusti  anno  gracie  millesimo 
ducentesimo  quinquageshno  primo. 


DE  (JAMBUSKENXETH. 


149 


1  1  8.    COMPOSITIO  INTER  NOS   ET  DUNFERMELING   SUPER  DIUERSIS  DECIMIS 
ET  DE  CELDKA  FAKINE  DE  POLMAS  PiEGIS  KlKKETOUN. 

Uniuersis  saiicte  matris  ecclesie  filiis  literas  istas  visuris  vel  audituris, 
G[uido]  de  Lundoris  et  G[ilbertus]  de  Abirbrotliok  abbates,  et  J[oliannes]  prior 
de  May,  eternam  in  Domiuo  salutem  :  Literas  domiui  pape  Innocentii  tercii 
suscepimus  iu  liec  verba  :  Innocentius  episcopus  seruus  seruorum  Dei,  dilectis 
filiis  de  Lundoris  et  de  Abirbrotliok  abbatibus  et  priori  de  May,  diocesis 
Sancti  Audree,  salutem  et  apostolicam  benedictionem  :  Dilecti  filii  abbas  et 
conuentus  de  Dunfermeling  sua  nobis  conquestione  monstrarunt  quod  cum 
abbas  et  canonici  de  Cambuskynueth,  diocesis  Sanctiandree,  eosdem,  super 
quibusdam  decimis  quas  ad  ecclesiam  suam  de  Striueling  pertinere  dicebant, 
coram  venerabili  fratre  nostro  episcopo  Dunblanensi  et  coniudicibus  suis 
delegatis  a  nobis,  traxissent  in  causam,  et  ipsi  super  capella  de  Donypais 
auctoritate  nostra  conueuissent  eosdem,  taudem  venerabili  fratre  nostro  Epi- 
scopo  Sanctiandree  ac  coUegis  ipsius  in  quos  fuit  a  partibus  compromissum 
interponentibus  partes  suas  inter  eos  amicabilis  compositio  interuenit,  quam 
vltra  quiuquennium  obseruatam  dicti  abbas  et  canonici  de  Cambuskynnetli 
nituntur  infringere,  minus  iuste  contra  iuramentum  prestitum  temere  venientes, 
ideoque  discretioni  vestre  per  apostolica  scripta  mandamus  quatenus  composi- 
tionem  ipsam,  sicut  sine  prauitate  prouide  facta  est  et  ab  vtraque  parte  sponte 
recepta,  faciatis  per  censuram  ecclesiasticam,  apellatione  remota,  firmiter 
obseruari :  Quod  si  vero  omnes  liiis  exequendis  [non]  potueritis  interesse,  duo 
vestrum  ea  nicliilominus  exequantur,  vos  denique,  filii  abbates,  super  vobis  ipsis 
et  credito  vobis  grege  taliter  uigilatis,  extirpando  vicia,  et  plautando  virtutes,  vt 
in  nouissimo  districti  examinis  die  coram  tremendo  iudice  C[ui  reddet  vnicuique 
secundimi  opera  sua  diguam  possitis  reddere  ratiouem  :  Datum  Lateranensi 
nono  Nouembris  pontificatus  nostri  anno  septimo  decimo.     Harum  literarum 


KIRKETOUN. 


150 


BEGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


KiRKETou.v.  auctoritate,  partibus  iu  presencia  nostra  constitutis,  ex  inspectioue  instru- 

meutorum  autenticorum  et  assertione  partium  nobis  pleuius  coustitit  quod 
abbas  et  canonici  de  Cambuskyunetli  traxerunt  iu  causam  abbatem  et 
monacbos  de  Duufermeling  super  quibusdam  decimis  ad  ecclesiam  suam  de 
Kirkis  vt  asserebant  spectantibus,  scilicet  super  decimis  bladis  de  terra  Eoberti 
Cambrou  de  Sipbalue,  de  terra  Hugonis  Parcur,  de  terra  ilalcolmi  seruientis 
regis,  de  terra  de  Ivirkis,  de  Cambusbaromi,  de  Sceot  quam  seruientes  regis 
tenent  de  Butlicadroch,  de  terra  Odonis  seruieutis  regis,  de  terra  AVelaudi  de 
Pulmais  quam  Patricius  tenet,  de  terra  canouicorum  iuxta  molendinum,  de 
vna  carucata  terre  de  Craghortli,  et  de  alia  carucata  terre  quam  Vnspac  tenuit, 
et  super  decimis  piscarie  de  Forth  et  molendiui  de  Baunoc.  Monaclii  vero 
de  Dunfermeling  vice  versa  conueuiebant  abbatem  et  canouicos  de  Cambus- 
kynnetli  eadem  auctoritate  super  capella  de  Donipas  et  super  omnibus 
decimis  de  Carnok  et  Plaue  et  Vtred  Banoc,  quia  vt  iidem  monachi  asserebant 
omues  decime  de  dominio  domini  regis  de  scliira  de  Striueling  ad  eos  per- 
tiuebant.  Hec  est  forma  literarum  quibus  vtebantur  cauonici  contra  monachos  : 
Innocentius  episcopus  seruus  seruorum  Dei,  venerabili  fratri  Duublanensi 
episcopo  et  dilectis  filiis  de  Cupro  et  Scoua  abbatibus,  diocesis  Sanctiandree, 
salutem  et  apostolicam  beuechctiouem  :  Querimoniam  dilectorum  filiorum 
abbatis  et  cauonicorum  de  Cambuskynneth  accepimus,  coutiueutem  quod 
abbas  et  monachi  de  Dunfermeling,  diocesis  Sauctiandree,  quasdam  decimas 
ad  ecclesiam  suam  de  Eggles  pertiueutes  per  violeuciam  occupatas  detiuent 
et  reddere  contradicuut,  alia  eis  dampna  et  iuiurias  iiTOgaudo ;  ideoque  discre- 
tioni  vestre  per  apostohca  scripta  maudamus  quateuus,  partibus  couuocatis, 
audiatis  hiuc  inde  proposita,  et  quod  canonicum  fuerit,  appellatioue  postposita, 
statuatis,  facientes  quod  decreueritis  per  ceusuram  ecclesiasticam  firmiter 
obseruari ;  testes  autem  qui  fuerint  nominati,  si  se  gracia,  odio  vel  timore  sub- 
traxerint,  per  eandem  discretionem,  appellatione  remota,  cogatis  veritati  testi- 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


151 


moniiim  perliibere,  iiullis  literis  veritati  et  iustieie  preiudicantilms  a  sede 
apostoliea  impetratis ;  quod  si  uon  omnes  liiis  exequendis  potueritis  interesse, 
tu,  frater  episcope,  cum  eorum  altero,  ea  nichilominus  exequaris  :  Datum 
Lateranensi,  kalendas  Aprilis  pontificatus  nostri  anno  sexto.  Hec  est  forma 
literarum  quibus  vtebantur  monachi  contra  canonicos  :  INNOCENCIUS  episcopus 
seruus  seruorum  Dei,  dilectis  filiis  priori  Sancte  Crucis,  decauo  de  Tyning- 
ham,  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  et  magistro  Laurentio  officiali  venerabilis  fratris 
nostri  episcopi  Sanctiandree,  salutem  et  apostolicam  benedictionem  :  Querelam 
dilectorum  fiHorum  abbatis  et  conuentus  de  Dunfermeling  accepimus,  con- 
tinentem  quod  canonici  de  Cambuskynneth,  diocesis  Sanctiandree,  capellam 
de  Dunipas  et  quasdam  decimas  de  Striueling  ad  eos  de  iure  spectantes  contra 
iustitiam  detinent  et  reddere  contradicunt ;  quia  vero  nobis  non  constitit  de 
premissis,  discretioni  vestre  per  apostolica  scripta  mandamus  quatenus,  vocatis 
qui  fuerint  euocandi,  audiatis  hinc  inde  proposita  et  quod  canonicum  fuerit, 
appellatione  postposita,  statuatis,  facientes  ciuod  decreueritis  pier  censuram 
ecclesiasticam  firmiter  obseruari :  Testes  autem  qui  nominati  fuerint  si  se  gracia, 
odio  vel  timore  subtraxerint,  per  eandem  censuram,  cessante  appellatione 
cogatis  veritati  testimonium  perhibere,  nullis  literis  veritati  et  justicie  pre- 
iudicautibus  a  sede  apostolica  impetratis ;  quod  si  non  omnes  hiis  exei|uendis 
poteritis  interesse,  duo  vestrum  ea  nichilominus  exec^uantur :  datum  Eome, 
apud  Sanctum  Petram  sexto  kalendas  Nouembris  p)ontificatus  nostri  anno 
septimo.  Tandem  vero  post  multas  altercationes,  de  assensu  parcium,  auctori- 
tate  domini  pape  et  iudicum  delegatorum,  Willelmo  inclite  recordationis  tunc 
temporis  rege  Scotorum  ad  pacem  inter  eos  reformandara  partes  ,suas  inter- 
ponente,  ita  amicabiliter  conuenit,  scilicet,  quod  abbas  et  monachi  de  Dunfer- 
meling  pro  bono  pacis  concesserunt  abbati  et  canonicis  de  Cambuskynneth 
annuum  redditum  nouem  marcarum  imperpetuum  assignatum  pro  arbitrio 
bonoram  ^arorum  in  decimis  bladi  terrarum  istarum,  scilicet,  de  rnithcadroch. 


KIRKETODN. 


152 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


KiRKEToux.  de  Pulmais  Elwyn,  de  rulniais  "Weland,  de  terra  Constantini  quam  Eobertus 

Cambroun  tenuit  eo  tempore,  de  terra  Hugouis  Parcur  iuxta  Fulech,  et  de  crofto 
suo  in  parco  ;  monaclii  eciam  similiter  pro  bono  pacis  quietum  clamaueruut 
abbati  et  canonicis  de  Cambuskynneth  omne  jus  quod  dicebant  se  habere  iu 
capella  de  Dunipas  et  in  decimis  superius  nominatis  ;  et  quia  pax,  sub  predicta 
forma  inter  partes  prolocuta,  non  fuit  vt  decuit  in  scriptura  redacta,  nobis  de 
auctoritate  mandati  apostolici  ad  pacem  p)erpetuam  inter  predictos  abbates 
perficiendam  et  confirmandam  diligenter  iutendentibus,  de  consilio  virorum 
prudentiura  inter  aljbatem  et  monaclios  de  Dunfermeling  ex  vna  parte  et 
abbatem  et  cauonicos  de  Cambuskynucth  ex  alia  parte,  anno  ab  incarnatione 
Domini  millesimo  ducentesimo  decimo  quinto,  nono  kalendas  Nouembris,  in 
ecclesia  parrochiali  de  Perth,  ita  amicabiliter  conuenit  quod  pax  inter  eos  prius 
prolocuta  et  formata  cum  omni  iutegritate  seruabitur  iuxta  quod  superius 
continetur,  hoc  adiecto,  quod  dominus  abbas  et  conuentus  de  Dunfermeling,  ad 
incrementum  eorum  que  prius  fuerant  assiguata  abbati  et  canonicis  de  Cambus- 
kynneth,  dabiint  eis  annuatim  vnam  celdram  farine  auenatice  placabilis  de 
decima  bladi  Pohnas  Eegis  infra  quindecim  dies  a  die  penthecostes  numerandos, 
apud  Pohnas,  ita  qiiod  mouachi  nunciabunt  predictis  canonicis  quo  die  infra 
predictos  quindecim  dies  parati  sint  soluere ;  et  si  casu  aliquo  alterutra  pars 
impedita  fuerit  quomiuus  die  nomiuato  fiat  sohicio,  hoc  non  obstante,  alio  die 
infra  eosdem  quindecim  dies  ad  maudatum  monachorum  satisfaciat;  et  preterea 
terra  illa  que  dicitur  terra  canonicorum,  iuxta  molendinum,  quam  rex  Dauid 
dedit  ad  fundationem  abbacie  de  Cambuskynneth,  remanebit  libera  et  quieta 
canonicis  de  Cambuskynneth,  cum  omni  iutegritate  tam  in  temporalibus  quam 
iu  spiritualibus,  ita  tamen  quod  non  liceat  eis  in  eadem  terra  neque  ecclesiam 
neque  capelh\m  neque  oratorium  construere  :  Saluis  tam  predictis  monacliis 
quam  canonicis  omnibus  aliis  possessionibus  quas  die  quo  facta  fuit  liec  coni- 
positio  tenuerunt :  et  vt  hec  compositio  futuris  temporibus  rata  et  inconcussa 


DE  CAMBUSKEXXETII. 


153 


perseiieret,  appositione  sigilloruni  iiostrorum  et  appositioue  sigillorum  vtriiis- 
que  conuentus  et  aliorum  proborum  virorum  i[ui  huie  compositioni  iuterfuerunt 
est  corroborata. 


KIRKETOUN. 


119.    BULLA  DE  KlRKETOUN  VICAEIA  VXITA  ET  VNIONE  CONHEMATA. 

Gregokius  episcopus  seruus  seruorum  Dei,  ad  perpetuam  rei  memoriam  :  Siu- 
cere  deuotionis  affectus  quem  dilecti  filii  abbas  et  conuentus  monasterii  de 
Cambuskynneth,  ordinis  sancti  Augustini,  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  ad  nos  et  Eo- 
manam  gerunt  ecclesiam  merito  nos  inducit  vt  in  Iiiis  que  digue  possunt  fieri  eis 
simus  oportuno  tempore  gi'aciosi ;  sane  petitio  pro  parte  dictorum  abliatis  et 
conuentus  nobis  nuper  exhibita  continebat  quod  olim  boue  memorie  Willelmus 
episcopus  Sanctiandree  prouide  atteudens  quod  dicti  abbas  et  conuentus,  qui 
rectoriam  parrochialis  ecclesie  de  Kirketoun  prope  Striueling  dicte  diocesis 
canonice  obtiuebant,  contra  vicarios  ipsius  ecclesie  qui  fuerunt  pro  tempore  liti- 
gando  graues  expensas  fecerant,  quodque  dictum  monasterium  pro  sustentatione 
personarum  ibidem  Domino  famulancium  subuentione  temporalium  indigebat, 
de  vnanimi  consensu  et  assensu  dilectorum  filiorum  capituli  ecclesie  Sancti- 
andree,  tractatu  frequenti  ac  diligenti  super  hoc  prius  liabito,  perpetuam 
vicariam  dicte  ecclesie  cum  rectoria  ipsius  coaduuauit,  ac  dictis  abbati  et 
conuentui  concessit  vt  ipsam  ecclesiam  de  Kirketouu  dicto  monasterio 
vicinam  cum  omnibus  suis  pertinenciis  integre  et  plene  haljereut  et  imper- 
petuum  possiderent  in  quiete;  fractus  omnes  et  singrdos  et  obuentiones,  necnon 
et  decimas  tam  maiores  quam  minores  ad  dictam  ecclesiam  pertinentes  seu 
quoquomodo  pertiuere  valentes,  integre,  plene  et  pacifice  perciperent  et  in 
vsus  proprios  pro  sue  voluutatis  arbitrio  conuerterent,  et  quod  ipsi  abbas  et 
conuentus  dicte  ecclesie  per  duos  capellanos  ydoueos  quos  ad  hoc  assumere 
vellent  honeste  facerent  deseruiri,  saluis  episcopalibus  juribus  et  archidiacon- 
alibus  in  omnibus,  prout  in  literis  autenticis  inde  confectis,  dicti  episcopi 

20 


154 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


KiRKETOUN.  sigillo  Diiiuitis,  quaruiu   teuorem   de   verbo    ad  verbum  preseutibus   inseri 

fecimus,  pleuius  continetur  :  Quare  pro  parte  dictorum  abbatis  et  conuentus 
nobis  fuit  liumiliter  supplicatum  vt,  cum  ipsi  juxta  huiusmodi  concessionem 
dictam  ecclesiam  per  quadraginta  annos  pacifice  possederunt  et  adbuc 
pacifice  possideant  de  presenti,  premissis  robur  confirmationis  adjicere  de 
beuiguitate  apostolica  diguaremur,  uos  itaque  buiusmodi  supplicatiouibus 
inclinati  huiusmodi  coadunationem  et  concessionem  per  dictum  episcopum 
vt  premittitur  factas  iritas  babeutes  et  gratas  illas  dummodo  dicti  abbas  et 
conuentus  prefatam  ecclesiam  per  quadraginta  annos  pacifice  possederunt  et 
adliuc  pacifice  possideant  de  presenti,  auctoritate  apostolica  ex  certa  scientia 
tenore  presencium  confirmamus  et  preseutis  scripti  patrociuio  communimus  : 
Tenor  autem  dictarum  literarum  talis  est :  Vniuersis  sancte  matris  ecclesie 
filiis  ad  quos  preseutes  litere  peruenerint,  Willelmus  misei'atione  diuina 
ecclesie  Sanctiandree  minister  humilis,  salutem,  gratiam  et  benedictionem 
diuinam :  Pastoralis  ofiicii  decet  solicitudiuem  gregis  sibi  commissi  statum 
et  merita  dUigenter  perquirere,  vt  sic  intime  subiectorum  suorum  wltus 
agnoscens  que  singulorum  saluti  ac  quieti  opportuna  nouerit  tanquam  dispen- 
sator  domus  domini  prouidus  siugulis  caute  valeat  miuistrare ;  cum  igitur 
occasione  vicarie  ecclesie  de  Kirketoun  prope  Striuiling,  nostre  diocesis,  reli- 
giosi  viri  abbas  et  couuentus  de  Cambuskynneth,  ad  quos  dicte  ecclesie 
rectoria  noscitur  pertinere,  iam  frequenter  contra  vicarios  dicte  ecclesie  ad 
eorum  presentationem  per  nos  institutos  labores  sustinuerunt  et  in  eorum 
detrimentum  et  grauamen  expensas  fecerunt  litigando,  nos,  statu  dicti  monas- 
terii,  prout  ex  iniuncto  nobis  incumbebat  officio,  chligeucius  perquisito,  dictum 
monasterium  vltra  quam  status  eiusdem  et  personarum  ibidem  Deo  famu- 
lancium  merita  requirebant  bonorum  temporalium  subueutione  inueniums 
indigere,  vnde  nos  statum  dicti  mouasterii  aliqualiter  releuare  cupientes, 
vicariam  dicte  ecclesie  cum  rectoria  eiusdem  coaduuauimus,  et  dictis  abbati 


DE  GAMBUSKENNETH. 


155 


et  conuentiii,  de  gratia  nostra  speciali  dispensando  cura  eisdem  caritatiue,  de 
vnanimi  cousensu  et  assensu  capitidi  nostri,  tractatu  frequenti  ac  diligenti 
super  hoc  prius  liabito,  coucessimus  vt  dictam  ecclesiam  de  Kirketoun  monas- 
terio  suo  vicinam  cum  omnibus  suis  pertinenciis  integre  et  plene  habeant 
et  impei^petuum  possideant  iu  cpiiete  fructus  omnes  et  singulos  et  obuen- 
tiones,  necnon  et  decimas  tam  maiores  quam  minores  ad  dictam  ecclesiam 
pertinentes  seu  quoquomodo  pertinere  valentes,  integre,  plene  et  pacifice  per- 
cipiant  et  in  vsus  suos  proprios  pro  sue  voluntatis  arbitrio  conuertant,  vt 
in  hoc  ipsorum  commoditati  pie  consulamus  pariter  et  quieti ;  et  cpiod  ipsi 
dicte  ecclesie  per  duos  capellauos  ydoneos,  quos  ad  hoc  assumere  voluerint, 
lioneste  faciant  desemiri,  saluis  episcopalibus  juribus  et  archidiaconalibus  iu 
omnibus :  Volumus  eciam  quod  de  procuratione  ratione  dicte  ecclesie  nobis 
debita  in  dicto  monasterio  nobis  decenter  prouideatur,  vt  eorum  expensis  et 
tedio  graciose  eciam  parcamus  in  hac  parte  :  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  has 
literas  nostras,  sigillo  nostro  signatas,  per  quas  dictis  abbati  et  conuentui  dictam 
ecclesiam  de  Kirketoun  pleno  iure  vt  premissum  est  conferimus,  per  quas  eciani 
procuracionem  ratione  dicte  ecclesie  nobis  debitam  in  dicto  suo  monasterio  sin- 
gulis  annis  recipere  eisdem  concedimus,  sepedictis  abbati  et  conuentui  coucedi- 
mus  patentes  :  datuni  apud  Falkland,  decimo  septimo  kalendas  Junii  anno 
gracie  millesimo  ducentesimo  nonagesimo  quinto :  Nulli  ergo  omnino  liominura 
liceat  hanc  paginam  nostre  coufirmationis  infringere  vel  ei  ausu  temerario 
contraire  ;  si  c^uis  autem  hoc  attemptare  presumpserit,  indignationem  omnipo- 
tentis  Dei  et  beatorum  Petri  et  Pauli  apostolorum  eius  se  nouerit  incursurum  ; 
Datum  Auinione,  octauo  idus  Xouembris,  pontificatus  nostri  anno  secuudo. 


KIBKETOUN. 


120.    CUR.V  S.VXCTI  XlXI.\NI  DE  KlRKETOUX  TEMPOR.\US  ET  AD  NUTU.M. 

Iacobus  miseratione  diuina  archiepiscopus  Sanctiandree,  totius  regui  Scotie 
primas,  legatus  natus,  decano  Cristianitatis  nostre  de  Linlithqw  vniuersisque 


156 


EEGISTRUM  MONASTEIUI 


KIRKETOUN, 


filiis  et  singulis  domiais  rectoribus,  vicariis  perpetuis,  curatis  et  capellanis  per 
prouinciam  nostrara  Sanctiandree  vbilibet  coustitutis,  salutem  cum  benedic- 
tione  diuina  :  Infrascriptas  venerabilis  patris  Alexandri  abbatis  de  Cambus- 
kynneth  et  conuentus  eiusdem  presentationum  literas  sigillo  commimi  dicti 
monasterii  et  subscriptioue  domiui  Willelmi  Litstar  presbyteri  nostre  diocesis 
notarii  et  tabellionis  publici  roboratas,  dilecto  filio  domino  Waltero  Stewart 
de  et  super  vicaria  pensionaria  vigiuti  marcarum  cum  certa  gleba  ecclesie 
parrocliialis  beati  Niniani  de  Kirketoun  nostre  diocesis  factas  et  concessas,  per 
eundem  dominum  Walterum  nobis  presentatas,  recepimus  sequenti  sub  tenore : 
Keuerexdissimo  in  Cristo  patri  et  domiuo,  domino  Jacobo  miseratione  diuina 
Sanctiandree  arcbiepiscopo  totius  regui  Scotie  primati,  legato  nato  etc. 
vestri  oratores  deuoti  Alexander  permissione  diuina  abbas  monasterii  Sancte 
Llarie  de  Cambuskynneth  et  eiusdem  loci  conuentus,  ordinis  Sancti  Augustini, 
vestre  diocesis,  reuerencias  humUes  cum  honore :  Cum  alias  predecessores  nostri 
Andreas  pie  memorie  abbas  et  pro  tempore  existens  conuentus  domino 
"Waltero  Stewart  presbytero,  ex  certis  causis  tunc  expressis,  recoleude  memorie 
Alexandro  predecessori  vestro  ad  vicariam  pensionariam  vigiuti  marcarum 
vuacum  certa  gieba  ecclesie  parrochiaHs  Sancti  Niniani  de  Kirketoun  vestre 
diocesis,  semper  et  quousque  eidem  domino  Waltero  prouisum  foret  de  aUquo 
beneficio,  et  prouisione  alicuius  beneficii  adepta,  dicta  pensio  vnacum  gleba 
nobis  et  monasterio  nostro  libere  rediret  et  dicto  Andree  abbati  et  couuentui 
et  eorum  successoribus  licitum  foret  de  eiusdem,  sicut  de  ceteris  dicte  vicarie 
fructibus  libere  hactenus  consuetum  fuerat,  vt  semper  disponerent  sic  et  non 
alias  per  literas  suas  patentes  sigiUo  commuiii  sigUlatas  presentarunt,  qui  pre- 
decessor  vester  presentationis  huiusmodi  literarum  tenore  spreto,  dictum 
dominum  Walterimi  in  vicaria  predicta  tanquam  perpetua  instituit,  vnde  nos 
lioc  percipientes  quod  eidem  domino  Waltero  de  vicaria  perpetua  ecclesie 
parrocliiaUs  de  Bonkle  Duukeldensis  diocesis  fuit  prouisum,  eundem  dominum 


DE  CAMBUSKEXNErH. 


157 


'Waltemm  corain  vestra  reuerendissima  jiatemitate  vestroque  officiali  Saucti- 
anJree  priucipali  super  premissis  traximus  iu  causam,  et  lite  coram  eodem 
vestro  officiali  peudeute,  idem  domiuus  Walterus  uoleus  nobis  et  loco  nostro 
in  premissis  preiudicium  geuerare,  libere  nobis  obtulit  iu  luauibus  reuereudis- 
sime  paternitatis  vestre,  juri,  liti  et  cause  predictis  ac  collationi  prefati 
predecessoris  vestri  renunciare  ;  quocirca  ne  inde  graue  foret  sibi  pre- 
iudicium,  eundem  dominum  "Walteriun  ad  curam  dicte  parrocliialis  ecclesie 
de  Kirktouu  eidem  vestre  reuereudissime  paternitati  teuore  presencium  post 
liuiusmodi  renunciationem  in  mauibus  vestre  reuerendissime  patemitatis 
fiendam  presentamus,  concedeutes  et  assignantes  eidem  domino  Waltero  pro 
toto  tempore  vite  sue  peusionem  aunuam  vigiuti  marcarum  vna  cum  gleba 
quam  prius  possederat,  sic  quod,  eo  cedente  [vel]  decedente,  pensio  et 
gleba  predicte  ecclesie  ad  uos  et  monasterium  nostrum  libere  reuertantur ; 
vestram  reuerendissimam  paternitatem  rogantes  quateuus  eundem  domiuum 
Walterum  ad  curam  animarum  prefate  ecclesie  Saucti  Niuiaui  de  Kirketoun, 
durante  vita  sua  duntaxat,  admittere,  et  pensionem  cum  gleba  eidem  coufirmare 
pro  toto  tempore  vite  sue  et  approbare,  diguemiui  :  lu  cuius  rei  testimonium 
sigillum  nostrum  commune,  notario  publico  subscripto  ad  lioc  rogato,  est  ap- 
pensum  apud  idem  monasterium  nostrum,  vicesimo  nono  die  mensis  Octobris 
anuo  DomLni  millesimo  quiugeutesimo  vigesimo  septimo,  iudictione  prima, 
pontificatus  sauctissimi  iu  Cristo  patris  et  domiui  nostri,  domini  Clementis 
diuiua  prouideucia  pape  septimi,  anno  quarto,  vestreque  consecratiouis  auuo 
decimo  octauo  et  translationis  ad  primicialem  regni  sedem  auuo  quiuto,  pre- 
sentibus  ibidem  prouidis  et  houestis  viris,  Alexaudro  Gourlay,  Dauid  Balfoure 
et  Donaldo  Symsoun,  viris  laicis,  testibus  cum  multis  aliis  ad  premissa  vocatis 
pariter  et  rogatis  etc.  Sequitur  subscriptio  notarii  de  qua  supra  fit  mentio  : 
Et  ego  AVilelmus  Litstar,  presbyter  Sanctiaudree  diocesis,  publicus  sacra 
auctoritate  apostolica  notarius,  quia  preseucium  literarum  concessioni,  peu- 


KUtKETOUN. 


158 


REGISTBUM  MONASTEnil 


KIRKETOUN. 


sionis  et  glebe  assignationi  dicti  domini  Walteri  vita  diirante,  ceterisque  omni- 
biis  et  singulis  premissis  dum  sic  ut  premittitur  dicerentur,  agerentur  et  fierent, 
vnacum  prenominatis  testibus  presens  interfui,  eaque  omnia  et  singula  sic 
fieri,  vidi,  sciui  et  audiui  ac  in  notam  cepi,  ideoque  bas  presentes  presentationis 
literas,  siue  boc  presens  publicum  instrumentum  manu  mea  propria  fideliter 
scriptuni  ex  mandato  dictorum  abbatis  et  conuentus,  et  in  banc  publicam  for- 
mam  redegi,  subscripsi  et  publicaui,  siguoque  nomine  et  siTbscriptione  meis 
solitis  et  consuetis,  vnacum  appensione  sigilli  communis  prefati  abbatis  et 
conuentus,  signaui,  rogatus  et  requisitus  iu  fidem  et  testimonium  veritatis 
omnium  et  singulorum  premissorum.  Post  quarumquidem  literarum  presenta- 
tionem,  exhibitionem  et  receptiouem,  prefatus  dominus  Walterus  proprio  motu 
et  ex  certa  sciencia,  omnibus  melioribus  modo,  via,forma,  iure,  causa  pariter  et 
effectu,  quibus  de  iure  melius  et  efficacius  potuit  aut  debuit  potestque  debet, 
omni  iuri,  liti  et  cause,  titulo,  proprietati  et  possessioni  quod  et  que  liabet, 
habuit  aut  habere  poterit  in  et  ad  supradictam  vicariam  pensionariam  coram 
notario  et  testiljus  subscriptis  in  manibus  nostris  sponte  et  libere  renunciauit, 
cessit  et  diniisit,  cum  pacto  iureiurando  affirmato  de  non  contraueniendo,  et 
quod  in  huiusmodi  renunciatione  non  interuenit  nec  interueniet  fraus,  dolus, 
s}Tnoniaca  labes  aut  queuis  alia  illicita  pactio ;  quibus  pactis,  ne  ex  buiusmodi 
renunciatione  in  commodum  dicti  monasterii  facta,  ipse  domiuus  Walterus 
nimium  dampnum  paciatm-  seu  lesiouem,  dictam  vicariam  pensionariam 
viginti  marcarum  ecclesie  de  Kirketoun  cum  gleba  adiacente  solita  et  consueta 
eidem  domino  Waltero  pro  toto  tempore  vite  sue  de  nouo  contulimus,  prout 
conferimus  per  jiresentes,  curam,  regimen  et  administrationem  eiusdem  eideni 
committentes  secundum  vim,  formam,  seriem  et  tenorem  dictarum  presenta- 
tionum  litterarum  desuper  confectarum,  sic  quod,  ipso  domino  Waltero  cedente 
vel  decedente,  dicta  ^acaria  pensionaria  cum  gleba  ad  ipsos  abbatem  et  conuen- 
tixm  et  eorum  successores  libere  reuertatur  sine  contradictione  aut  obstacido 


DE  CAMBUSKENXETH. 


159 


aliquali;  quare  vobis  et  vestrum  cuilibet  in  virtute  sancte  obediencie  precipimus 
et  mandanius  quatenus  dictum  dominum  Walterum,  sic  vt  premittitur,  quoad 
uixerit,presentatum  e.t  prouisum.in  et  ad  realem,  actualem  et  corporalem  posses- 
sionem  seu  quasi  dicte  vicarie  pensiouarie  viginti  marcarum  cum  gleba  solita 
et  consueta  quam  prius  possederat,  per  libri  missalis,  vestimentorum  altaris 
assignationem  inducatis  et  instituatis,  inductumque  et  institutum  canonice 
defendatis,  sibique  aut  suis  factoribus  de  uniuersis  et  singulis  fructibus  et 
prouentibus  eiusdem  integre  respondere  faciatis,  contradictores  quoslibet  et 
rebelles  per  censuras  ecclesie  arcius  compescentes  ;  in  signum  autem  liuius- 
modi  possessionis  et  institutionis  per  vos  seu  aliquem  vestrum  tradite  instru- 
meutum  publicum  desuper  leuari  aut  aliter  legittime  notificari  faciatis.  In 
C[Uorum  omnium  et  singulorum  fidem  et  testimonium  premissorum  bas 
preseutes  nostras  prouisionum  seu  collationum  literas  exinde  fieri  et  per 
notarium  publicum  infrascriptum  nostrum  scribam  et  tabellioneni  subscrilii 
et  publicari  mandamus,  sigillique  nostri  rotundi  iussimus  et  fecimus  appen- 
sione  communiri :  Data  et  acta  erant  hec  in  loco  nostre  residencie  infra 
monasterium  de  Dunfermeling,  horam  circiter  secundam  pomeredianam,  die 
decimo  mensis  Nouembris  anno  Domini  millesimo  quingentesimo  vicesimo 
septuno,  indictione  prima,  poutificatus  sanctissimi  in  Christo  patris  et  dommi 
nostri,  domini  Clementis  diuina  prouidencia  pape  septimi,  anno  C|uinto  ;  pre- 
sentibus  ibidem  honestis  viris  magistro  Abraham  Creichtonn  rectore  de 
Chirnside,  Eoberto  Stewart  et  Georgeo  Boswald,  cum  diuersis  ahis  ad  pre- 
missa  vocatis  pariter  et  rogatis. 

Et  ego  Thomas  Craig  artium  professor,  presbyter  Abirdonensis  diocesis, 
publicus  sacra  auctoritate  apostolica  notarius,  quia  dicte  vicarie  pensionarie 
renuuciationi,  prouisioni  et  receptioni  ceterisque  premissis  omnibus  et  singulis, 
dum  sic  vt  premittitur  agerentur  et  lierent,  vua  cum  prenominatis  testibus 
preseus  interfui,  et  eadem  in  uotam  recepi,  ideoque  has  preseutes  prouisionum 


KIRKETOUN. 


KEGISTRUM  MONASTEUII 


KiRKETOUN.  litteras  manu   alterius  fideliter  scriptas  sigilli  dicti   domini    reuerendissimi 

roboratas  exinde  confeci,  subscripsi  et  signaui,  in  fidem  premissorum  rogatus 
et  requisitus. 

121.  DONATIO  ECCL?:SIE  DE  KlNCARDIN. 

KYNCARDYN.  WlLLELMUS  Dci  gTacia  rex  Scotorum,  omnibus  probis  hominibiis  totius  terre 

sue,  clericis  et  laicis,  salutem  :  Sciant  presentes  et  futuri  me  dedisse  et  conces- 
sisse  et  hac  carta  mea  confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte  ^Marie  de  Cambus- 
kynneth  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  ecclesiam  de  Kyncardyn,  cum 
capellis  et  ten-is,  decimis  et  oldationibus  omnimodis,  et  omnibus  aliis  iustis 
pertinenciis  suis  :  Tenendam  in  liberam  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  ita  libere 
et  quiete,  plenarie  et  honorifice,  sicut  alias  ecclesias  suas  liberius  et  quietius 
plenius  et  lionorificentius  tenent  et  possident :  Testibus,  Hugone  cancellario 
meo,  comite  Patricio,  rioUando  filio  Vctredi,  W[altero]  de  Lindesay,  Eicardo 
de  Prebenda  clerico  meo,  Piadulpho  et  Waltero  capellanis  meis,  Herberto 
Marescallo,  W[illelmo]  de  Passeln,  Pdcardo  de  Camera,  apud  Striueling. 

122.  Kyncardin  ecclesie  confirmatio. 
W[iLLELMUS]  Dei  gracia  episcopus  Dunblanensis,  uniuersis  sancte  matris 
ecclesie  filiis,  salutem  in  Doniino  :  Sciant  omnes  tam  presentes  quam  futuri 
ad  quos  littere  iste  peraenerint,  nos  concessisse  et  hac  carta  nostra  confirmasse 
Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte  Marie  de  Cambuskynneth  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo 
seruientibus  ecclesiam  de  Kincardin,  cum  capellis  suis  et  terris  et  decimis 
et  omnimodis  oblationibus  et  olnientionibus  suis,  et  omniljus  eius  iustis  per- 
tinenciis  :  Tenendam  in  liberam  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  ita  libere,  quiete, 
plenarie  et  lionorifice  sicut  carta  donn'ni  regis  Willelmi  testatur,  et  sicut  alias 
ecclesias  suas  liberius,  quietius,  integrius  et  honorificentius  tenent  et  possident, 
saluo  episcopali  iure  ;  hiis  testibus,  archidiacono  Jonatha  capellano  meo,  Cor- 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETU. 


IGl 


mac  Malpole  priore  Keldeorum  persoaa  de  Mothell,  Micliaele  et  eiiis  capellano 
ilachbeth,  magistro  Symone  medico,  Martino  senescallo,  Eicardo  capeUano 
comitis  et  Johanne  cancellario  comitis,  Henrico  capellano,  Malisio  persona  de 
Dunblane,  Beano  magistro  de  Dunblaue,  Ysaac  IMichaele  clerico  persona 
de  Logyn,  Matlieo  capellano  de  Tulybody,  Malcolmo  persoua  de  Insuhx 
Macholem,  Abraham  fratre  persone  de  Kincardin,  Symone  de  Tulibody  et  filio 
eius  Jlatheo,  Symone  persona  de  Alweth. 

123.    CONFIKMATIO  ECCLESLVRUII  DE  KlXCAKDIX,  TuLILODY  ET  TULICULTKY. 

Abraham  Dei  gracia  episcopus  Dunblauensis,  vniuersis  sancte  matris 
ecclesie  filiis,  salutem :  Sciant  preseutes  et  futuri  nos  concessisse  et  hac 
carta  nostra  confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte  Marie  de  Striueluig  et 
canonicis  ibideni  Deo  seruientibus  ecclesiam  de  Tulibody  et  ecclesiam  de 
Tulicultry  et  ecclesiam  de  Kyncardyn  cum  decimis  et  obhxtionibus  et  omni- 
modis  obuentionibus  earum  et  aliis  omnibus  iustis  pertinenciis  suis:  Tenendas 
sibi  in  liberam  et  perpetuam  elemosinam,  ita  libere,  quiete,  pleuarie  et  honorifice 
sieut  carte  patronorum  ipsarum  ecclesiarum  et  confirmationis  predecessorum 
nostrorum  testantur  et  confirmantur,  et  sicut  alias  ecclesias  suas  prefati  canonici 
Hberius,  quietius,  plenius  et  houorificentius  tenent  et  possident,  saluo  iuie 
nostro  episcopaU ;  hiis  testibus,  Henrico  archidiacono  Dunlveldensi,  Gilberto 
archidiacono  Dunblaueusi,  W.  capellano  episcopi,  Bricio  capellano  de  Huc- 
tjTcardoner,  Luca  et  Johanne  clericis  nostris,  Bricio  decano,  W.  clerico, 
Herueo  clerico,  Henrico  arcliidiacono. 


124.   CONFIRMATIO  OsBERTI  EPISCOPI  DUNBLANEXSIS  ET  CAI'ITULI  EIUSDEM 
SUPER  PREDICTIS  ECCLESIIS. 

OsBERTUS  Dei  gracia  episcopus  Dumblanensis,  omnibus  sancte  matris  ecclesie 
filiisin  Christo  salutem:  Xouerit  vniuersitas  vestra,  nos  pietatis  iutuitu,  con- 

21 


162 


EEGISTRUM  MONASTEEII 


silio  et  assensii  magistri  Gilberti  areludiacoui  nostri  et  totius  capituli  nostri, 
concessisse,  et  hac  nostra  carta  confirmasse  abbati  et  cauonicis  de  Striueling 
Deo  seruientibus  et  seruituris  ecclesias  de  Kincardin  et  Tulibod^-  et  de  Tuli- 
cultry,  cum  capellis,  terris,  et  cum  onmibus  iustis  pertinenciis  suis,  tenendas 
sibi  in  liberam  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  :  Nos  uero  de  consilio  et  assensu 
clericorum  nostrorum,  eisdem  canonicis,  eorum  teuuitati  et  paupertati  com- 
pacientes,  et  considerantes  predictarum  ecclesiarum  panpertatem,  concessimus 
et  hac  carta  nostra  confirmanimus,  vt  omnes  prouentus  predictarum  eccle- 
siarum  in  vsus  suos  proprios  pro  sue  voluntatis  arbitrio,  in  fratrum  predicte 
domus  de  Cumbuskynnetli  sustentacionem,  libere  conuertant :  Presentabunt 
autem  idem  cannnici  nobis  et  successoribus  nostris  capellanos  vel  clericos, 
vel  si  nialuerint  fratres  suos  proprios  qui  pro  tempiore  eisdem  ecclesiis 
deseruient,  nobis  vero  et  successoriljus  nostris  de  spiritualibus  respondeant, 
ipsis  autem  de  temporalibus  reddant  rationem,  saluis  episcopalibus  :  vt  autem 
hec  nostra  concessio  futuris  temporibus  firma  rata  et  inconcussa  permaneat, 
eam  sigilli  nostri  et  predicti  arclndiaeoui  nostri  aj)positione  duximus  robor- 
andam ;  hiis  testibus,  domino  H.  abbate  de  Sancta  Cruce,  et  0.  eiusdem  loci 
priore,  domino  G[ilberto]  archidiacono  nostro,  magistro  H.  de  Bosco,  domiuo 
Matheo  decano  nostro,  domino  Jolianne  vicario  de  Tulialwyn,  Ada  fratre 
nostro,  Alexandro  et  Ada  et  Thoma  seruitoribus  nostris  et  multis  aliis. 


125.  Okdinatio  super  quartis  debatis  episcopo  Dunblanensi. 
Omnibus  Christi  fidelibus  presens  scriptum  visuris  vel  audituris,  Willelmus 
et  Galfridus  diuina  miseracione  Glasguensis  et  Dunkeldensis  episcopi, 
eternam  in  Domino  salutem  :  Mandatura  domini  pape  in  hec  verba  suscepi- 
mus:  Gregorius  episcopus  seruus  seruorum  Dei,  venerabilibus  fratribns  Glas- 
gnensi  et  Dunkeldensi  episcopis  salutem  et  apostolicam  benedictionem  : 
Venerabilis    frater  noster  Dunblanensis  episcopus  in  nostra  proposuit  pre- 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


1G3 


sencia  coustitutus,  quod  cum  olim  ecclesia  Uunblanensis  per  centuui  annos 
et  amplius  vacauisset,  fere  omiiia  bona  eius  fuerant  a  persouis  secularibus 
occupata  et,  licet  processu  temporis  fuissent  in  ea  plures  episcopi  instituti, 
per  simplicitatem  tantum  et  iucuriam  eorundem  non  solum  reuocata  non 
fuei'unt  taliter  occupata,  verum  eciam  reliquie,  que  occupantium  manus 
effugerant,  alienate  sunt  fere  penitus  et  consumpte,  propter  quod  nullus 
ydoneus  induci  potuitad  onus  huiusmodi  assumendum  peudecem  pene  annos, 
eadem  iuterim  pastoris  solacio  destituta ;  Cumque  nos  postmodum,  intellecto 
miserabili  statu  eius,  venerabilibus  fratribus  nostris  Sanctiandree  et  Brecli- 
iuensi  episcopis  ac  tibi  super  Dunkeldensi  prouisione  ij)sius  duximus  com- 
mittendum,  tu  et  idem  episcopi,  sperantes  dictam  ecclesiam  per  jamdictum 
episcopum  posse  de  lacu  miserie  respirare,  ipsum  eidem  ecclesie  prefecistis, 
quam  supradictus  episcopus  inuenit  adeo  desolatam,  quod  non  reciperet  vbi 
possit  caput  iu  cathedrali  ecclesia  reclinare,  uullumque  collegium  erat  ibi, 
sed  iu  ecclesia  ipsa  discooperta  quidam  capellanus  ruralis  diuina  ofticia 
celebrabat ;  ipsius  quoque  episcoj)i  redditus  sunt  adeo  tenues  et  exiles  quod 
vix  per  dimediunr  annum  potest  exinde  congrue  sustentari :  quod  vero 
iustancia  nostra  cotidiaua  est  omnium  ecclesiarimi  solLicitudo,fraternitati  vestre 
per  apostolica  scripta  mandamus  quateuus  ad  eaudem  ecclesiam  persoualiter 
accedentes,  si  reui  inueneritis  ita  esse,  quartam  partem  decimarum  omnium 
ecclesiariun  parrochialium  Dunblanensis  diocesis  faciatis,  si  absque  graui 
scandalo  fieri  poterit,  prefato  episcopo  assignari,  vt  ipse  de  vestro  et  proboruna 
virorum  consilio,  reseruata  sibi  de  ipsis  pro  sustentatione  sua  congi'ua  portione, 
decano  et  canonicis,  quos  ibidem  iustitui  volumus  et  mandamus,  assiguet ; 
alioquin,  assignata  ipsi  episcopo  quarta  decimarum  omnium  ecclesiarum 
eiusdem  diocesis  que  a  persouis  secularibus  detinentur ;  sedem  episcopalem  ad 
monasterium  sancti  Jolianuis  canonicorum  regularium  predicte  diocesis  trans- 
feratis,  eligendi  episcopos  cum  ecclesia  vacauerit  canonicis  ipsis  in  posterum 


KYNCARDYN 


164 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


KTNCARDTN.  potestate   concessa ;    contradictores,  si  qui  fuerint,  et  rebelles  per  censuram 

ecclesiasticam,  appellatione  postposita,  compescendo;  datum  Viterbii  tertio 
idus  lunii,  pontificatus  nostri  anno  vndecimo.  CuM  IGITUR  anno  gracie  mille- 
simo  ducentesimo  trigesimo  octauo,  venerabilis  pater  CQemens]  Dunblanensis 
episcopus  predictarum  litterarum  domini  pape  impetratarum  coram  nobis 
occasione  earundem  quartam  decimarum  omnium  ecclesiarum  iiarrocliialium 
sue  diocesis  tam  regularium  quam  secularium  exigeret,  resistentibus  petitioni 
sue  abbate  et  conuentu  de  Cambuskynneth  ;  tandem  idem  episcopus  pro  se 
et  successoribus  suis  et  pro  capitulo  suo,  et  dictus  abbas  pro  se  et  successoribus 
suis  et  pro  conuentu  suo,  sacramento  bincinde  prestito,  iiostre  se  subiecerunt 
ordiuationi  quoad  petitionera  dicti  episcopi  super  predicta  quarta  et  quoad 
ordinatiouem  ecclesie  Dunblanensis,  necnon  et  quantum  ad  ordinationem 
ecclesiarum  suarum  quas  habent  in  diocese  Dunblanensi,  scilicet,  de  Kincardin 
et  de  Tulybody  et  de  Tulicultry,  ecclesias  in  redditibus  exiles  et  ad  deseruien- 
dum  facUes  :  Nos  ergo  secundum  formam  mandati  apostolici  graue  scandabmi 
euitare  volentes,  inter  dictum  episcopum  et  ecclesiam  Dunblanensem  ex  vna 
parte,  et  dictos  abbatem  et  conuentum  ex  altera,  in  bunc  modum  ordinauimus, 
videlicet,  quod  dicti  abbas  et  conuentus  inuenient  quatuor  marcas  annuas 
vicario  qui  pro  eis  deseruiet  iu  ecclesia  Dunblanensi,  et  abbas  de  Cambus- 
kynneth  sit  canonicus  in  ecclesia  Dunblanensi  et  eius  successores  ;  preterea 
assignabit  domus  de  Cambuskynneth  quatuor  marcas  in  loco  certo  et  com- 
petenti  ecclesie  Dunblanensi,  de  quibias  episcopus  Dunljlanensis  et  suc- 
cessores  eius  disponent  jiro  sue  voluntatis  arbitrio,  et  sciendum  est  quod  hec 
proixisio  de  vltimis  quatuor  marcis  post  obitum  magistri  Hugonis  de  Boscho 
assignabitur,  et  dicti  abbas  et  conuentus  et  eorum  successores  a  supradicte 
quarte  exactione  et  vicariorum  in  supradictis  suis  ecclesiis  institutioue  quieti 
penitus  sint  et  absoluti  imperpetuimi,  et  omnimodos  fructus  dictarum  ecclesi- 
arum  suarum  in  suos  vsus  pro  sue  voluntatis  arbitrio  libere  conuertent :  No- 


DE  CAMPjUSKENNETII. 


165 


tandum  vero  quod,  sic  etiam  per  assensum  memorati  episcopi  Dunblauensis 
ordinauimus,  dicti  vero  abbas  et  conuentus  ydoneos  capellanos  diocesano  pre- 
sentabimt  qui  in  ipsis  ecclesiis  honeste  deseruient  et  ipsi,  diocesano  et  suc- 
cessoribus  suis  de  spiritualibus  respondentes,  ei  canonicam  facient  obedienciam, 
abbati  vero  et  conuentui  et  eorum  successoribus  ad  fidelitatem  eis  conseruan- 
dam  iuramento  prestito  tenebuntur,  saluis  episcopalibus  :  vt  hec  autem  omnia 
robur  firmitatis  obtiueant,  tam  nos  quam  venerabilis  prenominatus  Cle[mens] 
Dunblanensis  episcopus,  quam  eciam  eiusdem  ecclesie  capitulum,  huic  scripto 
sigilla  nostra  apposuimus  :  Datum  apud  Dunblanensem  quarto  kalendas  Feb- 
ruarii,  anno  gracie  millesimo  ducentesimo  trigesimo  nono. 


KYNCARDYN. 


126.    CONFIKMATIO  CAPITULI  DUNBLANENSIS  SUPER  TKIBUS  ECCLESIIS. 

Omnibus  hoc  scriptmn  visuris  vel  audituris,  decanus  et  capitulum  Duublanensis 
ecclesie,  eternam  in  Domino  salutem :  Nouerit  vniuersitas  vestra  quod  nos,  iu- 
spectis  instrimientis  coUationum  et  confirmationurn  venerabilium  patrum 
Symonis,  Jonathe,  Abrahe  et  Osberti  quoudam  episcoporum  Dunblanensium, 
necnon  et  venerabilis  patris  nostri  Clemeutis  Dei  gracia  eiusdem  loci  episcopi, 
monasterio  ecclesie  sancte  Marie  de  Cambuskynneth  de  cousensu  cleri  Dun- 
blanensis  quoudam  concessarum,  videlicet,  super  ecclesiis  de  Ivincardiu,  Tuli- 
body  et  de  Tulycultry  quas  in  diocese  Dunblanensi  possidet,  per  que  idem 
monasterium  obtiuuit  omnes  prouentus  et  fructus  dictarum  ecclesiarum  sibi  in 
vsus  proprios  omnimodo  conuertendos  imperpetuum,  predictorum  veuerabilium 
patrum  episcoporum  concessiones  et  coufiruiationes  super  memoratis  ecclesiis  in 
vsus  proprios  memorati  monasterii  libere  et  plenarie  couuertendis  vuauimi  et 
solempni  vohintate  et  consensu  concessimus  et  confirmauimus  ;  preterea  ordina- 
tionem,  que  per  venerabiles  patres  Glasgw  et  Dunkeldensem  episcopos,  auc- 
toritate  domini  pape  inter  venerabilem  patrem  nostrum  Clementem  episcopum 
et  ecclesiam  Dunblanensem  ex  vna  parte,  et  abbatem  et  couuentum  predicti 


16G 


HEGISTRUM  MOXASTEFdl 


KYN"CARDYN 


monasterii  ex  altera,  super  pretaxatis  ecclesiis  et  quarta  quam  dictus  episcopus 
ab  ipsis  exigebat.facta  est  de  consensu  vtriusque  partis,scilicet,c|Uod  dicti  abbas 
et  conuentus  inuenieut  quatuor  rnarcas  aunuas  vicario  qui  pro  eiis  deseruiet  in 
ecclesia  Dimblanensi,  et  abbas  sit  canonicus  in  ecclesia  Dunblanensi  et  eius 
successores  ;  preterea,  decedente  vel  recedente  magistro  Hugone  de  Bosclio  qui 
ecclesiam  ipsorum  de  Tulibody  tenet,  assignabunt  alias  quatuor  marcas  in  loco 
certo  et  competenti,  de  qiiibus  episcopus  Dunblanensis  et  eius  successores  pro 
voluntate  sua  disponent,  et  sic  sepedicti  abbas  et  conuentus  a  supradicte 
quarte  exactione  et  vicariorum  institutione  in  supradictis  ecclesiis  omnino 
erunt  quieti  imperpetuum  et  immunes  ;  inspecta  vtQitate  ecclesie  uostre 
super  tali  ordinatione,  vnanimi  consensu  nostro  sicut  melius  et  plenius  in 
autentico  super  eadem  ordinatione  pro  ipsis  confecto  continetur ;  ratam  et 
gratam  habentes,  concessimus  et  confirmauimus  et  sigilli  nostri  appositiono 
vna  cum  manuum  nostrarum  subscriptione  presentem  paginam  communimus  : 
Datum  apud  Diinblanensem,  anno  gracie  millesimo  ducentesimo  tricesinio 
nono,  tercio  kalendas  Februarii. 


127.    DiiXATIO  WlLELMI  KEGIS  ECCLESIE  KyNCAEDYN  ET  TERUAKUM. 

WiLELJius  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotorum,  omnibus  probis  Iiominibus  totius  terre 
sue  clericis  et  laicis,  salutem :  Sciant  presentes  et  futuri  me  dedisse  et  conces- 
sisse  et  Iiac  carta  mea  confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte  Marie  de  Cambus- 
kj'nneth  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  et  seruituris  ecclesiam  de 
Kincardin  cum  capellis  et  decimis  et  oblationibus  omnimodis  et  tresdeeiiu 
acras  terre  arabilis  et  vnum  toftuin  brasiatori  cum  vno  orto,  et  vnum  toftum 
ad  campanam  sancti  Lolani  eum  viio  orto,  et  vnum  toftum  ad  baculum  sancti 
Lolani  cum  vno  orto,  et  totam  terram  iacentem  inter  fontem  Faylayat  ex  parte 
orientali  ad  riuulum  descendentem  de  Garthow  ex  parte  occidentali,  cuni 
prato  ex   vtraque    parte  vsque  ad    moram  de  Lampurry,  et  herbagium  ad 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


1G7 


tresdeceni  vaccas  in  terra  nostra  de  Borland  et  cuni  onmibus  aliis  iustis  per- 
tinenciis  suis  :  Tenendam  et  habendam  in  liberam  et  perpetuam  elemosinam 
ita  libere  et  quiete,  plenarie  et  honorifice  sicut  alias  ecclesias  et  terras  suas 
libcrius  et  quietius,  plenius  et  honorificentins  tenent  et  possident :  Testibus, 
Hufjone  cancellario  nostro,  cum,  etc. 


KYXCARDYN. 


128.  Institutio  Kyppane  nouissima  abbatis  et  conuentus. 
AsNO  Domini  millesimo  quingentesimo  decimo,  mensis  Julii  die  vicesima  priraa, 
indictione  decima  tercia,  pontificatus  sanctissimi  in  Christo  patris  et  domini 
nostri,  domiui  JuUi  diuiua  prouidencia  pape  secundi,  anno  septimo,  ac  regni 
e.xcellentissinii  supremique  domini  nostri  Jacobi  quarti  Dei  gracia  Scotorum 
regis  iUustrissimi  anno  vicesimo  tertio,  in  mei  notarii  publici  et  testium  iii- 
fVascriptorum  presencia  personaliter  constitutus  circumspectus  vir  magister 
Tatricius  Coventre  induxit  et  inuestiuit  veneraliilem  in  Christo  patreni  Andream 
abbatem  mouasterii  de  Cambuskynnetli  et  discretum  virum  dompuum  Johan- 
nem  Eannaldson  canonicum  dicti  monasterii  ac  sindicum  conuentus  eiusdem  iu 
et  ad  realem,  actualem  et  corporalem  possessiouem  rectorie  ecclesie  parrochialis 
de  Ivippane,  cum  omnibus  et  singulis  iuribus,  redditibus,  fructibus,  prouenti- 
bus,  emohimentis  et  pertinenciis  ad  dictam  rectoriam  pertinentibus,  per  exhi- 
bitionem  et  deliberatiouem  libri,  calicis,  et  ceterorum  ornameutorum  summi 
altaris  dicte  ecclesie  de  Kippane  in  manibus  dicti  venerabilis  patris  et  dompni 
Johannis  Eannaldson  sindici  antedicti,  secundum  tenorem,  vim,  formani  et 
effectum  buUe  sanctissimi  domini  nostri  pape  ac  carte  supremi  domiui  nostri 
regis  dietis  abbati  et  conuentui  super  dicta  rectoria  confecte :  Super  C|uibus,  etc, 
prefatus  venerabihs  pater  ac  sindicus  antedictus  ipsis  fieri  pecierunt  a  me 
notario  pubUco  infrascripto  instrumenttim  seu  iustrumenta  :  Acta  erant  hec 
coram  summo  altari  in  choro  dicte  ecclesie  de  Kippane  hora  decima  ante 
merediem  vel  eocirca,  etc,  presentibus  honorabiUbus  et  prouidis  viris,  videUcet, 


168 


BEGISTRUM  MONASTEEII 


Moricio  Bucliquliannane  filio  nobilis  viri  Walteri  Buchquhannane  de  eodeni, 
Johanne  Knok  de  Ardmanwell,  Alexandro  Forester  de  Culmore,  Arthuro 
Steward  de  Culbeg,  Patricio  Makgilhois,  Johanne  Forestare  et  Jacobo  Harpar, 
cum  multis  aliis  parrochianis. 

Andreas  Nortoun  ad  premissa  notarius,  teste  manu  propria. 


129.    KirP.\XE  ECCLESIE  NOUA  DONATIO  PER  JaCOBUM  QUAETUM  EEGEM 
SCOTIE. 

Jacobus  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotorum,  onmibus  probis  hominibus  totius  terre  sue 
clericis  et  laicis,  salutem :  Sciatis  quia  nos  caritate  et  consciencia  comnioti,  re- 
spectum  et  considerationem  habentes  quod  ecclesia  parrochialis  de  Kippane 
Dunblanensis  diocesis  cum  iure  patronatus  eiusdem  situata  infra  comitatum 
de  Menteth  beatissime  gloriosissimeque  virgini  Marie,  monasterioque  nostro 
de  Candjuskynneth,  necnon  canonicis  inibi  Deo  seruientibus  et  imposterum 
seruituris,  per  quondam  Walterum  coniitem  de  iMenteith  et  Alexandrum  eius 
filium  et  lieredem  apparentem  in  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  data  fuit 
pro  salute  animarum  ipsorum  ac  Matilde  sponse  dicti  quondam  Alexandri  ac 
pro  suis  sepulturis  in  dicto  nostro  monasterio  electis,  perpendimus  eciam 
qualiter  prefata  ecclesia  et  ipsius  ius  patronatus  ad  tempus  iamdiu  elapsum  et 
vltra  memoriam  liomiuum  extra  possessionem  dicti  nostri  monasterii  extiterunt, 
et  nos  Dei  ecclesiam,  presertim  nostrum  monasterium  antedictum  iure  suo  non 
esse  lesum  ueque  preiudicatum,  quinymmo  eideni  suo  iure  restitui,  prout 
iustitia  suadet,  toto  animo  cupientes  et  affectantes,  quemadmodum  ecclesie 
libertates  et  priuilegia  nos  manu  tenere  et  defendere  canonice  tenemur  astricti, 
nos  igitur  in  lionorem  Dei  omnipoteutis  prefateque  gloriosissime  virginis  et 
matris  sue  Marie  et  pro  salute  animarum  quondam  nobilissimoruui  patris 
et  matris  uostrorum,  Jacobi  tercii  et  Margarete  eius  sponse  bone  memorie, 
quibus  propicietur  Deus,  quorum  corpora  in  dicto  nostro  monasterio  requies- 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


169 


cunt,  necnon  pro  orationum  suffragiis  pro  nostris  patre  et  matre  autedictis  ac 
pro  nobis  et  successoribus  nostris  imperpetuum  fiendis,  approbaiiimus,  ratifi- 
cauimus,  confirmauimus  et  hac  presenti  carta  nostra  pro  nobis  et  successoribus 
nostris  approbamus,  ratificamus  et  pro  perpetuo  confirmamus  illas  donationem 
et  concessiouem  et  coufirmacionem  factas  per  dictos  quoudam  Walterum  et 
Alexaudrum  prefato  nostro  monasterio  de  Cambuskyuuetli  et  cauonicis  eiusdem 
de  dicta  ecclesia  de  Kyppan  et  iure  patronatus  eiusdem,  ac  eciam  de  nouo 
dedimus  et  coucessimus  et  liac  presenti  carta  nostra  damus  et  coucedimus 
dicto  nostro  mouasterio  et  canonicis  antedictis  in  eodem  Deo  seruientibus  et 
imposterum  pro  perpetuo  seruituris  totum  ius,  clameum  et  iuris  titulum  que 
et  quem  habuimus,  habeuras  seu  nos  aut  successores  uostri  quoiiismodo  habere 
poterimus  in  et  ad  prefatam  ecclesiam  et  ius  patronatus  eiusdem  tam  rectorie 
([uam  vicarie  ipsius,  nunc  et  quomodocunque  ipsam  ecclesiam  vacare  coutigeret 
per  resignationem,  dimissionem  aut  mortem  magistri  Johannis  Malyson  nunc 
rectoris  et  possessoris  eiusdem,  aut  alias  quouismodo  uunc  de  presenti  vacautem 
a  tempore  donatiouis  eiusdem  dicto  uostro  monasterio  et  deuudationis  ipsius 
de  iure  patronatus  et  possessione  dicte  ecclesie :  Tenendum  et  habendimi 
totum  et  integrum  ius  prefate  ecclesie  et  patronatus  eiusdem  tam  rectorie  quam 
vicarie,  cum  omnibus  et  singulis  deciuiis,  fructibus,  oblatiouibus,  emolumentis, 
proficuis,  deuoriis  et  iustis  suis  pertinenciis  quibuscuuque  eidem  spectantibus 
aut  que  dictis  rectorie  et  vicarie  iuste  pertinere  dinoscuntur,  ad  vsum  et 
vtilitatem  dicti  nostri  monasterii  de  Cambuskyuueth  et  canonicorum  eiusdem 
preseucium  et  futurorum  conuertendis,  recipiendis  et  induceudis,  in  puram  et 
perpetuam  elemosinam  adeo  libere,  quiete,  plenarie,  integre,  honorifice,  bene 
et  in  pace,  sicut  aliqua  rectoria,  vicaria  aut  ius  jjatronatus  cuicunque  mouasterio 
infra  regnum  liberius,  quietius,  plenius,  integrius  et  honorificentius  datur  seu 
conceditur,  pro  orationiim  suffragiis  per  prefatos  canonicos  vt  premittitur 
impeudendis,  absque  aliqua  reuocatione,  contradictione,  obstaculo,  questione 


170 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


seu  demanda  nostri  aut  successorum  nostrorum  quonxncumque  in  contrarium 
quouismodo  facienda  in  futurum  :  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  presenti  carte 
nostre  magnum  sigillum  nostrum  apponi  precipimus,  testibus  reuerendo  in 
Christo  patre  Willelmo  episcopo  Abirdonensi  nostri  secreti  sigilli  custode, 
dilectis  consanguineis  nostris  Archibaldo  comite  Angusie  domino  Douglas 
cancellario  nostro,  Arcbibaldo  comite  de  Argile,  domino  Campbell  et  Lome 
magistro  hospicii  nostri,  Patricio  comite  de  BothuUe,  domino  Halis,  Alesandro 
domino  Hume,  magno  camerario  nostro,  Johanne  domino  Drummond  iusticiario 
nostro,  venerabilibus  in  Christo  patribus  Georgeo  abbate  de  Dunfermeling, 
Georgeo  abbate  de  Pasleto  thesaurario  nostro,  apud  Striueling,  sexto  die  mensis 
Aprilis,  anno  Domini  millesimo  quadringentesimo  nonagesimo  sexto  et  regni 
nostri  octauo. 


130.  Kyppane  concordia  inter  Dunblane  et  Cambuskynneth. 
Uniueksis  et  singulis  sancte  matris  ecclesie  iiliis  ad  quorum  noticias  presentes 
litere  peruenerint,  Jacobus  Dei  et  apostolice  sedis  gracia  ecclesie  cathedralis 
Dunblanensis  episcopus,  cum  consensu  et  assensu  capituli  eiusdem  capi- 
tulariter  in  geuerali  capitulo  congregati,  salutem  cum  benedictione  diuina : 
Noueritis  nos  quemdam  contractum  siue  appunctuamentum  coneordie  inter 
nos  ab  vna,  et  venerabilem  in  Christo  patrem  Andream  permissione  diuina 
abbatem  monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth  et  conuentum  eiusdem  partibus  ab 
altera,  recepisse  et  intellexisse  tenorem  qui  sequitur  continentem:  Hic  cou- 
tractus,  appunctuamentum  et  concordia  nunc  facta  et  conclusa  apud  ciuitatem 
Dunblanensem  decimo  tertio  die  mensis  Marcii,  anno  Domini  millesimo  quin- 
gentesimo  decimo,  inter  reuerendum  in  Cristo  patrem  et  dominum  Jacobum 
Dei  et  apostolice  sedis  gracia  ecclesie  cathedraKs  Dunblanensis  episcopum, 
cum  consensu  et  assensu  capituli  dicte  ecclesie  in  generali  capitulo  capitu- 
lariter  congregati,  pro  se  et  successoribus  suis  episcopis  ab  vna,  et  venerabilem 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETU. 


171 


in  Christo  patrem  Andream  permissione  diuina  abbatem  monasterii  de  Cam- 
buskynnetli  cum  consensii  et  assensu  capituli  dicti  monasterii  pro  se  et 
successoribus  abbatibus  ab  altera  partibus,  continet,  proportat  et  testatur, 
f[uod  inter  prefatos  reuerendum  et  venerabilem  ■  patres  et  eorum  capitula 
predicta  finaKter  concordatum  et  conclusum  existit  de  et  supra  litibus  et 
contrauersiis  ortis  et  que  oriri  poterunt  in  futurum  inter  eosdeni  penes  ius 
ecclesie  parrocbialis  de  Elippaue  quam  asseruut  dicti  abbas  et  conuentus  eis 
pertinere  ex  donatione  illustrissimi  et  serenissimi  principis  Jacobi  Dei  graeia 
Scotorum  regis  quarti  patroni  eiusdem  ecclesie  de  Kippane,  cum  vacare 
contigerit,  et  nunc  cum  vacare  contingat  per  resignacionem  seu  diniis- 
siouem  magistri  Patricii  Coventre  rectoris  moderni  eiusdem  ecclesie  de 
Kyppane ;  et  ex  aduerso  dictus  reuerendus  pater  et  eins  capitulum  asserunt 
quod  dicta  eeclesia  de  Kippane  est  prebenda  et  canonicatus  ecclesie 
catliedralis  Dunblanensis  et  ad  ipsius  reuerendi  patris  collationem  spec- 
tans,  et  ideo  huiusmodi  donatio  facta  monasterio  de  Cambuskynnetli 
muiime  valet,  cuni  ratione  patronatus  rex  tollere  ius  quesitum  ecclesie 
Dunblanensis  aut  eam  dismembrare  seu  numerum  canonicorum  et  pre- 
bendarum  eiusdem  diminuere  de  iure  minime  poterat ;  tum  eciam  quia 
prefatus  abbas  est  cauonicus  dicte  ecclesie  catbedralis  Dunblanensis  ratioue 
ecclesie  de  Kincardiu  suo  monasterio  spectantis  et  ideo  non  valet  de  iure 
duos  canonieatus  seu  prebendas  in  vna  et  eadem  ecclesia  cathedraU  simul 
gaudere  et  possidere  :  Super  quibus  et  pro  litium  et  contrauersiarum  liuius- 
modi  extinctione  ac  pro  bono  pacis  et  concordie  inter  eosdem  reuerendum  et 
venerabilem  patres  et  eoruni  capitula  predictos  suosque  snccessores  de  cetero 
habendaram  et  fiendarum.et  ne  prefata  ecclesia  catliedralis  numero  canonicornm 
et  prebendarum  minuatur,  appunctuatum,  concordatum  et  finaliter  conuentum 
extat  inter  eosdem,  interuenientibus  eciam  consensu  et  assensu  excellentissimi 
serenissimique  principis  Jacobi  quarti  Scotorum  regis  antedicti  patroni  iuris 


172 


REGISTEUM  MONASTERII 


patronatus  dicte  rectorie  de  Kippane,  in  hunc  qiii  sequitur  niodum,  videlicet, 
quod  vicaria  dicte  ecclesie  de  Kippane  cum  omuibus  et  singulis  fructibus, 
redditibuset  prouentibus,  iuribus  ac  emolumentis  ad  dictam  vicariam  spectan- 
tibus  seu  spectare  valentibus  in  futurum,  vnacum  summa  ^aginti  librarum 
vsualis  monete  Scotie  singulis  annis  leuandarum,  percipiendarum  ac  soluen- 
darum  de  fructibus,  redditibus,  prouentibus  rectorie  dicte  ecclesie  de  Kippane 
perjietuis  temporibus  futuris  ad  duos  anni  terminos  consuetos  Penthecosten 
videlicet  et  Sancti  Martini  in  liieme  per  equales  portiones,  cum  mansione 
ipsius  prebende  solita  etconsuetavniantur,erigautur,creenturet  incorporentur, 
sic  tamen  ut  diete  mansionis  et  glebe  dimedia  acra  dicto  monasterio  vnacum 
domunculo  jiro  decimarum  garbalium  dicte  rectorie  receptione  mouasterio  de 
Cambuskynneth  perpetuis  temporibus  futuris  debeatur  et  possideatur,  nec- 
non  tenore  presencium  vniuntur,  eriguntur,  creantur  et  incorporantur  in  vno 
canonicatu  et  prebenda  dicte  ecclesie  cathedralis  Dunblanensis  vocando  in 
futurum  canonicatus  et  prebenda  de  Kippane,  qui  canonicatus  de  Kippane  et 
prebenda  perpetuis  futuris  temporibus  ad  donationem,  prouisionem  et  plena- 
riam  dispositionem  dicti  reuerendi  patris  et  suorum  successorum  pleno  iure 
spectabunt  et  iure  ordinario  pertinebunt ;  et  prefatus  venerabilis  pater  et  con- 
uentus  eiusdem  monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth  et  eorum  successores  habebunt 
omnes  et  singulos  fructus  rectorie  dicte  ecclesie  de  Kippane  in  elemosina 
concessa  eidem  monasterio  de  Cambuskynneth,  abbati  et  conuentid  eiusdeni 
et  eorum  successoribus  perpetuis  temporibus  futuris,  inde  soluendo  dictam 
summam  viginti  librarum  dicto  canouico  et  prebendario  vt  premittitm'  absque 
vlteriori  molestatione,  vesatione  aut  perturbatione  in  futurum  ;  insuper  pre- 
bendarius  siue  canonicus  de  Kippane  qui  prebendam  seu  canonicatum 
predictum  habebit  et  sui  successores  faciant  seu  facere  procurent  per  se  aut 
per  quoscunque  alios  capellanos  ydoneos  et  suflEicientes  omnia  et  singula 
seruicia  pertiuentia  ad  curam  dicte  ecclesie  de  Kj-ppane  debita  et  consueta ; 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


173 


necnon  vniuersa  et  singula  iura  ordiuaria  dicte  ecclesie  saibibunt  et  sustenta- 
bunt  et  extraordinaria,  excepto  subsidio  episcopali  dum  sedem  vacare  cou- 
tigerit,  quod  pro  rata  portionis  beneficii  soluet  monasterium,  sicque  prefatus 
abbas  et  conuentus  liberi  erunt  a  solutione  quorumcunque  iurium  ordinari- 
orum  et  extraordinariorum,  vt  modo  expressatorum,  dicte  ecclesie  de  Kippane, 
et  a  solutione  cuiusdam  antique  pensionis  wulgariter  vocate  stalsiluer  solute 
singulis  annis  preteritis  stallario  in  eadem  ecclesia  cathedrali  Dunblanensi, 
quatuor  libras,  ad  quas  soluendas  prebendarius  tenebitur ;  ad  que  omnia  et 
singula  in  omnibus  suis  puuctis  et  articulis  ac  conditionibus  fideliter  perim- 
plenda  et  inuiolabiliter  obseruanda  partes  prescrijite  se  mutuo  firmiter  obliga- 
runt  sub  strictiori  forma  et  stilo  obligationis,  fraude,dolo  ac  malo  ingeuio  penitus 
remotis  et  seclusis :  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  huic  parti  contractus,  ap- 
punctuamenti  et  concordie  appensum  est  priuatum  sigillum  serenissimi  prin- 
cipis  antedicti  Jacobi  Scotoruni  regis  quarti  in  verificationem  sui  assensiis  et 
consensus  ad  premissa  accedentium,  apud  Edinburgh,  vicesimo  nouo  die  mensis 
Marcii,  anuo  Domini  millesimo  quiugentesimo  vndecimo,  necnon  sigillum 
commuue  capituli  Dunblanensis,  vnacum  sigillo  rotundo  dicti  reuerendi  patris 
Jacobi  episcopi  eiusdem,  pro  perpetuo  cum  monasterio  de  Cambuskynueth  in 
euidenciam  premissorum  permansm-o,  accedente  ad  hoc  consensu  et  assensu, 
approbatione,  confirmatione  sedis  apostolice,  pro  nobisc[ue  successoribus  nostris, 
cum  consensu  et  assensu  dicti  nostri  capituli  in  generali  capitulo  generaliter 
congregati,  tanquam  de  iure  nobis  incumbit,  approbamus,  ratificamus  et  con- 
firmamus  per  presentes,  apud  Dunblauensem  ciuitatem,  primo  die  mensis 
Aprilis  anno  quo  supra  sunt  appensa. — Ex  mandato  supremi  domini  nostri 
regis  literatorio.  Jacobus  episcopus  Dunblanensis. 

Waltekus  Drummond  decanus. 

Jacobus  Wilson  prebendarius. 

Jacobus  Belsis  prebendarius  et  canonicus. 


174 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


131.    KlPPANE  ECCLESIE  INSTKUMENTUM  CONFIEMATIONIS  JaCOBI  QUARTI  IN 
SUO  PAELIAMENTO  SECUNT3UM  TEXOEEM  CAKTE  NOBIS  CONCESSE. 

1n  Dei  nomine  amen  :  Per  hoc  presens  publicum  instrumentum  cunctis  pateat 
euiJenter  quod  anno  ab  iacarnatione  Domini  millesimo  quadringentesimo 
nonagesimo  sexto,  mensis  vero  Juuii  die  vicesimo  tertio,  indictione  decima 
quarta,  pontificatus  sanctissimi  in  Christo  patris  et  domini  nostri,  domini  Alex- 
andri  diuiua  prouidencia  pape  sexti  anno  quarto,  in  parliamento  supremi 
doraini  nostri  regis  Jacobi  quai'ti  tento  et  inclioato  apud  Edinburgh  in  pretorio 
eiusdem  die  prescripto,  personaliter  constitutus  prefatus  dominus  noster  rex 
coram  tribus  statibus  sui  regni,  meque  notario  publico  et  testibus  subscriptis  et 
ibidem  idem  supremusdominus  uoster  rex.ex  sua  speciali  gracia  et  ex  suo  proprio 
motu,  dedit,  concessit,  confirmauit  et  approbauit  illas  donationem,  concessionem, 
confirmacionem  et  approbationem  quas  alias  fecerat  venerabili  in  Cristo  patri 
Henrico  abbati  de  Cambuskynneth,  conuentiu  et  monasterio  eiusdem,  ecclesie 
de  Kippane  sub  eius  carta  magno  suo  sigillo  sigillata,  sic  quod  dicta  ecclesia  de 
Kippaue  perpetuis  futuris  temporibus  remaneat  cum  dictis  abbate  et  conuentu 
et  monasterio  et  eorum  successoribus  imperpetuum  pro  diuinis  ofBciis  et 
suffragiis  pro  perpetuo  celebrandis  et  fiendis  pro  animabus  recolende  memorie 
quondam  patris  sui  et  matris  sue,  anima  sua,  et  animabus  antecessorum  et 
successorum  suoram  quorumcunque,  secundum  teuorem  sue  carte  predicte, 
quam  dictus  abbas  et  conuentus  inde  habent :  Super  quibus  omnibus  etsingulis 
prefatus  dominus  abbas  pro  se,  suo  conuentu,  monasterio  et  eorum  sixccessori- 
bus  a  me  notario  publico  subscripto  sibi  fieri  petut  hoc  presens  pubbcum 
instrumentum.  Acta  erant  hec  in  loco  prescripto  hora  prima  vel  eocirca  post 
merediem  sub  anno,  die,  mense,  indictione  et  pontificatu  quibus  supra;  pre- 
sentibus  ibidem  illustri  priacipe  Jacobo  duce  Eo~sie  fratre  germano  supremi 
domini  nostri  regis,  reuerendissimis,  reuerendis,  nobUibus  et  potentibus  dominis, 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


\lb 


videlicet,  Wilelmo  archiepiscopo  Sanctiandree  primate  Scotie,  Eoberto  arclii- 
episcopo  Glasguensi,  Wilelmo  episcopo  Abirdonensi,  Andrea  episcopo  Mo- 
i'auiensi,  Jolianne  priore  Sauctiandree,  Arcliibaldo  coniite  Angusie  domino 
Douglas  cancellario  Scotie,  Arcliibaldo  comite  de  Argile,  Johanne  comite  de 
Craufurd,  Patricio  comite  de  Boitbuile,  Wilelmo  comite  Mariscalli,  Wilelmo 
comite  Erolie,  Alexandro  domino  Hume,  Jolianne  domino  Drummoud, 
magistris  Eicardo  Lausone,  Wilelmo  Scot  de  Flawcrag,  Jacobo  Heurisoue, 
Thoma  Buthlar  cum  diuersis  aliis  ad  premissa  vocatis  pariterque  rogatis. 

Et  ego  Petrus  Marche,  clericus  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  publicus  auctorita- 
tibus  imperiali  et  regali  notarius,  quia  premissis  omnibus  et  singulis  dum 
sic  vt  preniittitur  dicerentur,  agereutur  et  fierent,  vna  cum  prenominatis 
testibus  presens  interfui,  eaque  omnia  et  singula  sic  fieri  vidi,  dici  sciui  et 
audiui  ac  in  notam  cepi ;  ideo  hoc  presens  publicum  instrumentum  manu 
alterius  scriptum  exinde  confeci,  signoque  et  nomine  meis  solitis  et  consuetis 
signaui,  rogatus  et  requisitus  in  fidem  et  testimonium  omnium  premissorum. 

Peteus  Maeche. 


132.    DONATIO  ECCLESIE  DE  KlRKINTOLAUCH. 

Omxibus  sancte  matris  ecclesie  filiis,  W.  fihus  Thoraldi  vicecomes  de 
Striueling,  salutem :  Sciant  tam  posteri  quam  presentes  me  dedisse  et 
concessisse  et  hac  carta  mea  confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  sancte  Slarie  de 
Striueling  et  abbati  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  et  seruituris 
ecclesiam  de  Kirkintulauch  in  perpetuam  elemosinam  cum  dimedia  carucata 
terre  et  cum  omnibus  eidem  ecclesie  iuste  pertinentibus  in  bosco  et  plano, 
pratis  et  pascuis  et  aliis  asiamentis  pro  amina  mea  et  anima  patris  mei 
et  matris  mee,  et  animabus  heredum  et  parentum  meorum,  ita  Liberam 
et   quietam    sicut    aliqua    liberius    et    quietius    ab    aliquo    possidetur    aut 


KHiKINTULAUCH. 


176 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


KiRKiNTDLAucH.  tenetur ;  hiis   testibus,  Alexandro  filio  eius,  M.    presbytero,  E.  clerico,  ]M. 

diacono,  W.  fratre  femine  eius,  E.  curato  de  Clakmanan,  E.  de  Warewic, 
etc. 

133.  CoxFiRMATio  Alexandri  regis  ecclesie  predicte. 
Alexander  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotorum,  omnibus  probis  hominibus  totins  terre 
sue  clericis  et  laicis,  salutem  :  Sciaut  presentes  et  futuri  nos  concessisse  et 
hac  carta  nostra  confirmasse  quietam  clamanciam  quam  Wilelmus  Cumyn 
comes  de  Buchane,  pro  se  et  heredibus  suis  fecit  Deo  et  ecclesie  beate  Marie 
de  Cambuskynneth  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  et  imperpetuum 
seruituris  de  toto  im'e  quod  idem  Wilehuus  Cumyn  et  heredes  sui  habere 
crediderunt  vel  quoquomodo  habere  potuerunt  in  ecclesia  de  Kirkintulach,  et 
in  capellis  suis,  et  in  omnibus  aliis  ad  eandem  ecclesiam  pertinentibus  : 
Quare  volumus  vt  predicti  canouici  de  Cambuskynneth  predictam  ecclesiam 
teneant  et  habeaut  in  liberam  et  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  cum 
capellis,  terris,  oblationibus  et  decimis  et  obuentionibus  omnimodis  et  cum  vna 
bouata  terre  adiacente  terre  ecclesie  ex  parte  orientali,  quam  idem  WUelmus 
Cumyn  ex  proprio  dono  suo  predictis  canonicis  in  puram  et  perpetuam 
elemosinam  contulit,  ita  libere  et  quiete,  plenarie  et  honorifice  sicut  carta 
jDredicti  Wilelmi  Cumyn  iuste  testatur,  sahio  seruitio  nostro ;  testibus 
Thoma  de  Striueliug  cancellario,  Mauricio  comite  de  Menteth  vicecomite 
de  Striueling,  Eoberto  capellauo,  Waltero  Cumyn,  Dauid  Cumyn,  Dauid 
Marescallo,  W.  Biset,  ajmd  Clakmanan,  vicesimo  septimo  die  IMarcii  anno 
reKui  domini  regis  duodecimo. 


134.  Item  confirmatio  ecclesie  predicte. 
Omnibds    sancte    matris    ecclesie    filiis    presentibus    et  futuris,   Walterus 
miseratione  diuina  ecclesie  Glasguensis  minister,  eternam  in  Domino  sahitem  : 


DE  CAMBUSKENXETH. 


177 


Nouerit  vniuersitas  vestra  uos  pietatis  iutuitu  coucessisse  et  liac  carta  nostra 
confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  sancte  ilarie  de  Striueling  et  canonicis  ibidem 
Deo  seruientibus  et  seruituris  ecclesiam  de  Kirkintulacli  cum  capellis, 
terris  et  decimis,  obuencionibus  omuimodis  et  cum  aliis  omnibus  iustis 
pertinentiis  suis  in  vsus  ijroprios  conuerteudis  :  Preseutabuut  quidem  dicti 
canouici  nobis  et  successoribus  nostris  capellanos  aut  clericos  ydoneos  ad 
vicariam  octo  marcarum  de  alteragio  vel  de  alia  certa  portione  et  competenti 
ipsius  ecclesie  percipiendarum,  qui  pro  tempore  eidem  ecclesie  deseruieut, 
et  de  episcopalibus  et  de  omni  onere  ad  predictam  ecclesiam  pertineute 
respondebuut,  saluo  eciam  nobis  et  successoribus  nostris  iure  episcopali  in 
omnibus :  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  presens  scriptum  sigilli  nostri  muni- 
mine  duximus  roboraudum,  liiis  testibus  domino  H.  et  domino  A.  capellauis 
nostris,  magistro  Eadulpho  de  Erade,  domino  Beniamyn,  Eoberto  cancellario, 
Waltero,  Anckea,  clericis  nostris  et  multis  aliis. 


KIRKrSTULAUCH. 


135.  CoLLATio  EPiscori  JonAXNi  Steiuelixg  mcarie  Kiekintulacii. 

llOBERTUS  miseratione  diuina  Glasguensis  archiepiscopus,  decano  nostro 
Cristianitatis  de  Leuenax  necnou  vuiuersis  et  singulis  aliis  presbyteris 
curatis  et  non  curatis  infra  nostram  prouinciam  vbilibet  constitutis,  et  super 
executione  presencium  debite  requisitis,  salutem  cum  benedictione  diuina : 
Quia  vicariam  perpetuam  ecclesie  parochialis  de  Kirkintulach  cum  vacare 
contigerit  per  pacificam  assecutionem  magistii  Eoberti  Formau  ad  pre- 
centoriam  Glasguensem,  per  finalem  litis  extinctionem  iu  Eomana  curia  nuuc 
super  predicta  preceutoria  pendentis  et  non  alias  ad  presentationem  lioc 
mense  abbatis  et  conuentus  de  Cambuskynneth  nostram  coUationem 
ordinariam  pleno  iure  spectantem,  magistro  Johanni  Sterling  nobis  per  dictum 
abbatem  et  couuentum  Uteratorie  preseutato  niodo  premisso  et  non  alias 

23 


178 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


KTRKIXTULAUCH. 


contulimus,  prout  tenore  presencium  conferimus,  et  de  eadem  sibi  vt  pre- 
mittitur  prouiJemus,  ipsumque  coram  nobis  personaliter  constitutum  per 
annuli  nostri  digito  suo  impositionem  predicto  modo  inuestiuimus  in  eandem 
curam,  regimen  et  admiuistrationem  eiusdem  sibi  plenarie  committentes. 
Vobis  igitur  et  vestram  cuilibet  in  virtute  sancte  obediencie  et  sub  pena 
suspensionis  a  diuinis  stricte  precipimus  et  mandamus,  quatenus  prefatum 
magistrum  Joliannem,  aut  procuratorem  suum  pro  eo,  in  et  ad  realem, 
actualem  et  corporalem  possessionem  dicte  vicarie  iuriumque  et  pertinentium 
eiusdem  modo  premisso  et  non  alias  inducatis  et  instituatis,  inductumque  et 
institutum  cauonice  defendatis,  sibique  aut  procuratori  suo  super  vniuersis 
et  singulis  fructibus,  redditibus  et  prouentibus  dicte  vicarie,  buiusmodi 
pacifica  possessione  prescripti  magistri  Eoberti  Forman  ad  dictam  pre- 
centoriam  adepta  et  lite  iu  eadem  vt  premittitur  extincta,  integre  responderi 
faciatis ;  contradictores  vero  et  rebelles,  si  qui  forsan  fuerint,  auctoritate  nostra 
arcius  compescentes,  et  vos  qui  presentes  extunc  fneritis  sigillum  vestrum  in 
secunda  cauda  post  nostrum  appendatis,  aut  per  notarium  publicum  notificari 
faciatis :  In  quorum  omnium  et  singulorum  fidem  et  testiraonium  premis- 
sorum  has  presentes  nostras  collationis  literas  exinde  fieri  et  per  notarium 
publicum  subscriptum  scribam  nostriun  subscribi  et  publicari  mandanimus, 
sigillique  nostri  rotundi  iussimus  et  fecimus  appensione  communiri,  apud 
Striueling,  vltimo  die  mensis  ^laii  anno  Domini  millesimo  quingentesimo, 
indictione  tercia,  pontificatusque  sanctissimi  in  Christo  patris  et  domini 
nostri,  domini  Alexandri  diuina  prouidencia  pape  sexti,  anno  octauo  et  nostre 
consecrationis  decimo  sexto,  presentibus,  domino  Johanne  Scherar  archi- 
diacono  Kossensi  et  magistro  Eoberto  Blakader  presbyteris,  testibus  ad 
premissa  vocatis  pariter  et  rogatis. 

Et    ego    Archibaldus   Layng  arcium   magister   presbyter    Sanctiandree 
diocesis,    publicus    sacra   auctoritate   apostoli:a    notarius,   quia    prescripte 


DE  CAMBUSKEXXETU. 


collationi  et  prouisioni  modo  premisso,  ceterisque  supradiutis  dum  sic  vt 
premittitur,  vnaciim  prenominatis  testibus  presens  interfui,  eaque  omnia 
sic  fieri  vidi  et  audiui  ac  in  notam  cepi,  ex  qua  lioc  presens  pul.ilicum 
instrumentum  manu  propria  subscriptum  exinde  confeci,  nomineque  et  signo 
meis  solitis  et  consuetis  subscripsi  et  signaui  in  fidem  et  testimonium 
premissorum  rogatus  et  requisitus. 

Aechibaldus  Layng. 


KIRKIXTULAUCH, 


139.  CiTATio  suPER  Thoma  Flemyng  et  presbytekis. 
Officialis  Glasguensis  generalis  curatis  ecclesiarum  parrochialium  de  Lenze 
Monyabrun  seu  cuicunque  alteri  capellano  seu  notario  publico  executionem 
presencium  in  se  acceptare  volenti,  salutem  :  Qiiia  ex  parte  venerabilis  in 
Christo  patris  Alexandri  permissione  diuina  abbatis  monasterii  de  Cambus- 
kynneth  et  eiusdem  loci  conuentus,  necnon  procuratoris  eorundem,  querelam 
accepimus  continentem  quod  citatis  ad  dictorum  abbatis  et  conuentus 
instanciam  nobili  et  potenti  domino  Jolianne  domino  Flemyng  Scocie  magno 
camerario  et  reliquis  omnibus  paiTOchianis  de  Lenze  seu  Kiutulach  nuncu- 
pata  ad  certum  termimuu  eiis  per  nos  assignatum  et  non  compareutibus, 
dictorum  abbatis  et  conuentus  procuratore  instante,  eos  excommunicauimus 
et  excommunicationis  et  denunciationis  literas  vobis  curato  de  Lenze 
direxiuuis,  quas  et  vos  ab  earuudem  nuucio  et  baiulo  recepistis,  perlegistis, 
sed  eas  debite  executioni  demandari  recusastis,  quousque  veniens  quidam 
Thomas  Flemyng  in  dictum  nuncium  et  baiulum  manus  violentes  iniecit,  et  vi 
ac  vi  armata  dictas  nostras  literas  rapuit  et  secura  abduxit,  ipsumque  baiulum 
verberavit,  nostram  ymmoverius  ecclesiasticam  iurisdictionem  impediens  et 
preterea  excommunicationis  sentenciam  a  canone  latam  et  iii  bulla  cene 
Domiui  fulminatam  dampnabiliter  incurrendo,  a  qua  preterquam  in  mortis 
articulo  ab  alio  quam  sanctissimo  domino  nostro  papa  non  possit  absolui ; 


REGISTRUM  MONASTEIill 


KIRKINTULAUCH 


dicteque  ecclesie  curatus  domiuus  Johannes  Eeid,  dominus  Johannes  Eobe- 
sou,  dominus  Alexauder  Crestesou,  dominus  Damd  Atkiusone,  dominus 
Johaunes  Flesar,  Johanues  Craufurd,  non  obstaute  perlectione  huiusmodi 
literarum  denuuciatorialium,  et  ex  surreptione  earundem  publicatione  semel, 
preter  quod  a  diuinis  de  iure  suspensi  fuerunt,  ac  iterum,  huiusmodi  suspen- 
sione  stante,  in  dicti  Thome  surreptoris  ceterorumque  parrochianorum  per 
literas  nostras  predictas  excommunicatorum  presenciis  missarum  solempnia 
celebraruut  et  censuras  ecclesiasticas  contempueudo  celebrare  nou  desistunt : 
Vobis  igitur  et  vestrum  cuilibet  precipimus  et  mandamus  quatenus  citetis 
legitinie  prefatum  Thomam  Flemyng  nostrarum  literarum  surreptorem, 
dictosque  dominum  Johannem  curatum,  Alexandrum  Crestesone,  Dauid 
Atkinson,  Johannem  Flesar,  Johaunem  Craufurd,  presbyteros,  primo,  secundo, 
tercio  et  peremptorie,  vnico  tamen  contextu  pro  triplici  edicto,  quos  nos 
teuore  presencium  sic  citamus  quod  compareant  coram  nobis  seu  commissariis 
nostris  pluribus  aut  vno  in  ecclesia  metropolitana  Glasguensi,  loco  con- 
sistoriali  eiusdem,  die  uono  iuridico  citatiouem  vestram  proxime  et  immediate 
sequente,  quorum  dierum  tres  pro  primo,  tres  pro  secundo  et  reliquos  tres 
dies  pro  tertio  et  peremptorio  termino  citationeque  canonica  assiguamus  et 
per  vos  volumus  assignari,  dictum,  videlicet,  Thomam  Flemyng  ad  ^ddenduui 
et  audiendum  se  in  dictam  excommunicationis  sententiam  a  canone  in  dicta 
bulla  cene  Domiui  hitam,  dictosque  curatum  et  presbyteros  irregularitatis  notam 
])ropter  premissa  iucidisse  declarari  et  iucurrisse  vel  ad  diceudum  et  causam 
si  quam  habeat  seu  habeaut  rationabilem  iu  iure  probandum  quare  sic 
exeommunicatus  et  irregulares  declarari  non  deberent :  Et  insuper  nobis  ac 
procuratori  fiscali  curie  nostre  de  officio  responsuri  et  iuri  parituri  sub  simili 
excommunicationis  j)ena,  et  preseutes  debite  executas  earundem  latori  red- 
datis.  Datum  sub  sigUIo  officii  nostri,  apud  Glasgvv,  die  vigesimo  mensis 
Marcii  anno  Domini  etc.  quiugentesimo  vicesimo  secundo. 


■DE  CAMBUSKEXNETH. 


181 


137.  KlKKINTULACII  DECRETUM  DECI.MARU.M  PKO  .MOXASTERIO  DE  .\.\.\III 
CELDRIS  FAERINE  ET  TRES  CELDIUS  ORDEI  PRECIUM  BOLLE  .\III'*  ET 
QU.iTUOR'^  ET  PRO  QUALIBET  BOLLA  GALLINA  PRECIUM  IIIl'^ 

Jacobus  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotorum,  omnibus  probis  homiuibus  suis  ad  quos 
presentes  litere  peruenerint,  salutem :  Sciatis  nos  quoddam  actum  siue  decretum 
per  dominos  uostri  consilii  inferius  descriptum,  datum  et  promulgatum  vtii|ue 
intellexisse  sub  hac  forma :  At  Edinburgb,  the  last  day  of  Feln^uar,  the  zeir 
of  God  ane  thousand  fyve  liundreth  and  twenty  thre  zeris,  tlie  Lordis  of 
Counsale  vnderwrittin,  that  is  to  say,  ane  reuerend  fader  in  God,  Gawyne, 
Biscliop  of  Abirdeue,  ane  nobill  and  michty  Lord,  Hew  Erle  of  Eglingtoune, 
venerabill  faderis  in  God,  James  Abbot  [of]  Dundranan,  Thomas  Abbot  of 
Culros,  Maister  George  Hepburn,  Dene  of  Dunkeld,  Schir  Williani  Scot 
of  Balwery,  knycht,  and  Maister  Adam  Otterburn  of  Aiddhame,  in  the  actioun 
and  caus  persewit  be  ane  venerabill  fader  in  God,  Alexander  Alibot  of  Cam- 
buskynneth,  and  conuent  of  the  samyn,  aganis  Johue  Lord  Fiemyng,  for  the 
wranggus  and  maisterfull  spoliatioun,  vptaking  and  withalding  fra  thame  of 
thair  teynd  schavis  of  the  haill  parrochin  of  the  kirk  of  the  Lenze,  liand 
withiu  the  schirefdome  of  Dunbertane,  pertenyng  to  thame  as  personis  of 
the  said  kirk,  zeiiiy,  be  the  space  of  seveu  zeris  last  bii^ast,  extending 
ilk  zeir  to  thretty  thre  chaldris  of  nieill  aud  thre  chaldris  of  beir, 
])rice  of  the  boU  oureheid  xiij  s.  iiij  d.,  like  as  at  mare  lenth  is  coutenit 
in  the  summondis  thairupone.  Baith  the  sadis  partiis  beand  personali  pre- 
sent,  thare  richtis,  resouis  and  allegationis  hard,  sene  and  vnderstaud, 
and  thairwith  being  ripeUe  auisit,  the  Lordis  of  the  Counsale  decretis 
and  deliueris  that  the  said  Johnne  Lord  Flemyng  hes  done  wrang  in  tlie 
spoliatioun,  vptaking  and  ^\-ithhalding  fra  the  said  venerabUl  fader  and 
conuent  of  thare  teyndis  schavis  of  the  said  Kirk  of  Lenze,  zeirlie,  be  the 


KIRKINTUL.iUCH. 


182 


BEGISTRUM  MONASTEEII 


KiRKiNTULAUCH.  spacG  of  sevin  zeris  last  bipast,  pertenyng  to  the  said  venerabill  fader  and 

conuent,  and  thairfore  sall  desist  and  ceis  fra  all  intrometting  witli  tlie 
sadis  teyndis  to  be  gaderit,  set  and  disponit  be  tlianie  at  thair  pleseir  in 
tyme  to  cum,  and  als  sall  coutent  and  pay  to  the  sadis  venerabill  fader  and 
conuent  thretty  thre  chaldris  of  nieill,  thre  chaldris  of  beir,  price  of 
the  boll  of  meill  and  beir  onreheid  xiii  s.  iiii  d.  zeirlie,  and  illc  zeir,  be 
tlie  space  of  seviu  zeris  foirsaide,  and  witli  illv  boll  of  the  said  teynd 
meill  and  beir  ane  hen  price  iiii  d.  zeirlie  be  the  said  space,  quliilkis 
teyndis,  victualis,  and  gudis  pertenis  to  tlie  said  venerabill  fader,  conuent 
and  place  of  Cambuslvynnetli,  and  wes  intromettit  with  be  the  said  Johnne 
Lord  riemyug  likeas  was  cleirlie  previt  before  the  sadis  Lordis :  tharfore 
ordanis  lettres  be  directit  to  compell  and  distrenze  him,  his  landis  and  gudis, 
tliairfore  as  efferis.  Extractum  de  libro  actorum  per  me  Gawinum  episcopum 
Abirdonensem,  clericum  rotulorum  registri  ac  consilii  supremi  domini  nostri 
regis,  sub  meis  signo  et  subscriptione  manualibus.  Quodqiudem  actum 
siue  decretum  ac  omnia  et  singula  in  eodem  contenta  approbamus,  ratifica- 
nius  et  per  presentes  vt  premissum  est  confirmamus.  Datum  sub  testimonio 
magni  sigilli  nostri  apud  Ediuburgh,  vndecimo  die  mensis  Marcii,  anno 
Domini  millesimo  quingentesimo  vicesimo  tertio  et  regni  nostri  vndecimo. 


138.    COMPOTUAI  DOMINI  FlEMYNG. 

1n  Dei  nomine  amen :  Per  hoc  presens  publicum  instrumentum  cunctis 
pateat  euidenter  et  sit  notum  quod  anno  Incarnationis  dominice  millesimo 
quingentesimo  vicesimo  septimo,  mensis  vero  Marcii  die  penultimo,  indictione 
decima  quinta,  pontificatus  sanctissimi  in  Christo  patris  et  domini  nostri 
domini  Clementis  diuina  prouidencia  pape  septimi  anno  quarto,  in  mei 
notarii  publici  et  testium  subscriptorum  presencia  personaliter  constitutus 
venerabilis  in  Christo  pater  et  dominus  Alexander  permissione  diuina  abbas 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


183 


monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth  ordinis  Sancti  Augustini  Sanetiandree  dio- 
cesis  ex  vna,  ac  nobilis  et  potens  dominns  Malcolmus  dominus  Flemyng 
nuncupatus  Glasguensis  diocesis  partibus  ex  altera,  exoptantes  compotum, 
ealculum  et  rationem  garbarum  decimalium  ecclesie  parrocliialis  de  Lenze 
dicte  Glasgueusis  diocesis  prefato  abbati  et  monasteriu  spectancium  et 
pertinencium,  cum  quibus  vero  garbis  decimalibus  et  fructibus  C|Uondam 
Jobannes  dominus  Flemyng  dicti  Malcolmi  compotantis  pater  et  ipse 
Malcolmus  dominus  compotans  respectiue  ad  octo  annos  et  vnum  terminum 
ante  diem  huius  compoti  vltimi  elapsos,  vt  confessus  est  idem  Malcolmus, 
videlicet,  de  vno  termino  anni  Domini  mLllesimi  quingentesimi  decimi  octaui, 
necnon  de  aunis  Domini  millesimo  quingentesimo  decimo  nono,  v-igesimo, 
vigesirao  primo,  secundo,  tercio,  quarto,  quinto  et  vigesimo  sexto  intro- 
miserunt,  et  absque  compoto  in  suos  vsus  disposuerunt ;  quapropter  idem 
Malcolmus  compotans  motu  proprio,  vt  apparuit,  et  ex  sua  certa  scientia 
eidem  venerabUi  patri  tunc  presenti  coram  venerabilibus  et  prouidis  viris 
magistris  Johanne  Dingwall  sedis  apostolice  prothonotario  ecclesie  collegiate 
Sanctissime  Trinitatis  prope  Edinburgh  preposito,  Johanne  Campbell  de 
Lundy,  Adam  Otterburn  de  Auldhame,  et  Jacobo  Foulis  burgensi  de  Edin- 
burgh  de  consensu  vtriusque  partis,  sufiradictis  auditoribus  ad  huiusmodi 
compotum  audiendum  communiter  electis  tunc  presentibus  ac  onus  recep- 
tionis  huiusmodi  compoti  in  se  acceptantibus  suum  compotum  reddidit  in 
himc  qui  sequitur  modum  :  The  compt  niaid  betwix  ane  venerabill  fader 
in  God,  Alexander  Abbot  of  Cambuskynneth,  and  Malcom  Lord  Flemyng, 
apone  the  frutis  of  the  Kirk  of  Lenze  pertenyug  to  the  abbot,  place  and 
conuent  of  Cambuskyuneth,  intromettit  and  resauit  be  the  said  Malcom 
Lord  Flemyng  and  vmquhile  Johnne  Lord  Flemyng,  his  fader,  maid  at 
Edinburgh,  the  penult  day  of  Marche,  in  the  zeir  of  God  ane  thousand  fyve 
hundreth   twenty  and    sevin   zeris,  before   thir   auditouris   venerabill  men. 


KmKINTULAUCH. 


184 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


KIRKINTULAUCH. 


maisteris  Joliime  Dingwall,  prothonotar  provest  of  tlie  Triuite  College 
besyd  Edinburgh,  Johnne  Campbell  of  Luudy,  Adam  Otterburne  of  Ald- 
hame,  and  James  Foulis  burges  of  Edinburgh,  in  mauer  aud  forme  as  eftir 
followis : — Inprimis,  tlie  said  Malcolme  Lord  Flemyng  chargis  him  for  liis 
fader  aboue  writtin,  and  for  his  awin  interes,  witli  thretty  thre  pundis  sex 
schillingis  viii  d.  of  tlie  last  terme  that  wes  awaud  for  the  teyndis  of  the  said 
Eark  of  Lenze,  of  the  crop  of  the  zeir  of  God  i™  v''  and  xviii  zeris  :  Alswa 
the  said  Lord  Flemyng  chargis  him  with  the  croppis  of  the  zeris  of  God 
jmyc  jjjjj^  XX,  xxi,  xxii,  xxiii,  xxiiii,  xxv  and  xxvi  zeris,  extending  to 
aucht  croppis  by  the  terme  of  the  said  xviii  zeiris  aboue  expremit  as  eftir 
followis  :  Inprimis,  the  said  Lord  Flemyng  chargis  him  with  ii'^  markis  for 
croppis  of  tlie  zeir  of  God,  i"*  v''  xix  and  xx  zeris,  ilk  zeir  aue  liundretli 
markis  for  the  sadis  teyndis  ;  summa  i"  xxxiii  lib.  vi  sh.  viii  d. :  Alswa  the  said 
Lord  riemyng  chargis  him  with  xxxiii  chaldris  of  meill  and  thre  chaldris  of 
beir,  price  of  the  boU  ourheid  xiiis.  iiiid.,  and  ane  hene  with  ilk  boU  of  meill  and 
beir,  the  price  of  the  heue  oureheid  iiii  d.  ilk  zeir  for  thre  zeris,  videlicet,  the 
zeris  of  God  i™  v*=  xxi,  xxii,  xxiii  zeris  eftir  the  teuour  aud  forme  of  ane  de- 
crete  of  our  Souerane  Lordis  Counsale  gevin  at  Edinburgh  tlie  last  day  of 
Eebruar,  the  zeir  of  God  aue  thousand  v*^  xxiii  zeris,  as  is  conteuit  in  the 
samyn;  summa  in  money  zeiiiie  iii'^  Ixxxxiii  lib.  xii  s. ;  sunmia  of  the  sadis  thre 
zeris  i™  Ixxx  lib.  xvi  s. :  Alswa  the  said  Lord  Flemyng  chargis  him  with  the 
victualis  of  the  teyndis  of  the  Kirk  of  Lenze  foirsaid  ffor  the  zeir  of  God  i™  v" 
xxiiii  zeris,  xxv  and  xxvi  zeris,  ilk  zeir  to  thretty  thre  chaldris  meil,  tlire 
chaldris  beir,  and  aue  hene  to  ilk  boU  meill  and  beii',  extendiug  to  the  sovme 
abouewrittin ;  summa  of  thh-  last  thre  zeris  i™  v*^  Ixxx  lib.  xvi  s.  Summa 
totalis  of  the  haill  charge  aboue  wiitten  ii™  v°  xxviii  pvmdis  v  s.  iii  d.  Expense 
sequuntur.  Inprimis  allowit  to  the  said  Lord  be  my  Lord  Abbot  of  Cambus- 
kynneth  abouewrittin  eftir  the  tenour  of  ane  assedatioune  maid  be  vmquhile 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


185 


abbot  Audrow  to  vmquliile  Johiiue  Lord  Flemyng  for  that  aue  tenue  of  the 
zeir  of  God  ane  thousand  v<=  xviii  zeris,  x  markis,  aud  for  the  zeir  of  God  i™  v'' 
xix  and  xx  zeris,  ilk  zeir  xx  markis  for  the  said  vmquhile  Johnne  Lord 
Flemyngis  kyndues  doue  to  the  said  place  of  Cambuskynneth,  as  is  contenit 
in  the  said  assedatioun  schawiu  apon  compt ;  summa  xxxiii  lib.  vis.  viii  d. 
Item,  deliuerit  be  the  said  vmquhile  Johnne  Lord  Flemyiug,  in  the  uame 
and  behaK  of  the  said  Alexander  abbot,  to  my  Lord  Governour,  being  for  the 
tyme  in  ScotLand,  for  the  taxt  of  Candjuskynueth  before  the  dait  heirof,  quliair- 
on  the  said  abbot  hes  gevin  his  acquittauce,  quhilk  remauis  zit  with  the 
said  Malcolme  Lord  Flemying,  the  foirsadis  abbot  aud  Lord  Flemying 
grautand  the  samyn  vpou  compt  ii'^  xxxiii  lib.  vi  s.  viii  d.  Alswa  deliuerit  be 
tbe  said  vmquhile  Johnne  Lord  Flemyng  to  the  foirsaid  ablxit  siclike  before 
this  dait  the  sovme  of  tuenty  pundis,  quhairou  the  said  abbot  hes  gevin  his 
acquittauce,  remauauyug  iu  keping  with  the  said  Malcohne  the  foirsaid  comptar 
grantaud  the  samyn;  summa  xx  lib.  Item,  the  said  abbot  allowis  to  the  foirsaid 
Lord  Flemyng,  at  wes  deliuerit  be  vmquLile  Johnne  Lord  Flemyng  to  .Schir 
Ilichart  Striueliug,  being  factour  of  Cambuskynuetli  for  the  tyme,  quhais 
acquittauce  zit  remanis  with  the  said  Lord  Flemyng  thairon,  xxvi  lib.  xiii  s.  iiiid. 
Item,  deliuerit  be  the  said  Malcolme  Lord  Flemyug  to  the  foirsaid  abbot  laitlie 
in  part  of  payment  of  the  fructis  aboue  writtin,  aue  liuudreth  markis,  quhairou 
the  said  abbot  hes  geviu  his  acquittance  to  the  said  Lord  Flemyng,  quhilk 
zit  remauis  with  him  thaii'OU ;  Ixvi  Ub.  xiii  s.  iiii  d.  gTantit  vpon  the  compt. 
Summa  totalis  harum  expensarum  iii'=  Ixxxlib.,  et  sic  restant  duo  millia 
centum  et  quadragiuta  octo  libre  quiucpie  solidi  et  quatuor  denarii  super  dicto 
Malcolmo  domiuo  Flemyng  compotaute,  prefatis  venerabili  patri  et  conuentui 
et  loco  respoudeute,  prout  dictis  auditoribus  super  compotum  constabat. 
Super  quibus  omnibus  et  singulis  dictus  venerabilis  pater  a  me  notario  publico 
subscripto  sibi  fieri  peciit  et  requisiuit  vnum  vel  plura  publicum  seu  publica 

24 


KIHKINTULAUCH. 


186 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


KiRKiNTULAUCH.  iiistrumentuiTi   et  instrumenta.     Acta  erant  hec  in  domo  siue  liabitationis 

loco  dicti  magistri  Ade  Otterburne  infra  predictum  oppidum  Edinburgi  situato, 
liora  quarta  post  merediem  vel  eocirca,  sub  anno,  die,  mense,  indictione  et 
poutificatu  quibus  supra ;  presentibus  ibidem  venerabilibus  et  discretis  viris 
magistro  Duncano  Burnet  vicario  de  Auclitirhous,  Johanne  Thonisone  burgense 
de  Ediuburgh,  Waltero  Ohphant  et  Michaele  TuHoch  cum  diuersis  aliis  testi- 
bus  ad  premissa  vocatis  pariter  et  rogatis. 

Et  ego  Willehnus  MehU'um  arcium  magister,  clericus  Abirdonensis 
diocesis,  sacra  auctoritate  apostohca  notarius  publicus  :  Quia  prescripto  com- 
poto  ceterisque  premissis  omnibus  et  singulis,  dum  sic  vt  premittitur  dicerentur, 
agerentur  et  fierent,  vnacum  prenominatis  testibus  presens  fui,  eaque  onmia 
et  singula  sic  fieri  vidi,  sciui  et  audiui,  ac  in  notam  sumpsi,  ex  qua  hoc 
presens  publicum  instrumentum  mauu  alterius  fideliter  scriptum  exiude 
confeci  et  iu  hanc  formam  publicam  redegi,  signo  et  subscriptione  meis 
solitis  et  consuetis  signaui  et  subscripsi  in  fidem,  robur  et  testimoniura  omnium 
et  singulorum  premissorum  rogatus  et  requisitus. 

WiLLELMUS  IMeldrum,  Dotarius  publicus. 


1  39.    COPIA  ACTI  SUPEli  DOMIXUM  FlEMYNG. 

Decimo  die  luensis  Octobris  anno  Domini  millesimo  quingentesimo  septimo, 
quo  die  Johannes  doniinus  Flemyng  mouitus  est  ex  sua  propria  confessione, 
sub  pena  excommunicationis  submittens  se  iurisdictioni  nostre  in  hoc  casu, 
ad  satisfaciendum  venerabili  in  Christo  patri  Dauid  abbati  monasterii  de 
Cambuskynneth  de  summa  quingentarum  marcarum  monete  Scotie  tanquam 
pro  grassuma  et  firma  decimarum  garbalium  ecclesie  parrochiaHs  de  Kirkin- 
tulach  sibi  domino  assedatarum  per  dictum  abbatem  piro  terminis  trium  auno- 
rum  immediate  sequentium  festum  ad  uiucuhi  Sancti  Petri  vltimo  elapsiun  in 
terminis    subsequeutibus,  videlicet,  in  termino  Sancti  Martini  proximo  de 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETU. 


187 


summa  octuaginta  trium  marcarum  ad  bonum  compotnm,  et  in  festo  penthe- 
costes  proxime  sequente  de  summa  octuaginta  trium  marcarum  vsque  ad 
plenariam  solutionem  dicte  summe  quingentarum  marcarum  ad  bonum  cal- 
culum  et  ratiocinium  vt  supra. 


KIRKIXTULAUCH. 


140.  CoLLATio  Eriscon  eiusdem  vicaeie  magisteo  Jacobo  Lyx. 
Gawixus  miseratione  diuina  arcliiepiscopus  Glasguensis,  decano  Christianitatis 
nostre  [de]  Leueuax,  seu  cuicunque  alteri  capellano  super  executione  presenciuni 
debite  recpiisito,  salutem  cimi  benedictione  diuina  :  Quia  vicariani  perpetuam 
ecclesie  parrocbialis  Sancti  jSTiniani  de  Lenze  nostre  diocesis  de  jure  et  facto 
vacantem  per  mortem  quondam  venerabilis  viri  magistri  Jobannis  Striueling 
vltimi  vicarii  et  possessoris  eiusdem,  ad  presentationem  venerabilium  et  reli- 
giosorum  virorum  Alexandri  aljbatis  et  connentus  monasterii  Sancte  Marie  de 
Cambuskynneth  ordinis  Sancti  Augustini  Sanctiandree  diocesis  nostramque 
coUationem  ordinariam  pleno  jure  spectantem,  dilecto  nostro  domino  Johanni 
Clerk  dicti  monasterii  canonico,  nomine  et  ex  parte  venerabilis  vii'i  magistri 
Jacobi  Lyn,  canonici  Dunkeldensis  sacrarumcpie  literarum  bachalarii  formati, 
nobis  ad  eandem  vicariam  per  litteras  patentes  eorundem  abbatis  et  conuentus 
suo  communi  sigillo  sigillatas  presentati,  diuine  caritatis  intuitu  contulimus, 
et  eidem  de  eadem  prouidimus,  ipsumque  dominum  Johannem  nomine  quo 
supra  per  annuli  nostri  digitij  suo  impositionem  inuestiuimus  in  eadem,  prout 
presencium  per  tenorem  damus,  conferimus  et  inuestimus,  curam  auimarum 
regiraenque  et  administrationem  parrochianorum  eiusdem  sibi  committentes  ; 
Vobis  igitur  et  vestrum  cuihbet  precipimus  et  mandamus  quatenus  dictum 
magistrum  Jacobum  vel  suum  procuratorem,  aut  alium  eius  nomine,  in  rcalem, 
actualem  et  corporalem  seu  quasi  possessionem  dicte  vicarie  et  pertinenciarum 
eiusdem  instituatis  et  inducatis,  iuductumque  et  institutum  auctoritate  nostra 
canonice  defendatis,  sibique  de  fructibus,  redditibus  et  prouentibus  integre 


188 


BEGISTRUM  MONASTEEII 


KIRKINTULAUCH. 


responderi  facientes,  contradictores,  si  qui  forsan  fuerint,  per  censuram  eccle- 
siasticam  arctius  compescendo :  lu  signum  vero  institutionis  vestre  realis 
sigillum  vestrum  in  secunda  cauda  post  nostnmi,  apud  prefatum  magistrum 
Jacobum  permansurum,  presentibus  appendatis,  vel  coram  notario  et  testibus 
institutionem  ipsam  faciatis  :  Iii  quorum  omnium  et  singidorum  fidem  et 
testimonium  premissorum  has  presentes  litteras  collationis,  prouisionis  et 
institutionis  exinde  fieri,  et  per  notarium  publicum  scribam  nostrum  sub- 
scriptum  subscribi  et  piiblicari  inaudauimus,  sigillique  nostri  rotundi  iussimus 
et  fecimus  apf)ensione  communiri :  Datas  et  actas  Ediuburgi  iu  loco  liabita- 
tionis  et  solite  residencie  reuerendi  in  Christo  patris,  Gawini  episcopi  Abir- 
donenis  patrui  nostri,  die  Jouis,  primo  Marcii,  anno  Domini  millesLmo 
quingentesimo  vicesimo  quinto,  indictione  decima  quarta,  pontificatus  sanc- 
tissimi  in  Cliristo  patris  et  domini  uostri  domini  Cleujentis  diuina  prouidencia 
jiape  septimi  anno  tertio ;  presentibus  ibidem  pro  tunc  nobili  et  potenti 
domino  Jolianne  domino  Erskin,  venerabilibusque  viris  magistro  Alexandro 
Erskin  rectore  de  Monyabrotli,  et  Alexaudro  Spittall  vicario  de  , 

testibus  cum  multis  aHis  ad  premissa  vocatis  et  requisitis. 

Et  ego  Tliomas  Foulis  presbyter  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  publicus  sacris 
apostolica  et  imperiali  auctoritatibus  notarius,  ac  dicti  reuereudissimi  patris 
scriba,  quia  prefate  vicarie  presentationi,  presentationis  admissioni,  coUationi, 
prouisioni  et  inuesture,  ceterisque  premissis  omnibus  et  singulis  duin,  sic  vt 
premittitur,  agerentur,  dicerentur  et  fierent,  vnacum  prenominatis  testibus 
presens  interfui ;  eaque  omnia  et  singula  sic  fieri  et  dici  vidi,  sciui  et 
audiui,  ac  in  notani  cepi ;  ideoque  hoc  presens  publicum  instrumentum 
forinam  coUationis  iu  se  continens,  manu  alterius  fideliter  scriptum,  exinde 
confeci,  signoque  et  nomine  meis  solitis  et  consuetis,  vnacum  appensione 
sigiUi  rotundi  dicti  reuerendissimi  patris,  siguaui,  rogatus  et  requisitus  in 
fidem  et  testimonium  omnium  et  siugulorum  premissorum. 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


189 


141.    POSSESSIO  EIUSDEJI. 

1n  Dei  nomine,  amen :  Per  lioc  presens  publicum  instrumentum  cunctis 
pateat  euidenter  quod  anuo  Incarnatiouis  dominice  millesimo  liuingentesimo 
vigesimo  sexto,  raensis  vero  Junii  die  decima,  indictione  decima  quarta,  pontifi- 
catus  sanctissimi  in  Christo  patris  et  domini  nostri  domini  Clementis  diuina 
prouidencia  pape  septimi  anno  tercio,  in  mei  notarii  publici  et  testium 
subscriptorum  presencia  religiosus  vir  dompnus  Willelmus  Paterson,  canoni- 
cus  monasterii  de  Cambnslv\Tinetli,  personaliter  accessit  ad  presenciam  cir- 
cumspecti  viri  domini  Willelmi  Erskin,  curati  retroscripte  ecclesie  parrocliialis 
de  Lenze,  et  humiliter  requisiuit  eundem,  noniine  et  ex  parte  venerabilis  viri 
retroscripti  magistri  Jacobi  Lyn,  ut  eum  induceret  in  possessionem  actualem 
vicarie  perpetue  de  Lenze  retroscripte,  cum  omnibus  suis  juribus  et  perti- 
nenciis  de  quibus  fuit  mentio  in  retroscriptis  litteris  :  Dictus  vero  dominus 
WLlIelmus  Erskin,  vt  filius  obediens,  prescriptum  dominum  Willeluium  I^ater- 
son  canonicum,  nomine  et  ex  parte  retroscriiiti  magistri  Jacobi  Lyn,  in  realem, 
actualem  et  corporalem  possessionera  retroscripte  vicarie  de  Lenze,  secunduni 
tenorem  retroscriptarum  litterarum,  vt  moris  est,  induxit  et  vestiuit,  dando 
eidem  domino  Willelmo  Paterson,  noniine  retroscripti  magistri  Jacobi  Lyn, 
claueni  hostii  ecclesie  de  Leuze,  ac  deliberando  ei  calicem  et  patennm  ac 
librum  raissalera  surami  altaris  eiusdem  ecclesie,  cum  ceteris  necessariis  et 
oportunis.  Super  quibus  omnibus  et  singulis,  idem  dompnus  Willelmus 
Paterson  canonicus,  nomine  quo  supra,  a  me  notario  publico  suliscripto  sibi 
fieri  petiit  vnum  seu  plura  publicum  seu  publiea  instrumentum  vel  instni- 
menta.  Acta  erant  hec  in  choro  ecclesie  de  Lenze,  hora  vndecima  ante 
merediem  vel  eocirca,  ante  celebrationem  summe  misse,  sub  anno,  die,  mense, 
indictione  et  pontificatu  quibus  supra ;  presentibus  ibidem  honorabilibus  viris 
Patricio  Flemyng  baUiuo  de  Kirkintulach,  Thoma  Gilleis,  Andrea  Dollare, 


KIBKINTULAUCH. 


190 


REGISTRUM  MONA STERII 


KIRKINTULAUCH. 


Willelmo  Craufurcl,  Willelnio  Horn,  Jolianne  Drew  et  doniino  Alexandro 
Broun  capellano,  cum  parrochia  inibi  presente,  et  multis  aliis  testibus  ad 
premissa  vocatis  pariter  et  rogatis. 

Et  ego  "Willelmus  Litstar  presbyter  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  publicus  sacra 
auctoritate  apostolica  uotarius,  quia  predicte  institutioni,  inductioni  et  posses- 
sioni,  ceterisque  oninibus  et  singulis  premissis  dum,  sic  vt  premittitur, 
dicerentur,  agerentur  et  fierent,  vnacum  prenominatis  testibus  presens  per- 
sonaliter  interfui ;  eaque  oninia  et  singula  sic  fieri  vidi,  sciui  et  audiui,  ac  iu 
notam  cepi,  ideoiiue  Iioc  presens  publicum  instrixmentum  manu  niea  propria 
fideliter  scriptum  exinde  confeci,  et  liic  me  subscribendo,  in  hanc  publicani 
formam  redegi,  signoque  nomine  et  subscriptione  meis  solitis  et  consuetis 
signaui,  rogatus  et  requisitus  in  fidem  et  testimonium  omnium  et  singulorum 
premissorum. 


142.    COLLATIO  EIUSDEM  VICAEIE  JIAGISTKO  DUNCANO  BUKNET  DE 
KlRKINTULACII. 

In  Dei  nomine  amen  :  Per  hoc  presens  publicum  instrumentuni  cunctis  pateat 
'euidenter  quod  anno  Incarnationis  dominice  millesimo  quingentesimo  vigesimo 
septimo,  mensis  vero  Aprilis  die  septima,  indictione  decima  quinta,  pontificatus 
sanctissimi  in  Christo  patris  et  domini  no.stri  domiui  Clementis  diuina  proui- 
dencia  pape  septimi  anno  quarto,  in  mei  notarii  publici  et  testium  sub- 
scriptorum  preseucia  personaliter  constitutusvenerabilis  vii-,  magister  Duncanus 
Burnet  presbyter,  quandam  collationis  seu  prouisionis  literam  vicarie  ecclesie 
parrochialis  Saucti  Niniani  de  Lenze  nostre  Glasguensis  diocesis  pergameno 
scrijjtam  manu  sua  deferens,  signo  et  subscriptioue  manuali  magistri  Johannis 
Laxider  notarii  publici  in  fine  roboratam,  sigilloque  rotundo  reuerendissiini 
patris  Gawini  miseratione  diuina  dicti  Glasguensis  archiepiscopi  cera  rubea 
albe  impressa,  vt  nioris  est,  sigillatam  in  cauda  pendente,  discreto  viro  domino 


DE  CA  MB  l  'SKEXyETH. 


191 


Willelmo  Erskin  curato  prefate  ecclesie,  pro  executione  debita  huiusniodi  inde 
iienda,  reuerencia  qua  decuit  presentauit  et  deliberauit ;  quamquideni  literani 
ideiu  curatus  ad  mauus  recepit  niichique  notario  publico  subseripto  tvadidit 
perlegendam,  tenorem  qui  sequitur  continentem  :  Gawinus  miseratione  diuina 
archiepiscopus  Glasguensis,  dilecto  nobis  in  Cliristo  Duncano  Burnate  iiresby- 
tero  Abii-doueusis  diocesis,  in  artibus  magistro,  salutem  cum  beuedictione 
diuina:  literarum  scientia,  vite  et  morum  lionestas,  ah'aque  hiudabiha  probitatis 
et  virtutum  merita,  quibus  apud  nos  fidedigno  commendaris  testimouio,  nos 
iuducuut  vt  tibi  ad  gratiam  reddamur  hberales  ;  cum  itaque  perpetua  vicaria 
parrochiahs  ecclesie  Sancti  Niniani  de  Lenze  Glasguensis  diocesis  quam 
nuper  venerabilis  vir  magister  Jacobus  Lyn,  canonicus  ecclesie  Dunkeldensis, 
sibi  canonice  coUatam  obtinebat,  per  puram  et  sinqjlicem  ipsius  de  eadem 
vicaria  in  mauibus  nostris,  permutationis  causa  fiende  cum  vicaria  j)er- 
petua  parrochialis  ecclesie  de  Vchterhous  Duukeldensis  diocesis  c|uam 
tunc  tibi  canouice  coUatam  obtinebas,  et  uon  alias  aliter  nec  aUo  niudo 
per  discretum  et  religiosum  viruni  douiinum  Joliannem  Clerk,  canonicum 
professum  mouasterii  beate  Marie  de  Cambuskyinietli  Sauctiandree  diocesis, 
procuratorem  suum  legitimum  ad  hoc  ab  eo  specialiter  constitutum,  et  de  cuius 
procurationis  mandato  per  instrumentum  publicum  magistri  Johaunis  Thome 
clerici  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  apostolica  auctoritate  notarii  publici,  sub  data  in 
ecclesia  cathedrali  Dunkeldeusi  diei  vigesimi  quiuti  mensis  instantis  Marcii 
anni,  indictionis  et  pontificatus  infrascriptorum,  liquido  constabat  documento, 
spoute  factam  et  per  nos  ordinaria  auctoritate  admissam  resignationem  vacare 
noscitur  et  vacet  ad  presens.  Nos  igitur,  premissorum  meritorum  tuorum 
intuitu,  graciam  specialem  facere  volentes,  vicariam  perpetuam  dicte  ecclesie 
parrochiahs  Saucti  Niniani  de  Lenze  sic  ut  premittitur  vacantem,  ad  presenta- 
tionem  veuerabilium  et  religiosorum  virorum  dominorum  abbatis  et  comientus 
dicti  monasterii  beate  Marie  de  Cambuskynneth,  quotiens  eam  vacare  conti- 


KIUKlXTrLAUCU. 


192 


EEGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


KIRKINTULAUCH 


gerit  nostramque  coUationein  ordinanam  spectantem,  tibi  magistro  Duncauo 
presbytero  sufficienti  et  ydoueo,preseutique  et  acceptauti,  ac  ad  dictam vicariam, 
vt  premittitur,  vacantem  per  venerabilem  in  Christo  patrem  domiuum  Alex- 
andrum,  permissione  diuina  dicti  monasterii  de  Cambuskynuetli  modernuni 
abbatem  et  eiusdem  loci  couuentuin,  nobis  literatorie  eorum  sub  sigillo  com- 
muni  cera  rubea  albe  impressa,  sub  data  apud  jamdictum  monasterium  diei 
^■igesinie  none  eiusdem  mensis  Marcii  instautis  anni  etc.  infrascripti,  presentato, 
cum  pleuitudine  juris  canouici  ac  omuibus  juribus  et  pertineuciis  suis,  dicta 
ordinaria  auctoritate  tenore  preseucium  conferimus  et  assignamus,  ac  de  eadem 
tibi  prouidemus,  teque  coram  nobis  propter  hoc  persoualiter  coustitutum  in 
corporalem  possessionem  vicarie  juriumque  et  pertiuenciarum  predictorum  per 
annuli  nostri  digito  tuo  impositionem  iuuestinius  de  eadem,  curam,  regimen 
et  administrationem  dicte  vicarie  tibi  plenarie  committentes.  Quocirca 
decauo  Christiauitatis  nostre  de  Leuenax,  omnibusque  aliis  et  singulis  personis 
eoclesiasticis,  presbyteris,curatis  et  non  curatis,  notariis  et  tabellionibus  publicis 
quibuscunque  per  ciuitatem  et  diocesim  nostras  Glasguenses  constitutis,  tenore 
preseucium  courmittimus  et  mandamus  quatenus  ipsi  vel  alter  eorumqm  super 
hoc  fueriut  vel  fuerit  requisiti  vel  requisitus  ad  dictam  [ecclesiam]  parrochialem 
Sancti  Niniaui  de  Lenze  accedant  vel  accedat,  teque  magistrum  Duucanum 
vicarium,  vel  procuratorem  tuum  legitimum  tuo  nomine,  in  corporalem,  realem 
et  actualem  possessionem  vicarie  juriumque  et  pertiuentiarum  predictorum 
auctoritate  nostra  iuducaut,  instituant  et  defeudant  inductum,  seu  inducat, 
instituat  et  defeudat  inductum,  amoto  exiude  quolibet  illicito  detentore, 
tibique  vel  procuratoribus  tuis  legitimis  pluribus  aut  vui  de  vuiuersis  et 
siugulis  fructibus,  redditibus,  prouentibus,  juribus,  decimis,  obueuciouibus  et 
emolumentis  dicte  vicarie  plenarie  et  integre  respoudeant  seu  respoudeat  et 
faciant  seu  faciat  ab  aliis  plenarie  et  integre  responderi,  coutradictores  vero  et 
rebelles,  si  qui  forsan  fueriut,  per  censuram  ecclesiasticam  auctoritate  nostra 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


103 


arctius  compescendo.  In  quorum  omiiium  et  singulomm  fiJein  et  testi- 
mouium  premissoram  presentes  literas  siue  lioc  presens  publicum  instrumen- 
tum  huiusmodi  nostram  collationem  in  se  contineus  exinde  fieri  et  per 
notarium  publicum  subscriptum  nostrum  secretarium  et  tabellionem  subscribi 
et  publicari  mandauimus,  sigillique  nostri  rotundi  jussimus  et  fecimus  ajjpen- 
sioue  communiri.  Data  et  acta  in.  capella  regia  prope  monasteriiun  Sancte 
Crucis  dicte  Sanctiandree  diocesis  auno  Incarnatioms  dominice  millesimo 
quingentesimo  vigesimo  septimo,  die  vero  vltima  mensis  ]\Iarcii,  indictioue 
quinta  decima,  pontificatus  sanctissimi  in  Cliristo  j)atris  et  domini  nostri  domini 
Clementis  diuiua  providencia  pape  septimi  anuo  quarto ;  presentibus  ibidem 
venerabili  patre  domino  Alexandro  abbate  de  Cambuskynnetb,  venerabiLibus 
et  discretis  vii-is  magistris  et  dominis  Eoberto  Creiclitoun  preposito  ecclesie 
collegiate  beati  Egidii  de  Edinburgb,  Jobanne  Sanchar,  Jolianne  Colquhoun, 
cauonicis  ecclesie  Glasg-uensis,  Abraham  Creichtoun  rectore  de  UpsadillLng- 
toun,  Johanne  Doualdson  vicario  de  Kingorn,  et  Alexandro  Kyd  canonico 
capelle  regie  Striuiliugensis,  cum  multis  et  diuersis  aliis  testibus  ad  premissa 
vocatis  specialiter  et  rogatis.  Et  ego  Johannes  Lauder  arcium  magister, 
clericus  Sanctiandree  ciuitatis,  publicus  sacris  apostolica  et  imperiali  auctori- 
tatibus  notarius,  ac  in  officio  scriptorum  archiuii  Eomane  curie  matriculatus 
et  descriptus,  quia  predicte  vicarie  resiguationi,  resignationis  huiusmodi 
admissioni  ac  collationi,  prouisioni  et  vestm~e  predictis  ceterisque  premissis 
omnibus  et  singiUis  presens  et  personaliter  iuterfui,  ac  in  notam  cepi, 
ideoque  hoc  presens  pubUcum  instrumeutum  huiusmodi  resignationem, 
coUationem  et  prouisionem  in  se  continens,  manu  mea  propria  scriptum, 
exinde  confeci,  subscripsi  et  publicaui,  signoque  et  uomine  meis  solitis  et 
consuetis,  vuacum  appensione  sigiUi  rotundi  dicti  reuerendissimi  patris 
signaui,  rogatus  et  requisitus  in  fidem  et  testimonium  veritatis  omnium  et 
singulorum  premissorum  :   Quaquidem  collationis  seu  prouisionis   litera   sic 

25 


KIRKINTULAUCH 


194 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


KIRKINTULAUCH. 


presentata,  recepta  et  perlecta,  idem  dictus  dominus  "Willelmus  Erskin 
curatus,  vt  obediencie  filius  volens  mandato  huiusmodi  literarum  prescrip- 
tarum  obtemperare  et  obedire,  ad  summum  altare  dicte  ecclesie  parrochialis 
de  Lenze  accessit,  et  ibidem  por  deliberationem  calicis  cum  patena,  libri 
raissalis,  ornamentorum  altaris  et  clauis  hostii  in  manibus  sepefati  magistri 
Duucani,  ipsumque  magistruni  Duncanum  Burnate  in  realem,  actualem  et 
corporalem  possessionem  vicarie  dicte  ecclesie  parrochialis  Sancti  Niniani  de 
Lenze  juriumque  et  pertinenciarum  eiusdem,  secundum  vim,  formam  et 
continenciam  suprascriptaruni  literarum  sibi  in  hac  parte  directarum,  iu- 
duxit,  instituit  et  inuestiuit :  de  et  super  quibus  omnibus  et  singulis  sepedictus 
magister  Duncanus  a  me  notario  publico  subscripto  sibi  fieri  peciit  vnum 
aut  phira  publicum  seu  publica  instrumentum  vel  instrumenta.  Acta 
erant  hec  infra  dictam  ecclesiam  parrochialem  de  Lenze,  apud  summum 
altare  eiusdem,  hora  decima  ante  meridiem  vel  eocirca,  tempore  summe 
misse,  parrochianis  congregatis,  sub  anno,  die,  mense,  indictione  et  pontificatu 
quibus  supra;  presentibus  ibidem  proiiidis  et  honestis  viris,  Patricio 
Flemyug,  Thoma  Oelis,  Eoberto  DoLir,  Archibaklo  Boid,  Thoma  Scot,  Wil- 
lelmo  Garschore  de  eodem,  Malcohno  Cunyngburgh,  Jacobo  Auchiulek,  Wil- 
lelmo  Craufurd  parrochianis  dicte  ecclesie,  Waltero  Drew  et  Eoberto  NichoU, 
testibus,  cum  multis  aliis  ad  premissa  vocatis  pariter  et  requisitis  et  rogatis. 

Et  ego  Willehnus  Litstar  presbyter  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  publicus  sacra 
auctoritate  apo.stolica  notarius,  quia  suprascrii>tarum  literarum  presentationi, 
receptioni  et  perlecture,  prenominate  vicarie  possessionis  seu  institutionis 
dationi,  ceterisque  omnibus  aliis  et  singulis  premissis  dum,  sic  ut  premittitur, 
dicerentur,  agerentur  et  fierent,  vnacum  prenominatis  testibus  presens 
interfui,  eaque  omnia  et  singula  sic  fieri  [et]  dici  vidi,  sciui  et  audiui  ac  in 
notam  cepi,  ideoque  hoc  presens  pubhcum  instrumentum,  manu  propria  mea 
fideliter  scriptum,  exinde  confeci,  et  hic  me  subscribendo,  in  hanc  publicam 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


195 


formam  redeoi,  signoque  nomiue  et  subscriptione  meis  solitis  et  consuetis 
siguaui,  rogatus  et  requisitus  in  iidem  et  testimonium  omuium  et  singulorum 
premissorum. 

1  43.    COLLATIO  VICARIE  PEEPETUE  PAKEOCHIALIS  ECCLESIE  SaNCTI  NIXIANI 

DE  Lenze  pko  magisteo  Alexandro  Annande. 
Gawinus  miseratione  diuina  arcliiepiscopus  Glasguensis,  dilecto  nobis  in 
Cbristo  magistro  Alexandro  Annande  vicario  perpetuo  parrocliialis  ecclesie 
Sancti  Niuiaui  de  Leuze  nostre  diocesis,  salutem  cum  Lenedictioue  diuina : 
Literarum  scieucia  viteque  ac  morum  lionestas,  aliaque  laudabilia  probitatis 
et  virtutuui  merita  quibus  apud  nos  fidedigno  commeudaris  testimonio,  nos 
inducunt  vt  tibi  ad  gratiam  reddamur  liberales  :  Cum  itaque  vicaria  perpetua 
dicte  parrocbialis  ecclesie  Saucti  Niuiani  de  Lenze  uostre  diocesis  quam 
uuper  veuerabilis  vir  magister  Duucauus  Buruet  illius  vltimus  possessor 
obtinebat,  per  resiguationem  ipsius  de  eadem,  permutatiouis  causa  fieude  cuni 
vicaria  pensiouaria  ecclesie  parrochialis  de  Teru  Duuljeldeusis  diocesis,  quani 
tu  Alexander  uuper  obtinebas,  in  manibus  nostris  personaliter  et  spoiite 
factam  et  per  uos  admissam,  et  uon  alias  vacare  uoscatur  et  vacet  ad  presens  ; 
nos  igitur  premissorum  meritorum  tuorum  intuitu  graciam  specialem  facere 
voleutes,  vieariam  predictam  sic  vt  premittitur  vacautem  ad  presentationeni 
venerabilium  et  religiosorum  virorum  domiuorum  abbatis  et  couueutus  monas- 
terii  beate  Marie  de  Cambuskyuuetli  ordinis  Sancti  Augustiui  Sauctiaudree  dio- 
cesis,  uostramque  collationem  ordinariam  spectantem,  tibi  magistro  Alexaudr(  i 
Anuaude  clerico,  tanquam  sufScienti  et  ydoneo,  preseutique  et  acceptauti,  et  ad 
prefatam  vicariam  per  venerabilem  in  Cbristo  patrem  domiuum  AJexandrum 
permissione  diuina  abbatem  et  religiosos  viros  conueutum  dicti  monasterii  de 
Cambuskyuneth,  eiusdem  patrouos,  nobis  literatorie  eorum  sub  sigillo  communi 
cera  rubea  albe  impressa  preseutato,  cum  plenitudiue  juris  cauonici  ac  omni- 


KIRKINTULAUCH. 


196 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


KIRKINTULAUCH. 


bus  suis  juribus  et  pertineuciis  tenore  presentium  couferimus  et  assignamus,  ac 

de  eadem  tibi  prouidemus,  teque  coram  nobis  propter  lioc  personaliter  consti- 

tutum  in  corporalem  possessionem,  seu  quasi,  vicarie  perpetue  juriumque  et 

pertinenciarum  predictorum  per  annuli  nostri  digito  tuo  impositionem  inuesti- 

mus  de  eadem,  curam,  regimen  et  administrationem  dicte  vicarie  plenarie  com- 

mittendo  :  Quocirca  decano  Cliristianitatis  nostre  de  Leuenax  omnibusque  aliis 

et  singulis  personis  ecclesiasticis,  presbyteris,  curatis  et  non  curatis,  notariisque 

et  tabellionibus  publicis  quibuscunque  per  ciuitatem  et  diocesim  nostras  Glas- 

guenses  constitutis,  tenore  presencium  committimus  et  mandamus  quatenus 

ipsi  vel  eorum  alter  qui  super  hoc  fuerint  requisiti  seu  fuerit  requisitus  ad 

prefatam  parrochialem  ecclesiam  >Sancti  Niniani  de  Lenze  accedant  vel  acce- 

dat,  teque  magistmm  Alexandrum  vicarium  vel  procuratorem  tuum  legitinnmi 

tuo  nomine  in  corporalem,  realem  et  actualem  possessionem  vicarie  juriumque 

et  pertinenciarum  p^redictorum  auctoritate  et  vice  nostris  inducant,  instituant, 

et  defendant  inductum,  seu  inducat,  instituat  et  defendat  inductum,  amoto 

exinde  quolibet  illicito  detentore,  tibique  vel  procuratoriljus  tuis  legitimis 

pluribus  aut  vni  de  vniuersis  et  singulis  fructibus,  redditibus,  prouentibus, 

juribus,  decimis,  obuencionibus  et  emolumentis  dicte  vicarie  plenarie  et  iu- 

tegre  respondeant  seu  respondeat,  et  faeiant  seu  faciat  ab  aliis  quantum  in 

eiis  fuerit  plenarie  et  integi'e  responderi,  contradictores  vero  et  rebelles,  si  qui 

forsan  fuerint,  per  censuram  ecclesiasticam  auctoritate  nostra  arctius  compes- 

cendo  :  In  quorum  omnium  et  singulorum  fidem  et  testimonium  premissorum 

presentes  literas  siue  lioc  presens  publicum  instrmnentum  liuiusmodi  nostram 

collationem  in  se  continens  exinde  fieri  et  per  notarium  publieum  subscrij)- 

tum  nostrum  secretarium  nostrum  subscribi  et  publicari  mandauimus,  sigillique 

nostri  rotundi  jussimus  et  fecimus  appensione  communui.     Datum  et  actum 

in  palatio  nostro    Glasguensi,  sub  anno    incarnationis  Dominice  millesimo 

quingentesimo  trigesimo,  die  vero  vigesimo  secundo  mensis  Septembris,  indic- 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


197 


tione  tertia,  pontificatus  sanctissimi  in  Christo  patris  et  domini  nostri  Jomini 
Clementis  dinina  prouidencia  pape  septimi  anno  septimo  ;  presentibus  ibidem 
discretis  viris  domino  Georgeo  Drummond  capellano,  Jacobo  AVallace,  Thoma 
Dunbar  et  Johanne  Chalmer  laicis,  testibus  ad  premissa  vocatis  pariterque 
rogatis. 

Et  ego  Johannes  Lauder  arcium  magister,  clericus  Sanctiandree  ciuitatis, 
publicus  sacris  apostolica  et  imperiali  auctoritatibus  notarius,  ac  in  officio 
scriptorum  archiuii  Eomane  curie  matriculatus  et  descriptus,  qnia  iiredicte 
vicarie  ex  causa  permutationis  resignationi  ac  resignationis  huiusmodi  admis- 
sioni  necnon  et  collationi,  prouisioni  et  iuuesture  predictis,  cetevisque  pre- 
missis  omnibus  et  singulis,  vnacum  prenonnnatis  testibus,  presens  persoualiter 
interfui  et  in  notam  cepi,  ideoque  hoc  presens  publicum  instrumentum  huius- 
niodi  collationem  in  se  continens,  manu  aliena  fideliter  scriptum,  exinde  con- 
feci,  subscripsi  et  publicaui,  signoque  et  nomine  meis  solitis  et  consuetis  vna- 
cum  appensione  sigilli  rotundi  dicti  reuerendissimi  patris  signaui,  rogatus  et 
requisitus  in  fidem  et  testimonium  veritatis  omnium  et  singulorum  pre- 
missorum.  Joiiannes  Laudei:,  notarius  publicus. 


KmKINTDLAUOH. 


144.    POSSESSIO  EIUSDEM  VIC.A.EIE. 

In  Dei  nomine  amen  :  Per  hoc  presens  publicum  iustrumentum  cuuctis  pateat 
euidenter  quod  anno  Incarnationis  dominice  millesimo  quingentesinio  trigesimo, 
mensis  vero  Septembris  die  vicesimo  quinto,  indictione  tercia,  pontificatus  sanc- 
tissimi  in  Christo  patris  et  domini  nostri  domini  Clementis  diuina  prouidencia 
pape  septimi  anno  septimo,  ac  regni  e.xcellentissimi  principis  supremi  domini 
nostri  Jacobi  quinti  auno  decimo  octauo,  in  mei  notarii  publici  et  testium  sub- 
scriptorum  presencia  personaliter  constitutus  venerabilis  vir  magister  Alexauder 
Annande  clericus,  retroscriptas  litteras  collationis  seu  prouisionis  vicarie  ecclesie 
parrochialis  de  Lenze  retroscripte  manu  sua  deferens,  signo  et  subscriptione 


198 


REGISTEUM  MONASTEIUI 


KIRKIXTULAUCn. 


mauibus  magistri  Joliauuis  Laudei-  uotarii  publici  iu  fiue  roboratas,  cum 
sigillo  rotuudo  reuereudissimi  patris  Gawiui  arcliiepiscopi  Glasgueusis  cera 
rubea  albe  impressa  vt  moris  est  sigillatas  iu  cauda  peudenti,  reuerencia  qua 
decuit  preseutauit  et  deliberauit :  Quas  C|uidem  literas  discretus  vir  dominus 
Andreas  Simsou  curatus  de  Leuze  ad  mauus  recepit,  micliique  notario  publico 
subsciipto  tradidit  perlegeudas,  teuorem  qui  retroscribitur  contiueutes  :  qua 
quidem  litera  sic  presentata,  perlecta  et  publicata,  idem  dictus  dominus 
Andreas  Symson  curatus,  vtobediencie  filius  retroscriptarum  literarum  mandato 
volens  obedire  sibi  iu  hac  parte  directaium,  ad  summum  altare  retroscripte 
ecclesie  accessit,  et  ibidem  per  calicis  cum  patena,  libri  missalis,  orna- 
mentoruni  altaris  et  hostii  clauis  deliberationem  in  manibus  dicti  ma- 
gistri  Alexandri,  institutionem  totius  et  iutegre  vicarie  perpetue  retroscripte 
ecclesie  Saucti  Niniaui  de  Leuze,  cum  vuiuersis  suis  fructibus,  redditibus, 
oblationibus,  obueutiouibus,  proueutilnis,  juribus,  decimis  et  emolumeutis  ac 
pertinenciis  quibuscunque,  secundum  tenorem,  effectum  et  coutinenciam 
literarum  retroscriptarum  contulit  et  tradidit,  necnon  ipsum  dictum  magis- 
trmu  Alexaudrum  in  realem,  actualem  et  corporalem  possessiouem  huiusmodi 
vicarie  cum  pertineuciis  induxit  et  iuuestiuit.  De  et  super  quibus  omnibus  et 
singulis  memoratus  magister  Alexauder  a  me  notario  publico  subscripto  sibi 
fieri  peciit  vnum  seu  plura  publicum  aut  publica  iustrumentum  vel  instru- 
menta.  Acta  erant  Lec  infra  parrochialem  ecclesiam  retroscriptam  de  Lenze, 
apud  summum  altare  eiusdem,  hora  decima  ante  merediem  vel  eocu-ca, 
tempore  summe  misse,  parrochiauis  cougregatis,  sub  anno,  die,  mense, 
indictioue  et  pontificatu  quibus  supra ;  presentibus  ibidem  prouidis  et  honestis 
viris  Andrea  Flemyug,  Thoma  Scot,  Andrea  Scott,  Thoma  Gelis,  Eoberto 
Gilleis  et  Andrea  Philpson,  testibus  cum  multis  aliis  ad  premissa  vocatis 
pariter  et  rogatis. 

Et  ego  Gawinus  Clerk  presbyter  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  sacris  apostoHca, 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


199 


imperiali  et  regali  auctoritatibus  publicus  notarius,  quia  retroscripte 
coUatiouis  litere  presentationi,  receptioui,  perlecture,  huiusmodi  vicarie  de 
Lenze  institutionis  et  jjossessiouis  datioui,  ceterisque  premissis  et  omnibus  ac 
singulis  dum,  sic  vt  premittitur,  agerentur,  dicerentnr  et  fierent,  vnacum 
prenominatis  testibus  presens  personaliter  interfui,  eaque  omnia  et  singula 
sic  fieri  et  dici  vidi,  sciui,  et  audiui,  ac  in  notam  cepi,  ideoque  hoc  presens 
publicura  instrumentum,  manii  mea  propria  fideliter  ac  celeriter  scriptum, 
exinde  confeci  et  in  hanc  publicam  formam  redegi,  signoque  et  nomine  meis 
sohtis  et  consuetis  signaui,  in  fidem,  robur  et  testimonium  veritatis  omnium 
et  singulorum  premissorum,  rogatus  et  rec[uisitus. 

Gawixcs  Clerk,  notarius  publicus 


KIRKINTDLAUCH. 


145.    PONATIO  ECCLESIE  DE  KlLMAIlOXOCH. 

RoBEETrs  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotorum,  omnibus  probis  hominibus  totius  terre  sue, 
clericis  et  laicis,  salutem  :  Sciatis  nos  pro  salute  anime  nostre,  ac  pro  sabite 
animarum  omniuni  antecessorum  et  successorum  nostrorum  regum  Scotie, 
dedisse,  concessi.sse  et  hac  carta  nostra  presenti  comfirmasse  Deo  et  beate 
^larie  virgini  et  religiosis  xiris  abbati  et  canonicis  monasterii  de  Cainbus- 
kynneth  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  et  imperpetuum  seruituris,  aduocationem 
siue  jus  patronatus  ecclesie  de  Kilmoronok  :  Tenendam  et  habendam  eisdem 
rebgiosis  et  eorum  successoribus  in  projjrios  vsus  suos  in  liljeram,  puram  et 
perpetuani  elemosinam,  adeo  libere  et  quiete,  plene,  pure,  integre  et  honorifice 
cum  omuimodis  libertatibus,  commoditatibus,  asiamentis  et  iu.stis  pertineuciis 
suis  sicut  aduocatio  siue  jus  patronatus  nlicuius  ecclesie  per  totum  regnum 
nostrum  abcui  monasterio  siue  pio  loco  per  uos  aut  per  predecessores  iiostros 
reges  Scotie  coUata  liberius,  quietius,  plenius,  purius,  integrius  aut  lioiiorifi- 
centius  dari  poterit  aut  concedi.  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  presenti  carte 
nostre  sigilhim  nostrum  precipimus  apponi ;  testibus  venerabilibus  in  Christo 


KILM.^ROXUK. 


200 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


KiLMARoxoK.  patiibiis    Willelmo,    Wilk-hno    et    Gilberto    Sanctiaudi-ee,   Dunkeldeusis    et 

SodoreusLs  ecclesiaruui  Dei  gracia  episcopis,  Barnardo  abbate  de  Abirbrothok 
cancellario  nostro,  Duncauo  comite  de  Fyffe,  'Waltero  senescallo  Scotie, 
Jacobo  domiuo  de  Dowglas  et  iUexaudro  Fraser  camerario  nostro  Scotie, 
militibus,  apud  Sconani,  sexto  decinio  die  Januarii,  anno  regui  nostri  xx? 

146.     CONFIEMATIO  ECCLESIE  PREDICTE. 

Uniueksis  Christi  fidelibus  ad  i|Uorum  noticiam  preseus  scriptum  peruenerit, 
Johannes  miseratioue  diuiua  episcopus  Glasguensis,  salutem  in  Domino  sem- 
piteruam  :  Xouerit  vniuersitas  vestra  quod  cum  magnificus  princeps,  dominus 
Iiobertus  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotorum  illustris,  aduocationem  siue  jus  patronatus 
ecclesie  de  Kilmoronok  nostre  diocesis  religiosis  viiis  abbati  et  conueutui 
monasterii  de  Cambusk^-nnetli  et  eorum  monasterio,  pie  ac  deuote,  pro  salute 
anime  sue  et  pro  salute  auimarum  antecessorum  et  successorum  suorum 
regum  Scotorum,  perpetuo  contulisset,  et  nos  tam  viua  voce  quam  per  literas 
suas  patentes  cum  iustancia  sepius  requisisset  quod  dictam  ecclesiam  dictis 
religiosis  in  suos  proprios  vsus  graciose  conferre  dignaremur,  uos  tam 
deuotionem  dicti  domini  regis  quam  hospitalitates,  quas  dicti  religiosi  indesi- 
neuter  perficiuut,  corditer  attendentes,  vtLlitate  et  honore  ecclesie  uostre 
pensatis,  ipsam  ecclesiam  de  Kilmoronok  cum  terris,  decimis,  obuencionibus 
et  omnibus  aliis  iustis  pertineuciis  suis,  predictis  religiosis  et  eorum  succes- 
soribus  ac  monasterio  suo  de  Cambuskynneth  predicto,  diuine  pietatis  intuitu 
pro  nobis  et  successoribus  uostris  iu  suos  vsus  proprios  damus,  concedimus  et 
episcopali  auctoritate  presenti  scripto  imperj)etuum  confirmamus,  et  ipsos 
religiosos  iu  dictam  ecclesiam  per  aunulum  nostrum  inuestimus,  saluo  im-e 
veri  rectoris  eiusdem  ecclesie  douec  cedat  vel  decedat,  seu  alio  modo  de  jure 
fuerit  amouendus  ;  reseruata  tamen  uobis  ordiuatione  vicarie  eiusdem  ecclesie 
cum  ipsaiu  vacare  coutigerit ;  et  ille  vicarius  cum  institutus  fuerit  respoudebit 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


201 


de  omnimodis  oneribus  ordinariis  et  de  extraordinariis  pro  rata  portionis  sue. 
la.  cuius  rei  testimouium  presenti  scripto  sigiUum  nostrum  est  appensum. 
Datum  et  actum  apud  monasterium  de  Cambuskynnetli  predictum  vicesimo 
secundo  die  mensis  Nouembris,  anno  gracie  millesimo  tricentesimo  vicesimo 
quinto. 


KILMAKONOK. 


147-  CoNFiKMATio  Capituli  Glasguensis  ecclesie  peedicte. 
Uniueksis  Christi  fidelibus  presentes  literas  inspecturis,  decanus  et  capitulum 
Glasguense,  salutem  Ln  salutis  auctore  :  Noueritis  nos  inspexisse  litteras 
domini  Eoberti  Dei  gracia  regis  Scotorimi  illustris  et  venerabiiis  patris 
domiui  Jobannis  eadem  gracia  episcopi  Glasguensis,  super  concessione, 
donatione  et  confirmatione  ecclesie  de  KLhnoronok  Glasguensis  diocesis  factis 
abbati  et  conuentui  de  Cambuskynneth,  uon  cancellatas,  non  viciatas  nec 
abohtas,  sub  infrascripto  tenore  :  Eobertus  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotorum,  omnibus 
probis  homiuibxis  totius  terre  sue,  clericis  et  laicis,  salutem :  Sciatis  nos  pro 
salute  aiiinie  nostre,  ac  pro  sahite  animarum  oninium  antecessorum  et  succes- 
sorum  nostrorum  regum  Scotorum,  dedisse,  concessisse  et  hac  presenti  carta 
nostra  confirmasse  Deo  et  beate  Marie  virgini  et  religiosis  viris  abbati  et 
couueutui  de  Cambuskynneth  ibidem  Deo  semientibus,  et  imperpetuum  serui- 
turis,  aduocationem  siue  jus  patronatus  ecclesie  de  Kilmoronok  :  Tenendam 
et  habendam  eisdem  religiosis  et  eorum  successoribus  in  proprios  vsus  suos, 
in  hberam,  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam,  adeo  libere  et  quiete,  plenarie, 
pure,  iutegre  et  honorifice,  cum  omnimodis  Hbertatibus,  commoditatibus, 
asiamentis  et  iiistis  pertinencus  suis,  sicut  aduocatio  siue  jus  patronatus 
ahcuius  ecclesie  per  totum  regnum  nostrum  ahcui  monasterio  siue  pio  loco 
per  nos  aut  per  predecessores  nostros  reges  Scotie  coHata  liberius,  quietius, 
plenius,  purius,  integrius  aut  honorificentius  dari  poterit  vel  concedi.  In  cuius 
rei  testimonium  presenti  carte  nostre  sigillum  nostrum  precipimus  apponi ; 

26 


202 


EEGISTEmi  MONASTEEII 


KiLMARONOK.  testibus  veneraViilibiis  in  Cliristo  patribus,  Willelmo,  "\V[illelmo]  et  Gilberto 

Sanctiandree,  Dunkeldensis  et  Sodorensis  ecclesiaram  Dei  gracia  episcopis, 
Barnardo  abbate  de  Abirbrotliok  cancellario  nostro,  Duncano  comite  de 
Fyff,  Waltero  senescallo  Scotie,  Jacobo  domino  de  Douglas  et  Alexandro 
Fraser  camerario  nostro  Scotie,  militibus,  apud  Sconam,  sexto  decimo  die 
Januarii,  anno  regni  nostri  vicesimo.  Vniuersis  Christi  fidelibus  ad  quorum 
noticiam  presens  scriptum  peruenerit,  Johannes  miseratione  diuina  epi- 
scopiis  Glasguensis,  salutem  in  Domino  sempiternam  :  Nouerit  vniuersitas 
vestra  quod  cum  magnificus  princeps  dominus  Eobertus  Dei  gracia  rex 
Scotorum  illustris  aduocationem  siue  jus  patronatus  ecclesie  de  Kilmoro- 
nok  nostre  diocesis,  religiosis  viris  abbati  et  conuentui  monasterii  de  Cam- 
buskynneth  et  eorum  monasterio  pie  ac  deuote,  pro  salute  anime  sue, 
et  pro  salute  animarum  antecessorum  ac  successoram  suorum  regum  Scotorum, 
perpetuo  contulisset,  et  nos  tam  ^dua  voce  quam  per  literas  suas  patentes 
cum  instancia  sepius  requisisset  quod  dictam  ecclesiam  dictis  religiosis  in  suos 
proprios  vsus  graciose  conferre  dignaremur,  nos  tam  deuotionem  dicti  domini 
regis  quam  hospitalitates,  quas  dicti  religiosi  indesinenter  perficiunt,  corditer 
attendentes,  vtilitate  et  honore  ecclesie  nostre  pensatis,  ipsam  ecclesiam  de 
Kilraoronok  cum  terris,  decimis,  obuencionibus  et  omnibus  aliis  iustis  per- 
tinenciis  suis,  predictis  religiosis  et  eorum  successoribus  ac  monasterio  suo  de 
Cambuskynneth  predicto,  diuine  pietatis  intuitu  pro  nobis  et  successoribus 
nostris,  in  suos  proprios  vsus  damus,  concedimus  et  episcopali  auctoritate 
presenti  scripto  imperpetuum  confirraamus,  et  ipsos  religiosos  in  dictam  eccle- 
siam  per  annulum  nostrum  inuestimus ;  saluo  jure  veri  rectoris  eiusdem  ecclesie, 
donec  cedat  vel  decedat  seu  alio  modo  de  jure  fuerit  amouendus  ;  reseruata 
tamen  nobis  ordinatione  vicarie  eiusdem  ecclesie  cura  ipsamvacare  contigerit; 
et  ille  vicarius  cum  institutus  fuerit  respondebit  nobis  et  archidiacono  nostro 
qui  pro  tempore  fuerit  de  omnimodis  oneribus  ordinariis,  et  prefati  abbas  et 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


203 


conuentus  vnacum  predicto  vicario  de  extraordinariis  pro  rata  suarum  portio- 
num  respondebunt.  In  cviius  rei  testimonium  presenti  scripto  sigiUum  nostrmn 
est  appeusum:  Datum  et  actum  apud  monasterium  de  Cambuskynnetli  predic- 
tum  vicesimo  secundo  die  mensis  Februarii,  anno  gracie  millesimo  tricentesimo 
vicesimo  qainto  :  Quas  quidem  concessiones  et  donationes,  sic  vt  scriptum  est, 
ratas  et  firmas  habentes  ipsas  tenore  presencium  et  communi  consiLio  capituli 
nostri  et  assensu  confirmamus  et  commuuis  sigilli  nostri  capituli  appositione 
roboramus:  Datum  apud  Glasgew  dieVeneris  proximo  post  festum  translationis 
Saucti  Thome  Martiris,  anno  gracie  millesimo  tricentesimo  vicesimo  septimo. 

148.  Institutio  ecclesie  peedicte. 
JoHAXXES  Dei  gracia  episcopus  Glasguensis,  decano  Christianitatis  de  Leuenax 
salutem  cum  benedictione  diuina  :  Cum  excelleutissimus  princeps  et  dominus 
noster  dominus  Eobertus  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotorum  illustris  aduocationem  siue 
jus  patronatus  ecclesie  de  Kilmoronok  nostre  diocesis  religiosis  viris  abbati 
et  conuentui  monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth  et  eorum  monasterio  pie  con- 
tulisset  ac  deuote,  cuius  confirmacionem  predicti  religiosi  a  nobis  et  capitulo 
nostro  jamdudum  obtinuerimt ;  uos  igitur,  dictorum  religiosorum  angustiis  et 
eorum  monasterii  paterno  fauore  notabili  compacientes  indigencie,  ipsam 
ecclesiam  de  Kilmoronok  cum  terris,  decimis,  obuencionibus  et  omnibus  aliis 
iustis  pertinenciis  suis  prefatis  religiosis  et  eorum  successoribus  ac  monasterio 
suo  predicto,  diuine  pietatis  intuitu,  presencium  tenore  conferimus  per  resig- 
nationem  domini  Johannis  de  Lindesay  vltimi  rectoris  eiusdem  de  jure  et  de 
facto  vacautem,  reseruata  tamen  nobis  ordinatione  vicarie  eiusdem  ecclesie  ad 
presentatiouem  dictorimi  religiosorum  cum  ipsam  vacare  contigerit,  vnde  vobis 
in  vu-tute  sancte  obediencie  firmiter  iniungendo  mandamus  quatenus  prefatos 
abbatem  et  conuentum  in  predictam  ecclesiam  cum  omnibus  suis  pertinenciis, 
vt  premissum  est,  instituatis  et  in  corporalem  possessionem  eiusdem  inducatis 


KILMARONOK. 


204 


nEGISTnUM  MONASTEnil 


KiLMAEONOK.  ac  clefenclatis  inductos,  sibic^ue  de  fructibus  et  obuentionibus  eiusdem  integre 

responderi  faciatis,  contradictores  et  rebelles,  si  qui  fueriut,  per  censuram  eccle- 
siasticam  arctius  compescentes;  ad  cj^uod  vobis  plenitudinem  potestatis  commit- 
timus  per  presentes:  In  signum  vero  huius  institutionis  traditeque  possessionis 
presentibus  penes  prefatos  institutos  perpetuo  remansuris  sigillum  vestrum  ap- 
ponatis.  Datum  sub  sigillo  nostro  apud  Glasgw  die  Marcurii  proximo  ante  festum 
Sancti  Barnabe  apostoli,  anno  gracie  millesimo  tricentesirno  vicesimo  octavo. 


149.  Item  de  pkocurationibus  dicte  ecclesie. 
Omnibus  Christi  fidelibus  ad  quos  presentes  litere  peruenerint  ofBcialis  curie 
Glasguensis  salutem  in  Domino  sempiternam  :  Noueritis  c^uod  cum  coram 
nobis  in  consistorio  Glasguensi  causa  esset  diucius  ventilata  inter  abbatem  et 
conuentum  monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth  rectores  ecclesie  parrochialis  de 
Kilmoronok  actores  ex  parte  vna,  et  dominum  MaTiricium  perpetuimi  vicarium 
eiusdem  reum  ex  parte  altera,  circa  solutionem  procurationum  predicte  ecclesie, 
quarum  solutionem  asseruerunt  predicti  abbas  et  conuentus  ad  predictum 
vicarium  pertinere ;  tandem  dicta  causa  per  amicabilem  compositionem 
cepit  finem  coram  nobis  in  iudicio  in  hunc  modum,  videlicet,  quod  dictus 
dominus  Mauricius  vicarius  ecclesie  predicte  a  die  confectionis  presencium, 
sine  contradictione  quacunque,  procurationes  predicte  ecclesie  de  Kilmoronoch, 
cum  per  visitationem  canonicam  debeantur,  soluat  iu  futurum ;  et  dicti  abbas 
et  conuentus  omnes  expensas  factas  in  lite  et  circa  litem  ac  etiam  omnia  alia 
contenta  in  libello  siue  petita  remiserunt  ac  dictum  vicarium  quietum  clamant 
imperpetuum  per  presentes ;  et  hoc  omnibus  quorum  interest  vel  interesse 
poterit  in  futurum  notificamus  per  presentes  :  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  sigillum 
officii  nostri  presentibus  est  appensum.  Datum  et  actum  apud  Glasgw  in  maiori 
ecclesia  eiusdem  in  consistorio  ibidem  celebrato  die  Martis,  videlicet,  vltimo 
die  Januarii,  anno  Domini  millesinio  tricentesimo  quinquagesimo  primo. 


DE  CAMBUSKEXXETH. 


205 


1 50.    KlLMAROXOK  ECCLESIE  CONFIEMATIO  PAPE. 

JoHANNES  episcopus  seruiis  seruorum  Dei,  dilectis  filiis  abbati  et  conuentui 
monasterii  de  Cambuskynnetli  ordinis  Sancti  Augustini  Sanctiandree  diocesis 
salutem  et  apostolicam  benedictionem  :  Cum  a  nobis  petitur  quod  iustum  est 
et  honestum,  tam  vigor  equitatis  quam  ordo  exigit  rationis  vt  id  jier  solici- 
tudinem  nostri  officii  ad  debitum  perducatur  effectum,  sane  petitio  vestra 
nobis  exhibita  continebat  quod  clare  memorie  Eobertus  rex  Scotie  illustris, 
olim  patronus  parrochialis  ecclesie  de  Kilmaronok  Glasguensis  diocesis,  de 
propria  salute  cogitans  et  cupiens  terrena  in  celestia  et  transitoria  in  eterna 
felici  commercio  commutare,  pro  sue  ac  progenitorum  et  successorum  suorum 
aniniarum  salute,  jiis  patronatus,  quod  in  dicta  ecclesia  obtinebat,  vobis  et 
monasterio  vestro  pia  et  prouida  liberalitate  donauit,  prout  in  patentibus  literis 
inde  confectis,  dicti  regis  sigillo  munitis,  dicitur  plenius  contineri :  Nos  itaque, 
vestris  supplicationibus  inclinati,  quod  super  hoc  ab  eodem  rege  prouide  factum 
est  ratum  habentes  et  gratum,  id  auctoritate  apostolica  confirmamus  et  per 
presentis  scripti  patrocinium  communiraus;  nulli  ergo  omnino  hominum  liceat 
hanc  paginam  nostre  confirmationis  infringere,  vel  ei  ausu  temerario  contraire  ; 
si  quis  autem  hoc  attemptare  presumpserit  indignationem  omnipotentis  Dei 
et  beatorum  Petri  et  Pauli  apostolorum  eius  se  nouerit  incursurum.  Datum 
Auinione  decimo  Kalendas  Julii,  pontificatus  nostri  anno  decimo  octauo. 


KILMAROSOK. 


151.    KlLMAROXOK  NOUA  COMMISSIO  APPROBANS  DONACIONEM  EPISCOPI. 

Clemens  episcopus  seruus  seruorum  Dei,  venerabili  fratri  episcopo  Glasguensi 
salutem  et  apostolicam  benedictionem :  Hiis  Cjue  pro  salubri  statu  ecclesia- 
rum  et  monasteriorum  prouide  facta  sunt  vt  illibata  permaneant  Ubenter 
partes  nostre  solicitudinis  adhibemus,  exhibita  siquidem  nobis  nuper  pro  parte 
dUectorum  filiorum  Willelmi  abbatis  et  conuentus  monasterii  de  Cambuskyn- 


20G 


LEGISTRUM  MOXASTEEII 


KiLMARONOK.  uetli,  ofclinis  Sancti  Augustini,  Sanctiaudree  diocesis,  peticio  coutinebat  quod 

dudumbone  memorie  Joliannes  episcopus  Glasgueusis  predecessor  tuus,  atten- 
deus  vt  asserebat  quod  inclite  memorie  Eobertus  rex  Scotorum  aduocationem 
siue  jus  patronatus  quam  seu  quod  liabebat  in  parrocliiali  ecclesia  de  Kil- 
maronok  tue  diocesis  abbati  dicti  mouasterii  qui  tunc  erat  ac  conuentui  et 
monasterio  predictis  contiderat,  et  quod  demum  per  eosdem  abbatem  et  con- 
uentum  ab  ipso  Jolianue  episcopo  et  dilectis  filiis  capitulo  ecclesie  Glasguensis, 
confirmatioue  coUationis  huiusmodi  per  dictum  regem  eiis  vt  prefertur  facte 
obtenta,  idem  Jolianues  episcopus,  ijjsorum  abbatis  et  couueutus  indigencie 
compaciens,  dictam  parrochialem  ecclesiam  tunc  per  liberam  resignationem 
quoudam  Johaunis  de  Liudesay  olim  ipsius  ecclesie  rectoris  per  eum  iu  mani- 
bus  ipsius  Johannis  episcopi  extra  Eomanam  curiam  sponte  factam,  et  per  eun- 
dem  episcopum  extra  dictam  curiam  auctoritate  ordinaria  admissam,  vacantem 
cum  omnibus  terris,  decimis  et  aliis  juribus,  obuentionibus  et  pertinenciis  suis 
abbati  et  conuentui  ac  monasterio  prefatis  et  ipsius  abbatis  successoribus  vni- 
uersis  eadem  auctoritate  contulit  et  donauit,  reseruata  sibi  ordiuatione  perpe- 
tue  vicarie  pro  vicario  perpetuo  in  eadem  ecclesia  per  eum  cum  ipsam  vacare 
contigerit  ad  presentationem  abbatis  et  conuentus  predictorum  instituendo, 
prout  in  literis  auctenticis  eiusdem  Johannis  episcopi  sigillo  munitis  dicitiu: 
plenius  contiueri :  Quare  pro  parte  dictorum  Willelmi  abbatis  et  conuentus 
nobis  extitit  humiliter  supjjlicatum,  vt  cum  ipsi  dictam  parrochialem  eccle- 
siam,  iu  qua,  sicut  asserunt,  per  euiidem  Johannem  episcopum  de  fructiluis, 
redditibus  et  proueutibus  eiusdem  ecclesie  cougrua  portio  pro  vicario  perpetuo 
ipsius  ecclesie  extitit  ordinata  et  etiam  assignata,  vigore  collationis  et  dona- 
tionis  huiusmodi  fueruut  assecuti  illamque  per  quadraginta  annos  et  vltra  pos- 
sederunt  prout  adhuc  possideut  pacifice  et  quiete,  collationi  et  donationi  huius- 
niodi  per  dictum  Johanuem  episcopum,  vt  prefertur,  factis  et  aliis  preniissis 
robur  coufirmacionis  adicere,  et  omnem  defectum,  si  quis  forsan  in  eiis  inter- 


DE  CAMBUSKEXNETH. 


207 


uenisset  supplere  de  benignitate  apostolica  dignaremm-:  Nos  igitur,  de  premissis 
certam  noticiam  non  habentes,  fraternitati  tue,  de  qua  in  hiis  et  aliis  specialem 
in  Domino  fiduciam  obtinemus,  per  apostolica  scripta  mandamus,  quatenus  si 
premissa  repereris  veritate  fulciri,  collationem  et  donationem  predictas  per 
dictum  Jobannem  episcopum  vt  prefertur  factas  et  quecunque  inde  secuta, 
etiam  si  dicta  parrocbialis  ecclesia  dispositioni  apostolice  specialiter  reseruata, 
aut  eius  collatio  ad  sedem  apostolicam,  juxta  statuta  Lateranensis  consilii, 
legitime  deuoluta  existat,  auctoritate  apostolica  approbes  et  confirmes,  supplens 
omnem  defectum,  si  quis  forsan  interuenerit  in  eisdem  ;  et  nicbilominus  si  dieta 
portio  per  dictum  Johannem  episcopum,  vtprefertur,  assignata  congrua  non  ex- 
istatjde  fructibus  et  prouentibus^iusdem  ecclesie  pro  perpetuo  vicario  huiusmodi 
congruam  portionem  assignes,  ex  qua  idem  vicarius  congrue  sustentari  valeat, 
episcopalia  jura  soluere  et  alia  onera  sibi  incumbencia  commode  supportare. 
Volumus  autem  quod  approbatio  et  confirmatio  huiusmodi,  si  eas  per  te  fieri 
contingat,  perinde  valeant,  plenumque  sortiantur  effectum,  ac  si  coUatio  et 
donatio  predicte  per  nos  ex  certa  scieutia  cum  insertione  tenoris  literarum 
earundem  confirmate,  ac  defectus  huiusmodi,  si  qui  forsan  in  collatione  et 
donatione  predictis  interuenissent,  suppleti  extitissent.  Datum  Auinione 
sexto  nonas  Octobris,  pontificatus  nostri  anno  primo. 


KILMARONOK. 


152.    COLLATIO  VlCARIE  DE  KlLMAEONOCH. 

RoBERTUS  niiseratione  diuina  Glasguensis  archiepiscopus,  decano  nostro  Christi- 
anitatis  de  Leuenax  necnon  vniuersis  et  singulis  aliis  presliyteris,  curatis  et  non 
curatis,  infra  nostram  prouinciam  vbilibet  constitutis  et  super  presencium  exe- 
cutione  debite  requisitis,  salutem  cum  benedictione  diuina  :  Quia  vicariam 
perpetuam  ecclesie  parrochialis  deKihnaronok  nostre  diocesis  de  jure  et  de  facto 
vacantem  per  resignationem  seu  dimissionem  magistri  Dauid  Cunynghame  pro- 
curatoris  et  eo  nomine  domini  Andree  Quhiteheid  vltimi  vicarii  et  possessoris 


208 


EEGISTRUM  MONASTEEII 


KiLMAROxoK  eiusclem,  de  cuius  procuratiouis  maudato  uobis  lucide  coustabat  causa  permuta- 

tiouis  et  non  alias  cum  rectoria  de  Auldkrathy,  Sanctiaudree  diocesis,  quam 
vltime  possidebat  dominus  Jacobus  Eamsay,  iu  mauibus  nostris  sponte  f actam  ad 
presentationem  hoc  meuse  abbatis  et  conuentus  de  Cambuskynneth  nostram- 
que  collationem  ordinariam  pleno  jure  spectantem,  discreto  viro  domino  Johanni 
Naper  nobis  literatorie  presentato  contulimus,  prout  presenciuni  tenore  conferi- 
mus  per  presentes,  causa  permutationis  et  non  alias  vt  supra,  ipsumque  domi- 
uum  Johannem  coram  nobis  personaliter  coustitutum  per  aunuli  nostri  digito 
suo  impositionem  iuuestinius  in  eadem,  curam,  regimen  et  administrationem 
eiusdem  sibi  plenarie  committimus ;  vobis  igitur  et  vestrum  cuilibet  in  virtute 
sancte  obediencie  et  sub  pena  suspensionis  a  diuinis  stricte  precipimus  et 
mandamus  quatenus  prefatuni  dominum  Johaunem,  vel  firocuratorem  suum  pro 
eo,  iu  et  ad  actualem,  realem  et  corporalem  ijossessionem  dicte  vicarie  juriumque 
et  pertineuciarum  eiusdem  iuducatis  et  instituatis,  iuductumque  et  institutum 
cauonice  defeudatis,  sibique  vel  procuratori  suo  super  vniuersis  et  singulis 
fructibus,  redditibus  et  prouentibus  integTe  responderi  faciatis,  contradictores 
vero  et  rebelles,  si  qui  forsan  fueriut,  auctoritate  nostra  arctius  compescendo  : 
Et  vos  qui  presentes  executi  fueritis  sigillum  vestrum  in  secunda  cauda  post 
nostrum  appendatis  vel  per  uotarium  publicum  alias  notificari  faciatis,  apud  pre- 
fatum  dominum  Joliauuem  pro  perpetuo  remansuras.  In  quorum  omnium  et 
siugulorum  fidem  et  testimonium  premissorum  has  preseutes  nostras  coUationis 
literas  exinde  fieri  et  per  notarium  publicum  subscriptum  nostrum  in  hac  parte 
scribam  subscribi  et  publicari  maudauimus,  sigillique  uostri  rotundi  iussimus 
et  fecimus  appensione  communiri  apud  ciuitatem  nostram  Glasguensem  die 
tertio  mensis  Septembris,  anno  Domini  millesimo  quingentesimo  septimo, 
indictioue  decima,  poutificatus  sauctissimi  in  Christo  patris  et  domini  nostri 
domiui  Julii  diuina  prouidencia  pape  secuudi  anuo  quarto,  et  nostre  consecra- 
tionis  vicesimo  quiuto,  hora  octaua  ante  merediem  vel  eo  circa,  presentibus 


DE  CAMBUSKENyETH. 


ibidem  dominis  Alexaudro  Napare  milite  filio  et  apparente  lierede  Arcliibaldi 
Napere  de  Marcbanistoune,  Jobanne  Eankyn  rectore  de  Hiitoune,  Johaune 
Blakader,  Jobanne  Lokkart  et  Thoma  Fortoune  testibus  ad  preniissa  vocatis 
pariter  et  rogatis. 

Et  ego  Johanues  Gibson  arcium  magister,  presbyter  Sanctiandree  dio- 
cesis,  publicus  sacra  auctoritate  apostolica  notarius,  quia  preuiissis  omni- 
bus  et  singulis  duni  sic  vt  premittitur  agerentur,  dicerentur  et  fierent 
vnacum  prenominatis  testibus  personaliter  interfui,  eaque  omnia  et  singula  sic 
tieri  vidi,  sciui  et  audiui  ac  in  notam  cepi,  ex  qua  hoc  presens  publicum 
instrumentum  manu  propria  fideliter  scriptum  exinde  confeci  et  in  hanc 
publicam  formam  redegi,  signoque  et  nomine  meis  solitis  et  consuetis  hic  ine 
subscribeudo  signaui  iu  fidem  et  testimonium  oninium  et  singulorum  premis- 
sorum  rogatus  et  requisitus. 


KILM.\R0N0K. 


153.  coll.^.tio  vicaeie  de  kllmaeonok  peo  domino  elchaedo 
Striueling. 

Jacobus  miseratione  diuina  Glasguensis  arcbiepiscopus,  decano  Christianitatis 
de  Levenax,  necnon  vniuersis  et  siugulis  aliis  presbyteris,  curatis  et  uou  curatis, 
infra  uostram  prouinciam  vbilibet  constitutis,  et  super  preseucium  executioue 
debite  requisitis,  salutem  cum  benedictione  diuina  :  Quia  vicariaiu  perpetuam 
ecclesie  parrochialis  de  Kilmaronok  nostre  diocesis  de  jure  et  de  facto  vacantem 
per  mortem  quondam  domini  Johannis  Napar  vltimi  vicarii  et  possessoris 
eiusdem  ad  presentationem  veuerabilis  in  Christo  patris  Alexaudri  abbatis 
monasterii  beate  iLarie  de  Cambuskyuneth  et  eiusdem  loci  conuentus  nos- 
tramque  collationem  ordinariam  pleuo  jure  spectantem  discreto  vii'o  domiuo 
Eichardo  Striueling  presbytero  uobis  per  dictum  abbatem  et  conuentum  litera- 
torie  presentato,  diuine  caritatis  intuitu,  contulimus,  prout  presencium  tenore 
conferimus  et  de  eadem  sibi  prouidemus,  ipsum  dominum  Eichardum  coram 


210 


nEGISTRmi  MOXASTEPdl 


KiLMARONOK.  nobis  pepsonaliter  constitutum  jier  rmnnli  nostri  digito  suo  impositionem  in- 

uestimus  in  eadem,  curam,  regimen  et  administrationem  eiusdem  sibi  plenarie 
committendo ;  vobis  igitur  et  vestrum  cuilibet  in  virtute  sancte  obediencie  et 
sub  pena  suspensionis  a  diuinis  stricte  precipimus  et  mandamus  quatenus 
prefatum  dominum  Eicbardum  vel  procuratorem  suum  pro  eo,  in  et  ad  realem, 
actualem  etcorporalem  possessionem  dicte  vicarie  juriumque  et  pertinenciarum 
eiusdem  inducatis  et  instituatis,  inductumque  et  institutum  canonice  defen- 
datis,  sibique  aut  procuratori  suo  super  vniuersis  et  singulis  fructibus,  red- 
ditibus  et  prouentibus  eiusdem  integre  responderi  faciatis  ;  contradictores 
vero  et  rebelles,  si  qui  forsan  fuerint,  auctoritate  nostra  arctius  compescendo  : 
Et  vos,  qui  presentes  executi  fueritis,  sigillum  vestrum  in  secunda  cauda  post 
nostrum  appendatis  aut  per  notarium  publicum  alias  notificari  faciatis,  apud 
prefatum  dominum  Eichardura  jiro  perpetuo  remansuras  :  In  quoruni 
omnium  et  singulorum  fidem  et  testimonium  premissorum  bas  j^i^esentes 
nostras  collationis  literas  exinde  fieri  et  per  notariura  publicum  subscriptum 
scribam  nostrum  subscribi  et  publicari  mandauinnis,  sigillique  nostri  rotundi 
jussimus  et  fecimus  appensione  communiri,apud  oppidumEdinburgi  die  decimo 
tertio  mensis  Maii,  anno  Domini  millesimo  quingentesimo  vigesimo  secundo, 
indictione  decima,  pontificatusque  sanctissimi  in  Christo  patris  et  domini 
nostri  domini  N.  quia  hoc  in  regno  hucusque  nobis  non  constat  de  nomine 
noui  pontificis  moderni,  auno  eius  primo,  et  nostre  consecrationis  decimo 
quarto,  hora  intermedia  ad  terciam  post  merediem  vel  circa;  presentibus  ibidem 
honorabilibus  viris  Alexandro  Jardin  de  Apilgarth,  Johanne  Striuiling  de 
Kere,  militibus,  domino  Johanne  Clerk  canonico  dicti  monasterii  de  Cam- 
buskynneth,  Johanne  Scrimgeour  clauigero  et  Georgeo  Dury,  testibus  ad 
premissa  vocatis  pariter  et  rogatis. 

Et  ego  Johannes  Bannatyne  arcium  magister,  clericus  Sanctiandree  diocesis, 
publicus   sacra  auctoritate    apostolica   notarius,  quia  premissis  omnibus  et 


DE  CAMBUSKEXXETH. 


211 


sin^ulis  duin  sic  vt  premittitur  agerentur,  dicerentur  et  fierent  vnacuni 
prenouiinatis  testibus  presens  interfui,  eaque  oninia  et  singula  sic  fieri  vidi, 
sciui  et  auJiui  ac  iu  notam  cepi,  ideoque  hoc  presens  publicum  instrumentum 
siue  bas  presentes  collatiouis  literas  mauu  aliena,  me  aliis  arduis  occupato, 
scriptum  exinde  confeci  et  in  hanc  publicam  formam  redegi,  nomincque  et 
siguo  meis  solitis  et  consuetis  signaui  et  subscripsi  in  fidem  et  testinionium 
omnium  et  siugulorum  premissorum  per  dictos  venerabilem  patrom  Alexau- 
drum  et  Kichardum  vicarium  rogatus  et  requisitus. 


KILMARONOK. 


154.  Instkumentum  possessionis  dicte  vicakie. 
1n  uomiue  Domini  amen :  Per  hoc  preseus  publicum  iustrumeutum  cuuctis 
pateat  euidenter  quod  die  decimoquiuto,  mense,  anno  et  indictione  et  pontificatu 
retroscriptis,  in  mei  notarii  pubUci  et  testium  subscriptorum  presencia  discretus 
vir  dominus  liichardus  Striueliug  presbyter  persoualiter  accessit  ad  presenciam 
circumspecti  viri  domini  Alexandri  Libburn  curati  de  Kilmaronok  et  humiHter 
requisiuit  eundem  vt  eum  iuduceret  iu  possessionem  actualem  vicarie  per- 
petue  de  KUmaronok  cum  omnibus  suis  juribus  et  pertineuciis  de  quibus  fuit 
mentio  iu  retroscriptis  literis  ;  dictus  vero  domiuus  Alexander  Lilburn,  vt 
filius  obediens,  retroscriptum  dominum  Eichardum  Striueling  in  realem, 
actualem  et  corporalem  possessiouem  dicte  vicarie  de  Kilmaronok  secundum 
tenorem  retroscriptarum  literarum,  vt  moris  est,  induxit  et  inuestiuit,  daudo 
eidem  domino  Ricardo  Strineling  clauem  hostii  ecclesie  de  Kilmarouok,  ac 
deliberaudo  ei  calicem  et  patenam  ac  librum  missalem  summi  altaris  eiusdem 
ecclesie  cum  ceteris  necessariis  et  oportunis  :  Super  quibus  omnibus  et 
singulis  idem  dominus  Eicardus  Striueling  a  me  notario  publico  subscripto 
sibi  fieri  peciit  vnuni  seu  plura  publicum  seu  publica  instrumentum  seu 
instrumenta :  Acta  erant  hec  in  choro  ecclesie  de  Kilmaronok  hora  uoua 
ante  merediem  vel  eo  circa,  sub  anno,  die,  mense,  indictione  et  pontificatu 


212 


REGISTEUM  MONASTEPdl 


KiLMARONOK.  retrosciiptis  ;  presentibus  ibidem  honorabilibus  viris  Dauid  Alloway,  AVillelnio 

Eobeson  et  Alexandro  Gardnar  cuni  diuersis  aliis  testibus  ad  premissa  vocatis 
pariter  et  rogatis. 

Et  ego  Jacobus  "Wilsoun  presbyter  Dunkeldensis  diocesis,  publicus  auctori- 
tate  apostolica  notarius,  quia  predictis  institutioni  et  possessioni  ceterisque 
premissis  omnibus  et  singulis,  dum  sic  vt  premittitur  agerentur,  dicerentur  et 
fierent,  vnacum  prenominatis  testibus  iwesens  interfui,  eaque  omnia  et  singula 
sic  fieri  vidi,  sciui  et  audiui  ac  in  notam  sumpsi,  ideoque  hoc  presens  pub- 
licum  instrumentum  manu  aliena  fideliter  scriptum  exinde  confeci,  signoque 
nomLne  et  cognomine  meis  solitis  et  consuetis  signaui,  rogatus  et  requisitus 
in  fidem  veritatis  et  testLmonium  omnium  et  singulorum  premissorum. 


155.    COLLATIO  VIC.iKIE  DE  KlLMAROXOK  PEO  M.iGISTRO  EOBERTO  GrAHAME. 

Gawinus  miseratione  diuina  archiepiscopus  Glasguensis  decano  Cliristianitatis 
nostre  de  Leuenax,  necnon  vniuersis  et  singulis  aliis  presbyteris,  curatis  et  nou 
curatis,  infra  nostram  diocesim  vbilibet  constitutis  et  super  presencium  execu- 
tione  debite  requisitis,  salutem  cum  benedictione  diuina :  Quia  vicariam  per- 
petuam  ecclesie  parrochialis  de  KiLmaronok  nostre  diocesis  de  jure  et  de  facto 
vacantem  per  puram  et  simplicem  resignationem  dilecti  nostri  magistri  Walteri 
ilailuile  iUius  vltimi  vicarii  et  possessoris  causa  permutationis  et  non  alias  cum 
ofBcio  seu  beneficio  clericatus  paiTochialis  ecclesie  Saucti  Patricii,  de  Strogeith 
vulgariter  nuncupate,  Dunblanensis  diocesis,  quem  nunc  possidet  dLscretus  vir 
magister  Eobertus  Graham  in  manibus  nostris  sponte  per  dictum  magistrum 
Walterum  factam,  ad  presentationem  veuerabiLis  in  Christo  patris  et  doniini 
dominiAlexandri  permissione  diuiua  abbatis  monasterii  beateilarie  deCambus- 
kinneth,  ordinis  Sancti  Augustini,  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  et  eiusdem  loci  con- 
uentus,nostramque  coUationein  ordinariam  plenojure  spectantem,dictomagistro 
Eoberto  Grahame  coram  nobis  personaliter  insistenti,  nobis  per  dictos  dominos 


DE  CAMBUSKENXETII. 


213 


alibatem  et  conuentum  literatorie  sub  eorum  sigillo  communi  presentato,  diuine 
caritatis  intuitu,  contulimus,  prout  presencium  tenore  conferimus  et  de  eadem 
vicaria  prouidemus,  ipsumque  magistrum  Robertum  coram  nobis  personaliter 
constitutum  per  annuli  nostri  digito  suo  impositionem  inuestimus  in  eadem, 
curam,  regimen  et  administrationem  eiusdem  sibi  plenarie  committendo :  Vobis 
igitur  et  vestrum  cuilibet  in  virtute  sancte  obedientie  et  sub  pena  suspensionis 
a  diuinis  stricte  precipimus  et  mandamus  quatenus  prefatum  magistrum  Iio- 
bertum  vel  procuratorem  suum  ad  hoc  ab  eo  legitime  constitutum  in  et  ad 
realem,  actualem  et  corporalem  possessionem  dicte  vicarie  juriumque  et  per- 
tinenciarum  eiusdem  inducatis  et  instituatis,  inductumque  et  institutum 
canonice  defendatis,  sibique  magistro  Roberto  aut  procuratori  suo  super  \n\- 
uersis  et  singulis  fructibus,  redditibus  et  prouentibus  eiusdem  integre  respon- 
deri  faciatis,  contradictores  vero  et  rebelles,  si  qui  forsan  fuerint,  auctoritate 
nostra  arctius  compescendo  ;  et  vos,  qui  presentes  executi  fueritis,  sigillum 
vestrum  in  secunda  cauda  post  nostrum  aj)pendatis,  aut  per  notarium  jiubli- 
cum  alias  notificari  faciatis,  apud  prefatum  magistrum  Eobertum  pro  perpetuo 
remansuras.  In  quorum  omnium  et  singulorum  fidem  et  testimonium  pre- 
missorum  has  presentes  literas  nostras  collationis  exinde  fieri,  et  per  notarium 
publicum  subscriptum  subscribi  et  publicari  mandauimus,  sigillique  nostri 
rotuudi  jussimus  et  fecimus  appensione  communiri.  Datum  et  actum  apud 
ciuitatem  nostram  Glasgueusem  in  palacio  nostro,  die  octauo  mensis  Junii, 
anno  Domini  millesimo  quingentesimo  vigesimo  septimo,  indictione  decima 
quiuta,  pontificatus  sanctissimi  iu  Christo  patris  et  domini  nostri  domini 
Clementis  diuina  prouidencia  pape  septimi  anno  quarto  ;  presentibus  ibidem 
venerabilibus  viris  magistro  Johanne  Reid  vicario  de  Mernes  ac  rectore  alme 
vniuersitatis  nostre  Glasguensis,  magistro  Andrea  Smjth  decano  nostro  de 
Levenax  et  Johanne  Tod  seruitore  nostro,  testibus  ad  premissa  vocatis  pariter 
et  rogatis. 


KILM.\R0K0K. 


2U 


REGISTIIUM  MONASTEPdl 


KiLMARONok  Et  ego  Thomas  Foulis  presbytei  Saiictiandree  diocesis,  publicus  sacris 

apostolica  et  uuperiali  auctoritatibus  notarius,  quia  premissis  omnibus  et  sin- 
gulis  dum  sic  vt  premittitur  dicerentur,  agereutur  et  fierent  vnacum  prenomi- 
natis  testibus  presens  iuterfui,  eaque  omuia  et  singula  sic  fieri  et  dici  vidi, 
sciui  et  audiui  ac  iu  notam  cepi,  ideo  lioc  presens  publicum  instrumentum 
inanu  mea  propria  fideliter  scriptum  exiude  confeci,  signoque  et  nomine  meis 
solitis  et  consuetis  vnacum  appeusione  sigiLli  rotundi  dicti  reuerendissmii 
patris  signaui,  rogatus  et  requisitus  iu  fidem  et  testimonium  omnium  et  sin- 
gulorum  premissorum.  Thomas  Foulis,  notarius  publicus. 

156.    COLLATIU  VICAEIE  DE  KlLMAEONOK  PUO  MaURICIO  ClERK. 

Gawixus  miseratione  diuina  arcliiepiscopus  Glasguensis,  dilecto  nobis  in 
Cliristo  domiuoMauricio  Clerk  presbytero  nostre  diocesis,salutem  cum  benedic- 
tioue  diuina :  Vite  ac  morum  bonestas  aliaque  laudabilia  probitatis  et  virtutuni 
merita,  quibus  apud  uos  fidedigno  commendaris  testimonio,  nos  inducmit  vt 
tibi  ad  graciam  reddamur  liberales ;  cum  itaque  vicaria  perpetua  parrocliialis 
ecclesie  de  Kilnuironok  nostre  diocesis,  quam  nuper  dilectus  noster  magister 
Eobertus  Grabame  presbyter  Dunblanensis  diocesis  obtinebat,  per  liberam 
resignatiouem  ipsius  de  eadem  permutationis  causa  fieude  cum  vicaria  parro- 
cbialis  ecclesie  de  Drymmane  eciam  nostre  diocesis  quam  tu  merito  nuper 
obtinebas,  in  manibus  nostris  sponte  factam  et  per  nos  admissam,  vacare 
noscitur  et  vacet  ad  presens ;  nos  igitur,  premissorum  meritorum  intuitu 
graciam  specialem  facere  voleutes,  predictam  vicariam  perpetuam  de  Kil- 
maronok  vt  sic  premittitur  vacautem  ad  presentationem  venerabiliiun  et 
religiosorum  virorum  domiuorum  abbatis  et  conuentus  monasterii  de  Cam- 
buskynnetli,  ordinis  Sancti  Augustini,  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  nostramque  col- 
lationem  ordinariam  pleno  jure  spectautem,  tibi  domino  Mauricio  presbytero 
sufiicienti   et   }"doneo    et    ad  eaudeni  vicariam   per  venerabdem  in  Cbristo 


DE  CAMBUSKEXNETII. 


215 


patrem  dominiim  Alexandruin  abbatem  modernum  et  dicti  monasterii 
conuentum  nobis  literatorie  eorum  sub  sigillo  comrauni  oblongo  cera  rubea 
albe  impressa  presentato,  cum  plenitudine  juris  canonici  ac  omnibus  suis 
juribus  et  pertinenciis,  tenore  presencium  conferimus  et  assignamus  ac  de 
eadem  tibi  prouidemus,  tecpie  coram  nobis  propter  hoc  personaliter  consti- 
tutum  in  corporalem  possessionem  seu  quasi  vicarie  juriumque  et  pertinen- 
ciarum  predictorum  per  annuli  nostri  digito  tuo  imiDOsitionem  inuestimus  de 
eadem,  curam,  regimen  et  administrationem  dicte  vicarie  tibi  plenarie  com- 
mittentes ;  quocirca  decano  Cliristianitatis  nostre  de  Leuenax  omnibusque 
aliis  et  singulis  personis  ecclesiasticis  presbyteris,  curatis  et  non  curatis, 
notariisque  et  tabellionibus  publicis  quibuscunque  per  ciuitatem  et  diocesim 
nostras  Glasguenses  constitutis,  tenore  presenciura  coniraittimus  et  mandamus 
quatenus  ipsi  vel  eorum  alter  cpii  super  hoc  fuerunt  requisiti,  vel  fuerit 
requisitus,  ad  prefatam  parrochialem  ecclesiam  accedant  vel  accedat  tequc 
dominum  Mauricium  vicarium,  vel  procuratorem  tuum  legitimum  tuonomine, 
in  corporalem,  realem  et  actualera  possessionem  vicarie  juriumque  et  perti- 
nenciarum  predictorum  auctoritate  nostra  inducant,  instituant  et  defendant 
inductum,  seu  alter  eorum  inducat,  instituat  et  defendat  iuductum,  amoto 
exinde  quolibet  illicito  detentore,  tibique  vel  procuratoribus  tuis  predictis  de 
vniuersis  et  singulis  fructibus,  redditibus,  prouentibus,  juribus,  decimis, 
obuentionibus  et  emohimentis  dicte  vicarie  respondeaut  seu  respondeat  et 
faciant  seu  faciat  ab  aliis  plene  et  integre  responderi,  contradictores  vero  et 
rebelles,  si  c^ui  forsan  fuerint,  per  censuram  ecclesiasticam  auctoritate  nostra 
arctius  compescentes.  In  quorum  onmium  et  singulornm  fidem  et  testi- 
monium  premissorura,  presentes  literas  siue  lioc  presens  jDublicum  iustru- 
mentum  huiusmodi  nostrara  collationeni  in  se  continens  exinde  fieri,  et  per 
notarium  publicum  subscriptum  nostrum  secretarium,  scribam  et  tabellionem 
subscribi   et   publicari   raandauiraus,    sigillique   nostri   rotundi  jussimus  et 


KILMARONOK. 


!1G 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


KILMAROXOK. 


fecimus  appensione  communiri.  Datum  et  actum  in  ecclesia  nostra  Glas- 
guensi  sub  anno  Incarnationis  dominice  millesimo  quingentesimo  vigesimo 
septimo,  die  vero  vigesima  quinta  mensis  Julii,  iudictione  quinta  decima, 
pontificatus  sanctissimi  in  Christo  patris  et  domini  nostri  domini  Clementis 
diuina  prouidencia  pape  septimi  anno  quarto  ;  presentibus  ibidem  venera- 
bilibus  viris  magistris  et  dominis  Jobanne  Sancbar  de  Edilstoune,  Johanne 
Colqubone  de  Glasgow  secundo,  Jobanne  Doby  de  Ancrum  prebendariis 
canouicis  ecclesie  nostre  Glasgueusis,  Tboma  Foulis  notario  publico,  et 
Jobaune  Carnis  presbytero,  testibus  ad  premissa  vocatis  pariterque  rogatis. 

Et  ego  Jobannes  Lauder  arcium  magister,  clericus  Sanctiandree  ciuitatis, 
publicus  sacris  apostolica  et  imperiali  auctoritatibus  notarius,  ac  in  officio 
scriptorum  arcbiuii  Eomane  curie  matricvdatus  et  descriptus,  quia  predicte 
vicarie  resignationi  eiusJemque  coUationi,  prouisioni  et  inuesture,  ceterisque 
premissis  interfui,  ac  in  notam  cepi,  ideoque  boc  presens  publicum  instru- 
mentum  buiusmodi  coUationem  iu  se  continens,  manu  mea  propria  scriptum 
exinde  confeci,  subscripsi  et  publicaui,  signoque  et  nomine  meis  solitis  et 
consuetis,  vnacum  appensione  sigilli  rotundi  dicti  reuerendissimi  patris, 
signaui,  rogatus  et  requisitus  in  fidem  et  testimonium  veritatis  omnium  et 

singulorum  premissorum. 

JonANNES  Lauder  notarius  publicus. 


157.    IXSTKUMENTUM  POSSESSIONIS  DICTE  VICAKIE. 

In  Dei  nomine  amen  ;  Per  boc  presens  publicum  instrumentum  cuuctis 
pateat  euidenter  et  sit  notum  quod  auno  Incarnationis  dominice  mLIlesimo 
quingentesimo  vicesimo  septimo,  die  vero  vigesimo  octauo  mensis  Jubi,  indic- 
tione  decima  quiuta,  pontificatus  sauctissimi  in  Cbristo  patris  et  domiui  nostri 
domini  Clementis  diuiua  prouidencia  pape  septimi  anno  quai-to,  in  mei  notarii 
publici  et  testium  subscriptorum  preseucia  personaliter  constitutus  discretus 


DE  CAMBUSKEXNETH. 


217 


vir  dominus  Maiiricius  Clerk,  habens  et  deteneus  in  manibus  snis  retroscriptas 
collationis  literas  quoad  vicariam  de  Ivilmaronok  Glasguensis  diocesis 
tangentes,  humiliter  requisiuit  et  rogauit  discretum  virum  dominum  Dauid 
Thome  curatum  de  dicta  vicaria  de  Kilmaronok  quatenus,  juxta  tenorera 
retroscripte  collationis  literarum,  actualem,  realem  et  corporalem  possessionem, 
ac  institutionem  predicte  perpetue  vicarie  de  Kilmaronok  retroscriptas  jurium- 
i|ue  et  pertinenciarum  eiusdem,  vt  moris  est  in  similibus,  sibi  daret  et  assig- 
naret :  Quiquidem  dominus  Dauid  Thome,  predictis  collationis  literis  lectis  et 
intellectis,  eundem  dominum  Mauricium  Clerk  in  et  ad  realem,  actualem  et 
corporalem  possessionem,  institutionem  juriumiiue  et  pertinenciarum  cimi 
mansione  eiusdem  perpetue  vicarie  induxit  et  in  eadem  inuestiuit.  In  cuius 
inductionis  et  possessionis  ac  institutionis  signum  seu  veritatem,  idem  dominus 
Dauid  manualiter  ostii  dicte  ecclesie  clauem,  seram  fontis,  vestimenta 
summi  altaris,  calicem  et  missale,  ac  cetera  ad  liuiusmodi  institutioneni 
et  possessionem  requisita,  eidem  domino  Mauricio  Clerk  tanquani  vicario  per- 
petuo  dicte  vicarie  de  Kilmaronok  tradidit  et  deliberauit.  Super  quibus  omni- 
bxis  et  singulis  sic  premissis  prefatus  dominus  Mauricius  a  me  notario  publico 
subscripto  sibi  fieri  petiit  vnum  aut  plura  instrumentum  aut  instrumenta. 
Acta  erant  hec  infra  ecclesiam  parrochialem  de  Kihnaronok,  Iiora  vndecima 
ante  merediem,  sub  anno,  die,  mense,  indictione  et  pontificatu  quibus  supra- 
scriptis ;  presentibus  honestis  viris,  videlicet,  Patricio  Denzelstoune  de  Cul- 
grane,  Johanne  Napare  de  Kilmahew,  Waltero  Galbraith  de  PortneUene, 
Waltero  Boquhennane,  Johanne  JI^^Kawla,  Willelmo  Cuuynghame,  Patricio 
Calbraith  et  domino  Johanne  Clerk,  cuni  diuersis  aliis  testibus  ad  premissa 
vocatis  pariter  et  rogatis. 

Et  ego  Petrus  Tulloch,  presbyter  Glasguensis  diocesis,  sacra  auctoritate 
apostolica  notarius,  quia  premissis  inductioni  et  institutioni,  ceterisque  onini- 
bus  et  singulis  suprascriptis  dum  sic  vt  premittitur  agerentur,  dicerentur  et 


KILM.VRONOK. 


KILMARONOK. 


218 


REGISTR  L  \V  MOXASTERII 


fiereiit,  vuacuui  preuoiiuuatis  testibus  presens  iuterfui,  eaque  omuia  et  siugula 
suprascripta  sic  fieri  vidi,  sciui,  et  audiui  ac  iu  uotaui  cepi,  ideoque  lioc  presens 
publicum  iustrumeutum  mauu  mea  propria  fideliter  scriptum  coufeci  et  pub- 
licaui,  signoque  et  nouiiue  meis  solitis  et  cousuetis  signaui,  rogatus  et  requi- 
situs  iu  fidem  omuium  et  siugulorum  premissorum. 


158.  Decketum  gakbalium  decimarum  contra  parrochianos  de 

KlLMARONOK. 

At  Ediuburgli,  tlie  xxvi  day  of  Februar  tlie  zeir  of  God  ane  tliousand  fp'e 
liuiulretli  aud  tuenty  aucht  zeris,  tbe  Lordis  of  the  Consale  vnderwrittin,  that 
is  to  say,  ane  maist  reuereud  and  reuerend  faderis  in  God,  Gawyne  archi- 
bischop  of  Glasgow,  chauceRar,  Gawyne  bischop  of  Abirdene,  aue  uobill  and 
niychty  lord,  Hew  erle  of  Eglingtoune,  George  lord  of  Sanct  Johnuis,  maister 
Eobsrt  Forman  deue  of  Glasgow,  schir  Johune  Dingwell  prouest  of  the 
Triuite  College,  maister  Thomas  Cowtis  ofiiciall  of  Lotheaue,  niaister 
AVilliam  Gibson  dene  of  Eestahug,  maister  Thomas  Ersldn  of  Haltouue 
secretar,  William  Scot  of  Balweiy  kuicht,  maister  Adam  Otterburne  of 
Auldhame  aduocate  to  oure  Soueraue  Lord,  Nicholl  Crauford  of  Oxingangis 
iustice  clerk,  Mr.  Fraucis  Boituile,  and  maister  James  Lausone  burges  of 
Ediuburgh,  aueut  the  summondis  rasit  at  the  instance  of  ane  venerabill  fader 
iu  God,  Alexander  abbot  of  Canibuskynneth  and  convent  of  the  saniiu 
aganis  Johnne  Buchquhannane,  James  Haldane  of  Glenneges,  Agnes  Craufurd, 
Alexander  Gardinar,  Adam  Bullisland,  Johnne  Cheiy,  Dauid  Forsith,  Johnne 
Galychtly,  Michell  M^^Kinlay,  William  Eobertson,  James  Lilburne,  Thomas 
Lilburne,  William  Galloway,  William  Falconar,  Johnne  Howy,  Johnne  ISTachty, 
Cuthbert  erle  of  Glencarne,  Dauid  Meffaue,  Johnne  Slewman,  Johanue 
Logaue,  James  Thomson,  Johnne  Galbraith,  Cristiaue  Gilmore  the  relict  of 
vmquhile  Douald  M^^Cane,  Walter  Buchquhaunane,  Elizabeth  Cuuyughame 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


!19 


lady  of  ilakfarland,  Jolinne  Gardnar,  Donald  Biys,  Johanne  ^PKinlay, 
ilurdoch  Leky,  Androw  Stevin,  Johnne  M<=Lere,  Androw  MacYntoch,  Androw 
SpittaU,  IMichell  Scherar,  Cristiane  Knox,  Johnne  Makkillay.William  Cunyng- 
hame,  Gelis  Berclay,  Arthiire  Clerk,  Johnne  Makynquhone,  Angus  Micliell, 
j\Iichill  Maccorkill,  Johnne  IMaklere,  Donald  MacYnlay,  Dauid  IVPYntosh, 
Thomas  Buchquhannane,  Alexander  Gillespy,  Patrik  Makmoriss,  Johnne 
Forester,-  Johnne  M^^Ynlay,  Androw  ]M°Lintoch,  Patrik  Galbraith,  Andro 
Portar,  "VYalter  Galbraith,  Johnne  Halyday,  Alexander  Halyday,  Johnne 
Simple  of  Foulwod,  Agnes  Craufurd,  Alexander  Galbraith,  aud  William 
Cunynghame,  ffor  the  wangus,  violent  and  maisterfuU  spoliatioun  be  thame- 
self,  thair  seruandis  and  complices  of  thair  causing,  commaud,  as^istance  and 
ratihabitioun,  recently,  daylie  and  continualy,  xv  dayis,  the  xiiii  day  of 
September  last  bipast,  takin  and  withaldin  fra  the  said  venerabill  fader  and 
convent  of  thair  teynd  schavis  of  the  kirk  of  Kilmaronok  and  landis  in  the 
parrochyn  of  the  samyn,  liand  within  the  sehirefdome  of  Dunliertane,  per- 
tenand  to  thame  as  patrone  of  thare  kirl\,  and  anent  the  terme  assignit  to  the 
sadis  personis  and  parrochinaris  to  compeir  and  gif  thaire  athis  apon  the 
poyntis  contenit  in  the  said  summondis,  ilkane  for  thaire  awin  part,  with 
certificatiouue  to  thame,  and  thai  compeir  nocht,  tlie  samyn  suld  Ije  referrit  to 
the  aith  of  the  said  venerabill  fader,  as  at  mare  leuth  is  contenit  in  the 
summondis  and  actis  thairupoun :  The  said  venerabill  fader  comperand  for 
himself,  and  as  procuratoure  for  his  said  convent,  and  the  remanent  of  the 
sadis  personis  abone  writtin  beand  lauchfuUye  summond  to  this  actioun, 
oftymes  caUit,  and  nocht  comperit,  tlie  Lordis  of  the  Counsale  decretis  and 
deliueris  that  thir  personis  vnderwrittin,  and  ilkane  of  thame,  hes  doue  wrang 
in  tlie  maisterfuU  spoliatioun,  awaytaking  and  withalding  fra  the  said 
venerabiU  fader  and  convent  of  thair  cornis  eftir  specefiit  pertenand  to  thame 
as  thare  teyndis,  and,  thairfore,  sall  restore  and  deliuer  the  samyn  agane  to 


KILMARONOK. 


220 


REGISTUUM  MONASTERII 


KILMARONOK. 


tlie  said  veneraLill  fader  and  conuent,  of  tlie  prices  follo-\vand,  tliat  is  to  say, 
Jolmue  Bucliquliaunane,  for  the  teynd  schavis  of  tlie  landis  of  Estir  Catir 
aud  Spittaltoune,  xxxviii  boUis  aittis  witli  tlie  fodder;  James  Haldane  of 
Glenneges,  for  tlie  teynd  schavis  of  Myddill  Catir,  xxviii  bollis  of  aittis  with 
the  fodder ;  tlie  said  James  Haldane  and  Agnes  Craufurd,  for  the  teyud 
schavis  of  Wester  Catir,  xviii  liollis  aittis  with  the  fodder,  the  said  Alexander 
Gardnar,  Adani  Bullisland,  Johune  Chery,  Dauid  Forsith,  Johnne  Galichtlie, 
jMichel  M^^Kinlay,  William  Eohertson,  Johuue  libburne,  Thomas  Libburne, 
■\Villiam  Galloway,  William  Falconar,  Johnne  Howy  and  Johnne  M"=Autbane, 
for  the  landis  of  Bordlaud,  extending  to  xlii  boUis  of  aittis  with  the  fodder ; 
Cuthbert  erle  of  Glencarne,  the  teynd  schavis  of  the  landis  of  Drumcryn 
with  the  mauis  therof,  extendin  to  xlviii  bollis  of  aittis  with  the  fodder; 
Dauid  Meffene  and  Johnue  Slewman,  the  teyud  schavis  of  the  landis  of  South- 
sonue,  extendiug  to  vi  boUis  of  aittis  with  the  fodder ;  Johnne  Logane,  James 
Thomson,  the  teynd  schavis  of  Xorthswnne,  extending  to  \i  bollis  of  aittis 
with  the  fodder ;  Johnue  Galbraith  and  Cristiane  Gilmore,  the  rehct  of 
vmquhile  Donald  Makane,  the  teynd  schavis  of  the  landis  of  Callingad,  ex- 
tending  to  xviii  bollis  of  aittis  with  the  fodder ;  the  said  AValter  Buch- 
i|uheunane  aud  EUzabeth  Cuuyngham  Lady  j\Iakfarlan,  the  teynd  schavis  of  the 
laudis  of  Merinche,  extending  to  xii  boUis  of  aittis  with  the  fodder ;  Johune 
Garduar,  the  teynd  schavis  of  the  landis  of  Blairquhomre,  exteuding  to  viii 
bolUs  of  aittis  with  the  fodder ;  Donald  Brys  and  Johnne  Makyulay,  the 
teynd  schavis  of  the  landis  of  Blairquhannane,  extending  to  xii  bollis  of  aittis 
with  the  fodder ;  ^lurdoch  Leke,  Andro  Stevin,  Johnne  Maklere,  the  teynd 
schavis  of  the  landis  of  Blairuill,  estendiug  to  xii  bollis  of  aittis  with  tlie 
fodder ;  James  Haldane,  the  teynd  schavis  of  the  landis  of  Blairquhes,  ex- 
tendiug  to  xvi  bollis  of  aittis  with  the  fodder ;  Audro  Makliutoch,  the  tejTid 
scliavis  of  the  laudis  of  Ballaggane,  exteuding  to  xiii  bollis  of  aittis  with  the 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


221 


fodder ;  Andro  Spittall  and  Micliell  Sclierar,  the  teynd  sclaavis  of  tlie  landis 
of  Thynaglass,  extending  to  xiiii  bollis  of  aittis  with  the  fodder ;  Cristiane 
Knox,  the  teynd  schavis  of  the  landis  of  Caldorvene  extending  to  xii  boUis  of 
aittis  with  the  fodder ;  Johnne  M^Callay,  the  teynd  schavis  of  the  landis  of 
Cannnsmeyn,  Ardoch  and  Cokgoii-,  extending  to  xxxvii  bollis  of  aittis  with 
the  fodder ;  William  Cunynghame  and  Gelis  Berclay,  the  teynd  schavis  of  the 
landis  of  Bakichart,  extending  to  viii  bollis  of  aittis  Mith  the  fodder ;  Arthiire 
Clerk,  Johnne  J^Iackilquheue,  Angus  Mitcliell  and  ]Michell  IM^^Karkill,  the 
teynd  schavis  of  the  landis  of  Myltoune,  extending  to  xii  bollis  of  aittis  with 
thefodder;  Johnee  M<=Lere,  Donald  MTulay  and  Donald  Maklintoch,  the 
teynd  schavis  of  the  landis  of  Balloch,  extending  to  xlii  bollis  of  aittis  with  the 
fodder  ;  Tliomas  Buchquhannann,  the  teynd  schavis  of  the  landis  [of  ]  Leders- 
beg,  extending  to  x  bollis  of  aittis  with  the  fodder  ;  Alexander  Gillespy  and 
Patrik  Makmoris,  the  teynd  schavis  of  the  landis  of  Ladresmore,  extending  to 
xiiii  boUis  of  aittis  with  the  fodder ;  Johnne  Forestar,  John  Makinlay,  Andro 
^^PLinthocht,  the  teynd  schavis  of  the  landis  of  Botwi-icht,  extending  to 
xxxii  bollis  of  aittis  with  tbe  fodder ;  Walter  Galbraith,  Andi'o  Portar,  the 
teyud  scbavis  of  the  landis  of  Cirlthaue,  extending  to  xii  bollis  of  aittis  witli 
the  fodder ;  Walter  Galbraith,  the  teynd  schavis  of  the  landis  of  Portnellen- 
more,  extending  to  xii  bollis  of  aittis  with  the  fodder ;  Johnne  Halyday,  the 
teynd  schavis  of  the  laudis  of  Portnellenbeg,  exteuding  to  xvi  bollis  of  aittis 
with  the  fodder ;  Johnne  Simpill  of  Fulwod,  the  teyud  schavis  of  the  landis 
of  Eos,  extending  to  xii  bollis  of  aittis  witb  tbe  fodder;  Agnes  Craufurd, 
the  teynd  schavis  of  the  landis  of  Abir,  extending  to  xxiiii  bollis  of  aittis  witli 
the  fodder ;  Alexander  Galbraitli  and  William  Cunyngbame,  the  teyud  schavis 
of  the  landis  of  Garththarne,  extending  to  xiii  boUis  of  aittis  witb  the  fodder ; 
price  of  ilk  boll  of  the  said  aittis  oure  heid,  with  the  fodder,  vi  s.  viii  d., 
qubilk  teind  schavis  perteuis  to  tbe  said  venerabile  fader  and  convent  as 


KILMARONOK 


REGISTBUM  MONASTEEII 


KILMARONOK. 


patrone  of  tliair  kirk  and  abbay,  becaus  the  said  venerabill  fader  and  convent 
referrit  the  availl  and  qnantite  of  the  said  teynd  schavis  to  the  said  par- 
rochinaris  athis,  ilkane  for  thair  awne  part,  and  that  thai  suld  haue  comperit 
at  ane  certaine  day  of  lang  tyme  bipast  and  gevin  thair  athis  thairupone, 
with  certificatioune  to  thame  and  thai  failzeit  tliairintill  the  samyn  suld  be 
referrit  to  the  aithe  of  the  said  venerabill  fader,  quhilk  maid  faith  as  is  abone- 
writtin,  becaus  the  sadis  personis  comperit  nocht  to  the  effect  foirsaid,  and 
thairfore  ordanis  lettres  be  directit  to  poynd  and  distrenze  the  sadis  parrochy- 
naris  and  personis  abonewrittin  for  tlie  said  vittallis,  ilkane  of  thame  for 
thair  awne  part,  in  forme  as  efferis.  Extractum  de  libro  actorum  per  me 
Gawinum  episcopum  Abirdonensem,  clericum  rotulorum  registri  et  consilii 
supremi  domini  nostri  regis,  sub  meis  signo  et  subscriptione  manualibus. 

Gaavinus  Duxbak. 


159.    ECCLESIA  KlLMAEOXOK  LIBEKA  MONASTEEIO  CaMBUSKYNXETH. 

At  Edinburgh,  the  nynt  day  of  December,  the  zeir  of  God  ane  thousand  fyve 
hundreth  twenty  nyne  zeris,  it  is  appoyntit  and  finalie  concordit  betuix  ane 
venerabill  fader  in  God,  Alexander  abbot  of  Cambuskynneth,  for  him  and 
his  convent,  ou  the  ta  part,  and  ane  nobill  lord,  Andro  lord  Avendale,  on  the 
tothjT  part,  in  maner  and  forme  foUowand,  that  is  to  say  :  Forsamekle  as  the 
said  Andro  lord  Avendaill  is  restand  awand  to  the  said  abbot  and  convent 
the  sovme  of  thre  score  tuelf  pund  of  the  crop  of  the  frutis  of  the  kirk  of 
Kilmaronok  pertenand  to  the  said  abbot  and  convent,  intromettit  with  be 
the  said  lord  in  the  zeir  of  God  ane  thousand  fyve  hundreth  and  xxvi  zeris, 
and  als  hes  intromettit  with  ane  part  of  the  frutis  of  the  said  kirk  of  the  zeir 
of  God  ane  thousand  fyve  hundreth  and  xxvii  zeris,  nochtwithstanding,  becaus 
the  said  lord  hes  renuncit,  and  be  the  tenoure  heirof  renuncis  all  richt,  kynd- 
nes  and  interes  that  he,  his  aris,  or  assignais  hes,  had,  or  may  haue  ony 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


223 


maner  of  way  to  tlie  sadis  frutis  and  kirk,  be  ressoune  of  assedatioune  or 
vthirwys,  and  oblissis  liim,  liis  aris  aud  assignais,  tliat  he  or  thai,  uor  uane 
vthir  niauer  of  persoune  throw  tliare  richt,  unr  in  thare  uame,  sall  clame  rieht 
or  kyudues  to  the  said  Ivirk  and  frutis  iu  tyme  cumiug,  nor  sall  malc  impedi- 
meut  nor  stop  to  the  said  abbot  and  conveut,  thare  successouris,  factouris, 
firmararis,  or  servandis,  iu  peaceabill  broukiug  aud  joysing  of  the  said  kirk 
and  frutis,  bot  sall  be  himself,  sliereff  of  Duubertaue,  aud  his  deputis,  ffordar 
the  said  abbot  aud  couveut  aud  thare  successouris,  factouris,  tirmararis,  or 
servandis,  in  peceabill  vptalciug  of  the  frutis  of  the  samyn,  and  specialie  of 
the  vptaking  of  the  frutis  of  twa  croppis  last  bipast ;  ffor  tlie  quhilk  caus  tlie 
said  venerabill  fader,  for  Iiim  aud  his  couvent,  dischargis  tlie  said  lord  aud 
his  aris  of  the  foreuamit  sovme  of  threscore  tuelf  puudis,  and  als  of  the 
frutis  intromettit  be  him  of  the  crop  of  the  zeir  of  God  aue  thousaud  fyve 
Luudreth  and  twenty  sevin  zeris ;  and  in  sa  far  as  restis  awand  of  tlie  said 
crop  in  the  said  xxvii  zeris,  the  said  abbot  makis  the  said  lord  assignay  to 
intromett  with  the  samyn,  excepaud  samekle  as  deue  WUIiam  ratersou, 
factoure  to  tlie  said  abbot,  hes  iutromettit  with  before  the  dait  of  thir  pre- 
sentis,  aud  als  sall  coutent  and  pay  to  the  said  lordis  moder  the  sovme  of  twa 
huudreth  markis  iu  name  of  tlie  said  Androw  lord  Aveudall,  and  get  Iiir 
acquittance  thairupone,  and  deliuer  to  the  said  lord  Avendale,  and  keip  Iiini 
skaithles  thairof;  aud  attour  athyr  of  the  saidis  parteis,  for  thame,  tliare 
aris,  successouris  aud  assiguais,  dischargis  vtheris  of  all  vthir  clames  before 
the  day  of  the  dait  heirof.  In  witness  of  the  quhilk  thiug  baith  the  sadis 
parteis  hes  subscriuit  thir  presentis  witli  thaire  handis,  before  thir  witues, 
ane  houorabiU  mau  maister  Adam  Otterburne,  provest  of  Ediuburgh,  Charles 
Foulartouue,  MichaeU  Tidloiss  and  deue  Johnne  Clerk,  with  vtheris  diuei's. 

Alexander  abbas  mauu  propria  subscrijjsit. 

Andro  Lokd  Avendale. 


KILM.A.R0K0K- 


224 


REGISmmi  MONASTERII 


KiLMARONOK  Quo  die  prescripti  venerabilis  in  Christo  pater  et  noLilis  dominus  Andreas 

dominus  Avendale  moniti  sunt  pro  se,  suis  lieredibus  et  successoribus,  ex 
eorum  propriis  confessionibus,  sub  pena  excommunicationis  submittentibus  se 
nostre  jiirisdictioni  in  hoc  casii  ad  perimplendum  et  obseruaudum  omnia  et 
singula  contenta  iu  prescrij)to  contractu  in  singulis  suis  punctis  et  articulis 
secundum  formam  et  tenorem  eiusdem. 

Thomas  Mailwyxe  notarius  publicus  ac  scriba  curie 
officialatus  Laudonie  manu  propria  subscripsit. 

160.    DONATIO  rATEOXATUS  ECCLESIE  DE  KyNNOULE. 

KYXxouLE.  O.MNIBUS  hanc  cartam  visuris  vel  audituris,  Eobertus  Erskyn  dominus  eiusdem 

et  baronie  de  Kynnoule,  salutem  in  Domino  sempiternam  :  Nouerit  vniuersitas 
vestra  me,  pro  salute  anime  mee  et  pro  salute  animarum  omninm  predeces- 
sorum,  heredum  seu  siiccessorum  meorum,  dominorum  dicte  baronie  de  Kyn- 
noule,  dedisse,  concessLsse  et  hac  presenti  carta  nostra  confirmasse  Deo  et 
beate  Marie  virgini,  et  religiosis  viris  abbati  et  conuentui  de  Cambuskynneth 
ibidem  Deo  seruientibiis  et  imperpetuum  seruituris,  aduocationem  siue  jus 
patronatus  ecclesie  de  Kynnoule:  Tenendam  et  habendam  eisdem  religiosis  et 
eorum  successoribus  in  proprios  vsus  suos  in  liberani,  puram  et  perpetuam 
elemosinam,  adeo  libere  et  C[uiete,  plenarie,  integre  et  honorifice  cum  omni- 
modis  libertatibus,  commoditatibus,  asiamentis  et  iustis  pertinenciis  suis 
quibuseunque  sicut  aduocatio  siue  jus  patronatus  alicuius  ecclesie  ab  aliquo 
comite  vel  barone  per  totum  regnum  Scotie  alicui  monasterio  vel  pio  seu 
religioso  loco  alii  liberius,  quietius,  plenius,  purius,  integrius  et  honorifi- 
centius  in  liberara,  puram  et  pei-petuam  elemosinam  dari  potest  seu  coneedi. 
In  cuius  rei  testimonium  sigillum  meum  presenti  carte  est  appensum ;  tes- 
tibus  venerabilibus  in  Christo  patre  domino  AVillelmo  Dei  gracia  episcopo 
Sanctiandree,   magistro  Willelmo    de   Grenlaw    archidiacono    Sanctiandree, 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETII. 


225 


dommo  Dauid  Grahame,  Eogero  de  Slortuomari  et  Dauid  riemyng,  militibus, 
Alano  de  Erskin  fratre  meo  et  Hugone  de  Eoss,  ac  multis  aliis.  Datum  apud 
Striueling,  die  vicesimo  septimo  mensis  Januarii,  anno  gracie  millesimu 
tricentesimo  sexagesimo  primo. 


KVKNOULE. 


IGI.    CONFIEMACIO  EPISCOPI  SUPER  EODKM. 

Uniuersis  ad  quorum  noticiam  presentes  litere  peruenerint,  "Willelmus  Dei 
gracia  episcopus  Sanctiandree,  salutem  in  eo  qui  est  omuium  salus :  lu 
vestram  deducimus  uoticiam  et  vobis  tenore  presencium  iideliter  patefacimus 
quod  nobilis  vir  domiuus  Eobertus  de  Erskin,  dominus  eiusdem  et  barouie  de 
Kyunoule,  patrouusque  ecclesie  parrocbialis  de  Kynnoule  nostre  diocesis, 
aduocationem  siue  jus  patronatus  dicte  ecclesie  de  Kymioule  religiosis  viris 
abbati  et  conuentui  monasterii  de  Cambuskynnetli  ordinis  Sancti  Augustini 
eiusdem  nostre  diocesis  et  ipsorum  monasterio  pie  et  deuote,  pro  salute  auime 
sue  et  salute  auimarum  antecessorum  et  successorum  suorum,  precipue  domi- 
noruni  dicte  barouie,  contulit  perpetuo  et  donauit,  prout  iu  suis  literis  inde 
confectis  plenius  continetur,  nosque  frequenter,  pluries  et  iustauter  requisiuit 
et  per  excellentissimum  priucipem  et  dominum  nostrum  domiuum  Dauid  Dei 
gracia  regem  Scotorum  Ulustrem  et  suas  literas  requiri  sepius  procurauit  et 
cum  instancia,  vt  dictam  ecclesiam  de  Kyunoule  ipsis  reUgiosis  in  vsus 
proprios  couuertere  et  conferre,  ac  ipsi  mouasterio  subuectere  et  vuiii  per- 
petuo  diguaremur.  Nos  igitur  "Willelmus  episcopus  memoratus,  habito  prius 
super  hoc  solempni  et  dnigeuti  tractatu  cum  priore  et  capitulo  ecclesie  nostre 
cathedralis  Sanctiandree,  et  eorundem  ad  hoc  accedente  consensu,  attendentes 
deuotionem  dicti  donatoris  et  iustauciam  priucipis  ac  indigenciam  dieti 
monasterii  de  Cambuskyuneth  quod  per  guerras  et  hostiles  incursus  multipli- 
citer  collabitur  in  viribus  et  deformatur  ruinis  et  per  ictum  tonitrui  et  ful- 
minis  iu  campanile  promineuti  ac  aliis  dampnosum  et  deforme  i^assum  est 

29 


226 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


detrimentum  ac  ouera  alia  ordinaria  et  repentina  que  ipsum  monasterivmi 
subit  continue  et  sustinet,  ipsam  parrocliialem  ecclesiam  de  Kynnoule  cum 
terris,  decimis  et  obuentionibus,  et  omnibus  aliis  pertinenciis  suis,  predictis 
abbati  et  conuentui  de  Cambuskynneth,  diuine  pietatis  intuitu,  pro  nobis  et 
successoribus  nostris  in  suos  proprios  vsus  perpetuo  damus,  concedimus  et 
teuore  preseiitium  conferimus,  ac  ipsi  monasterio  de  Cambuskynnetb  aunec- 
timus  imperpetuum  et  vnimus,  et  hanc  nostram  concessionem  de  consensu 
prioris  et  capituli  nostri  Sanctiandree  vt  premittitur  factam,  scripto  presenti  et 
auctoritate  ordinaria  auctorizamus  et  imperpetuum  confirmamus,  et  religiosum 
virum  dominum  Gilbertum  abbatem  de  Cambuskynnetb,  nomine  suo  et  dicti 
sui  monasterii  ac  conueutus  predicti,  per  aunuli  nostri  traditionem  de  dicta 
ecclesia  de  Kynuoule  inuestimus,  saluo  domino  Bricio  rectori  eiusdem  ecclesie 
iure  suo  donec  cedat  vel  decedat :  volumus  itaque  et  ordinamus  quod  futuris 
temporibus  dicti  abbas  et  conueutus  de  Cambuskynneth  prefate  ecclesie  de 
Kynnoule  per  vnum  capellanum  honestum  et  ydoneum  quem  ad  hoc  assumere 
voluerint  deseruiri  faciant  in  diuinis,  saluis  nobis  et  successoribus  nostris 
episcopis  Sanctiandree,  archidiaconis  nostris  qui  pro  tempore  fuerint,  juribus 
episcopalibus  et  archidiaconalibus,  cum  canonica  obediencia  et  subiectione. 
In  cuius  rei  testimonium  sigillum  nostrum,  vuacum  sigillo  capituli  nostri  in 
signum  consensus  sui  ad  hoc  prestiti,  presentibus  est  appensum.  Datum 
apud  Sanctumandream,  septimo  die  mensis  Februarii  anno  Domini  millesimo 
tricentesimo  sexagesimo  primo. 


162.    CONFIKMATIO  EEGIS  SUPER  EODEM.       TRAXSCKIPTUM  DE  EEGISTRO 
EEGIS. 

Dauid  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotorum,  nmnibus  probis  hominibus  totius  terre  sue 
salutem  :  Sciatis  nos  iuspexisse  quamdam  cartam  Eoberti  de  Erskin,  militis,  iu 
hec  verba  :  Omnibus  hanc  cartam  visuris  vel  audituris,  Eobertus  de  Erskin, 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


dominus  eiusdem  et  baronie  de  Kynuoule,  salutem  in  Domino  senipiternam  : 
Xoueritis  me  pro  salute  anime  mee  et  pro  salute  animarum  omnium  predeces- 
sorum,  lieredum  seu  successorum  meorum,  dominorum  dicte  baronie  de  Kyn- 
iioule,  dedisse,  concessisse  et  hac  presenti  carta  mea  confirmasse  Deo  et  beate 
Marie  virgini,  et  religiosis  viris  abbati  et  conuentui  de  Cambuskynneth  ibidem 
Deo  seruientibus  et  imperpetuum  seruituris,  aduocationem  siue  jus  patronatus 
ecclesie  de  Kynnoule :  Tenendam  et  liabendam  eisdem  religiosis  et  eorum  suc- 
cessoribus  in  proprios  vsus  suos  in  liberam,  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam 
adeo  libere  et  quiete,  plene,  pure,  integre  et  bonorifice  cum  omnibus  libertatibus, 
commoditatibus,  asiamentis  et  iustis  pertinenciis  suis  sicut  aduocatio  siue  jus 
patronatus  alicuius  ecclesie  ab  aliquo  barone  per  totum  reguum  Scotie  alicui 
monasterio  seu  pio  aut  religioso  loco  alii  liberius,  plenius,  quietius,  purius, 
iutegrius  et  honorificentius  in  liberam,  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam 
dari  potest  seu  concedi.  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  presenti  carte  sigillum 
meum  apposui ;  testibus  reuerendo  in  Christo  patre  domiuo  Willelmo  Dei 
gracia  episcopo  Sanctiandree,  domiuis  Dauid  Grahame,  Eogero  de  Mortuo- 
mari  et  Dauid  Flemyng,  militibus,  magistro  Willelmo  de  Grenlaw  archidiacouo 
Sanctiandree,  Alano  de  Erskyn  fratre  meo,  Hugone  de  Eoss,  ac  multis  aliis. 
Datum  apud  Striueling,  die  vicesimo  septimo  mensis  Januarii,  anno  gracie 
millesimo  tricentesimo  sexagesimo  primo  :  Quamquidem  cartam  in  omnibus 
suis  punctis  et  articulis,  forma  jiariter  et  effectu  vt  prescriptum  est,  approba- 
mus,  ratificamus  et  per  presentes  confirmamus,  testibus,  etc.  Datum  apud 
Edinburgh,  septimo  die  Aprilis,  anno  regni  nostri  tricesimo  secundo  etc. 
Datum  per  copiam  transumptam. 


KTNNOULE 


1G3.    COXFIRMACIO  EPISCOPI  ET  PRIOEIS  SaNCTIANDREE  DE  KyNNOULE. 

Uniuersis  ad  quorum  noticiam  presentes  litere  peruenerint,  Willelmus  Dei 
gracia  episcopus  Sanctiandree  ac  eiusdem  ecclesie  prior  et  capitulum,  sahitem 


228 


REGISTRUM  MOXASTERII 


in  eo  ([\\\  est  omnium  vera  salus  :  In  vestram  deducimus  noticiam  et  vobis 
tenore  presencium  fideliter  patefacimus  quod  noljilis  vir  dominus  Eobertus  de 
Erskin,  miles,  dominus  eiusdem  et  baronie  de  Kynnoule,  olim  patronus  par- 
rochialis  ecclesie  de  Kynnoule  nostre  diocesis,  aduocationem  siue  jus  patrona- 
tus  predicte  ecclesie,  quam  ipsa  ecclesia  de  Kynnoule  habebat,  religiosis  viris 
abbati  et  conueutui  monasterii  beate  Marie  de  Cambuskynneth  ordinis  Sancti 
Augustini  Sanctiandree  diocesis  et  ipsorum  monasterio  pie  et  deuote,  pro 
salute  anime  sue  et  salute  animarum  antecessorum  et  successorum  suorum, 
precipue  dominorum  dicte  baronie,  contulit  perpetuo  et  donauit,  prout  in  eius 
literis  inde  confectis  plenius  continetur  ;  nosque  episcopus,  prior  et  capitulum 
antedicti  considerantes  causas  necessarias,  videlicet,  deuotionem  dieti  militis 
donatoris,  paupertatem  et  distructionem,  necessitatem  ac  indigenciam  dicti 
monasterii  propter  guerras,  tonitrua  et  fulmina,  ac  diuersos  hostiles  incursus, 
de  quibus  omnibus  et  singulis  per  testes  fidedignos  juratos  ac  per  nostram 
presenciam  oculariter  et  scienter  fuimus  et  sumus  plenarie  iuformati,  habito 
prius  super  hoc  frequenti  solempni  et  diligenti  tractatu  inter  nos  in  loco  nostro 
capitulari  ecclesie  nostre  cathedralis  Sanctiandree,  ad  hoc  vocatos  et  sepius 
specialiter  congregatos,  semper  nobis  communicato  diuersorum  peritorum  con- 
silio,  nostrorum  ad  hoc  communi  accedente  consensu,  attendentes  deuotionem 
dicti  donatoris  ac  dicti  monasterii  maximam  paupertatem  et  indigenciam 
quod  per  guerras  et  hostiles  incursus  multipliciter  collabitur  in  uiribus  et 
deformatur  ruinis  et  jier  ictum  tonitrui  et  fulminis  in  campanili  prominenti 
et  aliis  prout  noliis;  bene  patet  dampnosum  et  deforme  passum  est  detrimentum 
ac  onera  alia  ordinaria  et  repentina  que  ipsum  monasterium  suliit  continue  et 
sustinet,  ipsam  ecclesiam  parrochialem  de  Kynnoule,  cum  omnibus  pertinenciis 
suis,  predictis  abbati  et  conuentui,  diuine  pietatis  intuitu,  pro  nobis  et  succes- 
soribus  nostris  in  suos  proprios  vsus  perpetuo  damus,  concedimus,  et  tenore 
presencium  conferimus  ac  ipsi  monasterio  annectimus  et  impeqDetuum  vni- 


DE  CAMBUSKENXETH. 


229 


mus ;  donationem  clicti  militis  ratam  et  gratam  habentes  ac  eara  auctoritate 
ordinaria  confirmantes.  Et  nos  episcopiis  memoratus  hanc  nostram  prioris  et 
capituli  nostri  ecclesie  nostre  cathedralis  concessionem  de  vnanimi  et  com- 
muni  consensu  nostro  vt  predicitur  de  dicta  ecclesia  de  Kynnoule  piredictis 
religiosis  ac  eorum  monasterio  factam  scripto  presenti  ac  aiictoritate  OTxlinaria 
autorizamus  ac  imperpetuum  confirmamus,  et  religiosum  virura  fratrem  Clil- 
bertum  abbatem  dicti  monasterii,  nomine  suo  et  conuentus  ac  dicti  monasterii, 
de  dicta  ecclesia  de  Kynnoule  inuestimus,  sahio  domiuo  Bricio  eiusdem  ecclesie 
rectori  qui  nunc  est  jure  suo  donec  cedat  vel  decedat.  Vohimus  itaque  et 
ordinamus  quod  futuris  temporibus  perpetuo  vicario  siue  curato  predicte 
ecclesie  de  KjTinoule  qni  pro  tempore  fuerit  de  fructibus  dicte  ecclesie  aut 
dicti  monasterii  bonis  de  decem  libris  sterliugorum  deseruiatur  annuatim  pro 
sustentatione  vite  sue  ;  sahiis  nobis  et  successoribus  nostris  iuribus  episcopali- 
bus  et  archidiaconahbus  cum  canouica  obediencia  et  subiectione.  In  cuius 
rei  testimonium  sigillum  nostrum  vnacum  sigillo  communi  capituli  nostri 
antedicti  in  signum  consensus  sui  ad  hoc  prestiti  presentibus  est  appensum. 
Datum  apud  Sanctumandream,  septimo  die  mensis  Februarii  in  loco  eiusdem 
capitulari,  anno  Domini  millesimo  tricentesimo  sexagesimo  primo. 


KYNNOULE. 


l64.    IXSTITCTIO  ET  COLLATIO  EPISCOPI  S.\NCTIAXDrvEE  DE  DATA  :\IILLESIMO 
TRICENTESI.MO  SEXAGESIMO  PPaMO. 

WiLLELMUS  miseratione  diuina  episcopus  Sanctiandree,  domino  Andree  per- 
petuo  vicario  de  Perth,  decano  nostro  de  Gebry,  salutem  cum  benedictione 
diuina :  Quia  ecclesiam  de  Kynnoule  parrochialem,  cuius  aduocationis  seu 
patronatus  jus  nobilis  vir  dominus  Eobertus  de  Erskiu  dominus  baronie  de 
Kynnoule  religiosis  viris  dominis  abbati  et  conuentui  de  Cambuskynneth  pie 
concessit,  uosque  de  consensu  et  vohmtate  capituU  nostri,  habito  super  hoc 
dihgenti  tractatu  et  communicato  peritorum  consilio,  ad  instanciam  domini 


230 


nEGISTRUM  MONASTEEII 


iiostri  regis  et  dicti  patroni,  cousideratis  causis  uecessariis  et  vtilibus,  prefatis 
religiosis  viris  iu  proprios  vsus  cum  vuiuersis  pertineuciis  perpetuo  possidendis 
caritatiue  contulimus  et  [per]  presentes  couferimus,  saluo  jure  rectoris  nuuc  pos- 
sideutis  cui  pro  tempore  suo  in  uullo  volumus  derogare,  sicut  in  aliis  cartis  et 
literis  super  lioc  coufectis  plenius  contiuetur,  vobis  iu  virtute  obediencie 
firmiter  precipiendo  mandamus  quatenus  prefatum  abbatem,  nomine  suo 
suiqiie  conuentus  et  mouasterii  predicti,  in  dictam  ecclesiam  de  Kynnoule 
instituatis  ac  iu  corporalem  possessiouem  eiusdem  tanquam  verum  rectorem 
inducatis,  ita  quod  cedeute  vel  decedeute  rectore  qui  uuuc  est,  alia  insti- 
tutio  non  sit  sibi  uecessaria  vel  eciam  possessio  corporalis.  In  signum  vero 
liuiusmodi  institutionis  traditeque  sibi  possessionis  sigillum  of&cii  vestri  pre- 
sentibus  appouatis,  penes  dictos  religiosos  viros  etmouasterium  suum  perpetuo 
remausuris.  Datuin  sub  sigillo  nostro  apud  Monymell,  decimo  uono  die 
Februarii,  anuo  Domini  millesimo  tricentesimo  sexagesimo  primo. 


1 65.  BuLLA  DE  Kynnoule  de  vxione  dicte  ecclesie. 
Clemexs  episcopus  seruus  seruorum  Dei,  ^-euerabiLi  fratri  episcopo  Glasguensi 
.salutem  et  apostolicam  benedictionem  :  Sub  religiouis  obseruancia  virtutum 
Domiuo  famulautes  apostolico  nos  conuenit  fauore  prosequi  speciali  et  vt  eis 
iu  eorum  uecessitatibus  de  alicuius  subuentionis  auxQio  consulatur  partes 
nostre  sollicitudiuis  adherere,  sane  peticio  pro  parte  dilectorum  filiorum 
abbatis  et  couueutus  mouasterii  beate  Marie  de  Cambuskynuetli  ordiuis 
Suucti  Augustini  Sauctiaudree  diocesis  nobis  nuper  exbibita  continebat  quod 
olim  veuerabilis  frater  noster  WiLlelmus  episcopus  Sanctiaudree  considerans 
necessitates  et  indigencias  quas  iidem  abbas  et  conuentus  ac  monasterium,  qui 
occasioue  guerrarum  calicibus  aureis  et  argenteis,  paunis  lineis  et  laueis 
ac  oruamentis  ecclesiasticis,  priuilegiis  et  iustrumeutis  publicis  et  aliis 
diuersis  bouis  fueraut  nequiter  spoliati,  quoruuque  claustrum,  campanile  et 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


231 


alia  edificia  erant  distracta,  paciebantur,  ac  volens  eis  de  alicuius  subuencionis 
auxilio  prouidere,  de  consensu  dilectorum  filioruni  capituli  et  ecclesie  Saucti- 
andree  ordinis  predicti,  parrochialem  ecclesiara  de  Kyunouie  Sanctiaiidrce 
diocesis  predicte,  cuius  jus  patronatus  ad  eosdem  abbatem  et  couuentum  per- 
tinebat,  in  proprios  vsus  contulit  et  donauit  ac  vniuit  et  eis  eciam  incorporaiiit, 
et  quod  demum  ipsi  dictam  ecclesiam  tunc  per  obitum  quondam  Bricii  de  Bryet, 
tunc  vltimi  ipsius  ecclcsie  rectoris,  extra  Romanam  curiam  defuncti,  vacantem, 
assecuti,  illam  per  duos  annos  vel  circiter  pacifice  tenueruut,  quodque  post- 
modum  orta  mter  ipsos  abbatem  et  conuentum  ex  parte  vna  et  dilectum 
filium  Andream  de  Trebrine  presbyterum  dicte  diocesis  super  dicta  parrochiali 
ecclesia  de  qua  sic  vacante  idem  ^^^ndreas  sibi  asserebat  auctoritate  apostolica 
mandatum  fuisse  prouideri,  et  quam  quilibot  ipsorum  ad  se  de  jure  spectare 
asserebant,  materia  questionis  et  cause  liuiusmodi  ad  sedem  apostolicam  intro- 
ducta  et  coram  certo  causarum  palacii  apostolici  auditore  ex  commissione 
apostolica  aliquandiu  ventulata,  tandem  idem  Andreas  ptro  se  et  coutra 
abbatem  et  conuentum  predictos  super  dicta  ecclesia  diffinitiuam  sentenciam, 
per  quam  vt  asseritur  ecclesia  ipsa  sibi  fuit  adiudicata,  reportauit  que  nulla  pro- 
uocatione  suspensa  in  rem  transiuit  iudicatam ;  et  quod  idem  Andreas  pretextu 
sententie  huiusmodieosdemabbatem  et  conuentum  eiusdem  ecclesie  possessioue 
spoliauit,  ipsamque  extunc  tenuit  prout  tenet  occupatam ;  quare  pro  parte 
dictonmi  abbatis  et  conuentus  uobis  extitit  humiliter  supplicatum  vt  dietam 
parrochialem  ecclesiam  eisdem  abbati  et  conuentui  ac  monasterio  de  nouo 
vnire,  annectere  et  incorporare  de  benignitate  apostolica  diguaremur :  Nos  igitur 
huiusmodi  supplicationibus  inclinati,  fraternitati  tue,  de  qua  in  hiis  et  aliis 
specialem  in  Domino  fiduciam  obtinemus,  per  apostolica  scripta  committimus 
et  mandamus  cpiatenus  super  premissis  auctoritate  apostolica  te  informes,  et  si 
per  informationem  huiusmodi  repereris  vtile  et  expediens  existere  quod  dicta 
ecclesia  eisdem  abbati  et  conuentui  vuiatur,  ecclesiam  ipsam,etiam  si  disposi- 


232 


REGISTUU2I  MOXASTERII 


KYNNOULE 


tioni  apostolice  geueraliter  vel  specialiter  reseruata  seu  eiiis  collatio  ad  sedem 
predictam  legitime  deuoluta  existat,  cum  omnibus  juribus  et  pertineuciis  suis 
eisdem  abbati  et  couueutui  auctoritate  apostolica  imperpetuum  incorporare 
ac  auuectere,  et  vniri  procuretis,  ita  quod  liceat  eisdem  abbati  et  conuentui 
eiusdem  parrocbialis  ecclesie,  si  vacat  ad  presens  vel  cum  vacauerit  per 
liberam  resignationem  simplicem  vel  ex  causa  permutationis  ipsius  Andree, 
apud  sedem  apostolicam  vel  extra  Eomauam  curiam  vel  per  assecutionem 
cuiuscuuque  alterius  beneficii  auctoritate  apostolica  collati  vel  confereudi,  seu 
per  obitum  ipsius  Audree  seu  alias  quouismodo  etiam  ex  persona  cuiuscunque 
alterius,  corpuralem  possessiouem  eiusdem  parrockialis  ecclesie  ac  jurium  et 
pertineuciarum  predictorum  auctoritate  propria  libere  apprebendere  et  nan- 
cisci,  ipsamque  ecclesiam  perpetuo  retiuere,  ac  fructus,  redditus  et  prouentus 
eiusdem  ecclesie  iu  vsus  proprios  ac  iu  supportationem  onerum  huiusmodi  et 
iu  vtilitatem  dicti  mouasterii  conuertere  valeant  et  debeaut,  diocesaui  loci 
et  cuiuslibet  alterius  liceucia  miuime  requisita.  Volumus  autem  quod  de 
fructibus,  redditibus  et  prouentibus  predictis  perpetuo  vicario  in  eadem 
ecclesia  instituendo  et  iuibi  Domiuo  perpetuo  seruituro  congruam  portionem 
assignes,  de  qua  idem  vicarius  valeat  commode  sustentari,  episcopalia  jura 
soluere,  et  alia  sibi  iucumbeucia  onera  supi^ortare,  contradictores  per  censuram 
ecclesiasticam,  appellatioue  postposita,  compescendo,  nou  obstantibus  si  aliqui 
super  prouisionibus  sibi  faciendis  de  huiusmodi  pa"rrocliialibus  ecclesiis  vel 
aliis  beueficiis  ecclesiasticis  in  illis  partibus  speciales  vel  generales  dicte  sedis 
vel  legatorum  eius  literas  impetrarunt,  eciam  si  per  eas  ad  iuliibitiouem, 
reseruationem  et  decretum,  vel  alias  quomodolibet  sit  processum ;  quas 
quidem  literas  et  processus  liabitos  per  easdem  ad  prefatam  ecclesiam  par- 
rochialem  volumus  uon  exteudi  sed  uullum  per  lioc  eiis  quoad  assecutionem 
beneficiorum  aliorum  preiudicium  generari  et  quibuslibet  preuilegiis,  indid- 
geuciis   et    literis    apostolicis    geueralibus   vel    specialibus,   quorumcunque 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


233 


tenorum  existant,  per  que  presentibus  nou  expressa  vel  totaliter  non  incerta 
effectus  earum  impedire  valeat  quomodolibet  vel  deferri,  et  de  quibus  quoruni- 
que  totis  tenoribus  de  verbo  ad  verbum  liabenda  sit  in  nostris  literis  mentio 
specialis.  Et  insujier  extunc  irritum  decernimus  et  iuane  si  secus  super  liiis 
a  quoquam  quauis  auctoritate  scienter  aut  iguoranter  contigerit  attemptari. 
Datum  Auinioue  septimo  kalendas  Nouembris  pontificatus  nostri  anno  primo. 


166.    NOUA  BULLA  VNIONIS  ECCLESIE  DE  IvYNNOOLE. 

Benedictus  episcopus  seruus  seruorum  Dei,  venerabili  fratri  episcopo  Sancti- 
andree,  salutem  et  apostolicam  benedictionem :  Eomani  pontificis  prouidencia 
circumspecta  ad  ea  ex  apostolice  seruitutis  officio  libenter  intendit  per  que 
monasteriorum  et  personarum  in  eiis  degencium  necessitatibus  valeat  pro- 
uideri,  dudum  siquidem,  pro  parte  dilectorum  filiorum  abbatis  et  conuentus 
monasterii  beate  Marie  de  Cambuskynneth  ordinis  Sancti  Augustini  tue 
diocesis,  felicis  recordacionis  Clementi  pape  septimo  predecessori  nostro 
exposito  quod  olim  bone  memorie  "Willelmus  episcopus  Sanctiandree  con- 
siderans  quod  abbas  et  conuentus  ac  monasterium  predictum  per  gentes 
armigeras,  que  in  illas  partes  diucius  discurrerant,  calicibus  aureis  et  argenteis, 
pannis  lineis  et  laneis,  ac  ornamentis  ecclesiasticis  et  instrumentis  publicis, 
ac  diuersis  aliis  bonis  spoliati  ac  claustrum  et  campanile  et  alia  edificia  ipsius 
monasterii  distructa  fuerant,  et  quod  iidem  abbas  et  conuentus  adeo  iudigentes 
existebant  quod  commode  calicibus  et  ecclesiasticis  ornamentis  necessariis 
eidem  monasterio  prouidere  ac  claustrum,  campanile  et  edificia  predicta 
facere  reparari  absque  alicuius  subuenciouis  auxilio  non  valebant,  de  con- 
sensu  dilectorum  filiorum,  capituli  ecclesie  Sanctiaudree  dicti  ordinis,  par- 
rocliialem  ecclesiam  de  Kynnoule  dicte  diocesis  que  ad  presentationem 
dictorum  abbatis  et  couuentus  pertinet,  cum  omnibus  juribus  et  pertinenciis 
suis  eidem  monasterio  auctoritate  ordinaria  vniuerat,  annexauerat  et  incor- 

30 


234 


EEGISTRUM  MONASTEEII 


porauerat,  idem  predecessor  episcopo  Glasgiiensi,  eius  proprio  noniine  non 
expresso,  per  literas  apostolicas  dedit  in  mandatis  vt  super  premissis  se 
auctoritate  apostolica  informaret,  et,  si  per  informationem  huiusmodi  premissa 
reperiret  veritate  fulciri,  parrochialem  ecclesiam  predictam  cum  omnibus 
juribus  et  pertinenciis  supradictis  prefato  monasterio  auctoritate  apostolica 
vniret  annecteret  et  incorporaret,  prout  in  eisdem  literis  plenius  continetur ; 
et  deinde,  sicut  exhibita  nobis  pro  parte  dictorum  abbatis  et  conuentus 
petitio  continebat,  bone  memorie  Walterus  episcopus  Glasguensis  ad  exe- 
cutionem  literarum  ipsarum  procedens,  quia  premissa  reperit  veritate 
fulciri,  dictam  ecclesiam  parrochialem  eidem  monasterio  vigore  literarum 
dictarum  vniuit,  annexuit  et  incorporauit,  ita  quod,  cedente  vel  decedente 
rectore  ipsius  parrochialis  ecclesie  qui  tunc  erat  aut  alias  ecclesiam  ipsam 
quomodolibet  dimittente,  liceret  eisdem  abbati  et  conuent\ii  corporalem 
■possessionem  ipsius  parrochialis  ecclesie  auctoritate  propria  recipere  et 
retinere,  ac  fructus,  redditus  et  prouentus  ipsius  ecclesie  in  suos  ac 
monasterii  et  ecclesie  predictorum  vsus  conuertere,  et  subsequenter  dicto 
predecessore,  vnione  huiusmodi  non  sortita  effectum,  sicut  Domino  placuit, 
sublato  de  medio,  nos  diuina  fauente  clemencia  ad  apicem  summi  apostolatus 
assumptiones  et  singulas  vniones  quacunque  auctoritate  factas,  que  suum  non 
erant  sortite  effectum,  reuocauimus,  annuUauimus  ac  nullius  esse  vohmuis 
roboris  vel  momenti,  cum  autem,  sicut  eadem  petitio  subiungebat,  dictum 
monasterium  calicibus,  ornamentis  ecclesiasticis,  pannis  lineis  et  laneis  non 
modicum  indigeat  de  presenti,  dictaque  claustrum,  campanUe  et  edificia 
nondum  reparata  existant,  ac  abbas  et  conuentus  predicti  adeo  indigentes 
existant  quod  commode  calicibus,  ornamentis  ecclesiasticis  necessariis  eidem 
monasterio  prouidere,  ac  claustrum,  campanile  et  edificia  predicta  facere 
reparari  non  possunt,  pro  parte  carissimi  in  Christo  filii  Eoberti  regis  Scotie 
iHustris,  ac  abbatis  et  conuentus  predictorum  nobis  fuit  humiHter  supplicatura 


DE  CA2IBUSKEXNETn. 


23: 


vt  prefatam  parrochialein  ecclesiam  mouasterio  predicto  imperpetuum  vaire, 
auuectere  et  incorporare  de  beuignitate  apostolica  diguaremur :  Nos  igitur  de 
premissis  uobis  expositis  certam  uoticiam  uou  liabeutes,  huiusmodi  suppli- 
catiouibus  iucliuati,  frateruitati  tue,  de  qua  iu  hiis  et  aliis  pleuam  iu  Domiuo 
fiduciam  obtiuemus,  per  apostolica  scripta  maudamus  quateuus,  si  premissa 
nobis  exposita  repereris  esse  vera,  dictam  parrochialem  ecclesiam  cuiu  omui- 
bus  juribus  et  pertiueuciis  supradictis  eidem  monasterio  auctoritate  nostra 
imperpetuum  vuire,  auuectere  et  iucorporare  procures,  ita  quod,  cedeute  vel 
decedeute  rectore  ipsius  parrochialis  ecclesie  aut  illam  alias  quomodolibet 
dimittente,  liceat  eidem  abbati  et  couueutui  per  se  vel  alium  corporalem 
possessiouem  parrochialis  ecclesie  auctoritate  propria  appreheudere  et  retiuere, 
ac  ipsius  ecclesie  fructus,  redditus  et  prouentus  in  suos  ac  mouasterii  et 
parrocliialis  ecclesie  predictorum  vsus  couuertere,  cuiuscunque  licencia 
niiuime  requisita  ;  reseruata  tamen  prius  de  ipsius  parrochialis  ecclesie  fruc- 
tibus,  redditibus  et  prouentibus  cougrua  portioue  pro  perpetuo  vicario  ad 
preseutatiouem  abbatis  et  couuentus  predictorum  iuibi  instituendo,  ex  qua 
idem  vicarius  valeat  cougrue  susteutari,  episcopalia  jura  soluere,  et  alia  sibi 
iucumbeutia  ouera  supportare,  contradictores  per  censuram  ecclesiasticam, 
appellatioue  postposita,  compescendo ;  non  obstantibus  quibuscunque  coustitu- 
tionibus  apostolicis  ac  statutis  et  consuetudiuibus  ecclesie  Sauctiandree  et 
ordiuis  predictorum  coutrariis,  jurameuto,  confirmatione  apostolica  vel  qua- 
cuuque  firmitate  alia  roboratis,  aut  si  aliqui  super  prouisionibus  sibi  faciendis 
de  parrochialibus  ecclesiis  aut  aliis  beueficiis  ecclesiasticis  in  illis  partibus 
speciales  vel  generales  apostolice  sedis  vel  legatorum  eius  literas  impetrariut, 
etiam  si  per  eas  ad  inhibitionem,  reseruatiouem  et  decretum  vel  alias  quomodo- 
libet  sit  processum ;  quasquidem  literas  et  processus  habitos  per  eosdem  ad 
dictam  parrochialem  ecclesiam  volumus  non  exteudi,  sed  uullum  per  hoc  eiis 
quoad  assecutionem  paiTochialium  ecclesiarum  ac  beneficiorum  aliorum  pre- 


KVNXOULK. 


236 


EEGISTRUM  MONASTEIUI 


iudicium  generare,  seu  si  aliquibus  communiter  vel  diuisim  a  dicta  sit  sede 
indultum  quod  interdici,  suspendi,  vel  excommunicari  non  possint,  per  literas 
apostolicas  non  facientes  plenam  et  expressam  ac  de  verbo  ad  verbum  de 
indulto  huiusmodi  mentionem,  et  quibuslibet  priuilegiis,  indulgenciis  et 
literis  apostolicis  generalibus  vel  specialibus,  quorumcunque  tenorum  existant, 
per  que  preseutibus  non  expressa  vel  totaliter  non  inserta  effectus  earum 
impediri  valeat  quomodolibet  vel  deferri,  et  de  quibus,  quorumque  totis 
tenoribus  habenda  sit  in  nostris  literis  mentio  specialis,  prouiso  quod  paiTO- 
chialis  ecclesia  predicta  debitis  obsequiis  non  fraudetur  et  animarum  cura  in 
ea  nullatenus  negligatur  :  Nos  enim  exnunc  irritum  decernimus  et  inane  si 
secus  super  hiis  a  quoquam  quauis  auctoritate  scienter  vel  ignoranter  conti- 
gerit  attemptari.  Datum  Nicii,  quarto  nonas  Aprilis,  pontificatus  nostri  anno 
vndecimo. 


167.  Instrumentum  nouum  de  Kynnoule  quomodo  Andreas  Trebrone 
RECTOR  de  Ktnnoule  concessit  esse  contentus  de  annua  pen- 

SIONE  VIGINTI  LIBRARUM. 

In  Dei  nomine,  amen  :  Per  hoc  presens  publicum  instrumentum  cunctis 
pateat  euidenter  quod  anuo  ab  Incarnatione  Domini  millesimo  quadringen- 
tesimo  tertio,  indictione  vndecima,  mensis  Septembris  die  vicesima  sexta, 
pontificatus  sanctissimi  in  Christo  patris  ac  domini  uostri  domini  Benedicti 
diuina  prouidencia  pape  tercii  decimi  anno  nono,  in  mei  notarii  publici  et 
testium  subscriptorum  presencia  in  vestiario  ecclesie  parrochialis  de  Perth, 
hora  quasi  nona  illius  diei  comparuerunt  reUgiosi  viri  domini  Eicardus  de 
Craufurd  et  Johannes  de  Benyne  canonici  regulares  monasterii  de  Cambus- 
kynneth  ordinis  Sancti  Augustini  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  quiquidem  dominus 
Eicardus  in  medio  produxit  certas  literas  patentes  sub  sigiLlo  communi,  \-t 
apparuit,  dicti  monasterii,  conuentus  et  capituli  sigillatas,  continentes  inter 


DE  CAMBUSKENXETII. 


237 


cetera  qualiter  dictus  reuerendus  pater  abbas  et  suus  conuentus  fecerunt  dictuni 
dominum  Ricardum,  eorum  concanonicum,  procuratorem  et  negociorum  suoruni 
gestorem  ad  tractandum  et  determinandum  certas  contraueraias  seu  debatas 
ortas  inter  eosdem  religiosos  et  discretum  viriun  magistrum  Andream  de 
Trebrone,  occasione  juris  possessionis  et  proprietatis  parrochialis  ecclesie  de 
Kynnoule  dicte  diocesis ;  quibus  literis  lectis,  et  presentibus  tunc  discretis  viris 
domino  Andrea  de  Petscoty  perpetuo  vicario  et  Johanne  Gdl  preposito  de 
Perth,  statim  idem  prepositus  dixit  <[uod  fuerat  oneratus  j)er  nobilem  et 
potentem  virum  dominum  Dauid  de  Lindesay  comitem  de  Craufurd  dicere 
aliqua  assertiua  dicto  magistro  Andree,  et  sicut  asseruit  de  illis  voluit  se  deon- 
erare  in  presencia  dictorum  religiosorum  ac  nobilis  et  potentis  viri  domini 
Nicholai  de  Erskin,  militis,  domiui  de  Kynnoule ;  vude  statim  ideni  prepositus 
prorupit  in  Iiec  verba,  magister  Andrea,  dominus  meus  eomes  de  Craufurd 
concordauit  cum  domino  abbate  de  Cambuskynneth  quod  vobis  remanerent 
fructus  ecclesie  de  Kyunoule  anno  presenti,  quorum  partem  recepistis,  etquod 
post  istum  annum  essetis  contenti  de  vigiuti  libris  sterlingoruni  vobis  sol- 
iiendis  ad  duos  vsuales  termiuos  anni  tunc  futuri  annuatim,  pro  vita  vestra, 
tanquam  pro  annua  pensione  quousque  vos  poteritis  consequi  aliquod  bene- 
ficiuin  ecclesiasticum,  et  sic  tota  et  integra  ecclesia  de  Kynnoule  in  proprietate 
et  possessione,  sine  quocunque  juris  clameo  vel  calumpnia,  penes  ipsos  religiosos 
melius  et  securius  quo  fieri  j^otest  inter  partes  predictas  pro  perpetuo  remane- 
bit ;  et  hec,  sicut  asseruit  idem  prej)Ositus,  mandauit  sibi  dictus  dominus  comes 
denunciare  dicto  clerico  et  audire  responsionem  eiusdem :  qui  clericus  sic 
respondebat,  quod  dicti  domini  religiosi  peruigiles  in  facto  suo  primo  obtinu- 
erimt  dictuni  dominum  de  Kynnoule  pro  parte  eorundem ;  secundo,  magn ificum 
et  potentem  dominum  dominum  ducem  Albanie  declarare  literas  suas  in  fauore 
eorundem ;  et  tertio,  singularissimum  dominum  suu.m  dictum  domiuum 
comitem  de  Craufurd  obtinuerunt  iidem  religiosi,  vt  asseruit  idem  clericus,  pro 


KYNNOULE. 


238 


llEGISTnUM  MONASTEEII 


KWVNOULE. 


eorundeiu  libito  voluiitatis,  et  cuius  comitis  ordinationem,  secuudum  ipsius 
prepositi  relatiouem,  vt  affirmabat  idem  clericus,  volebat  seruare  in  omuibus, 
dum  tameu  assecuretur  debite  de  huiusmodi  anuua  pensioue  sibi  persoluenda  ad 
duos  auui  termiuos  vsuales  certo  loco  conuenieudo  inter  partes  :  Quiquidem 
religiosi  pecierunt  vt  posseut  remauere  cum  fructibus  ipsius  ecclesie  et  pos- 
sessionem  suam  contiuuare :  Qui  clericus  respondebat  quod  sicut  non  vole- 
bat  in  principali  ordinatione  dicti  domiui  comitis  decliuare,  sicut  nec  bono 
modo  audebat,  ita  nec  iu  fructibus  auni  presentis  dimittendis  cousentiret 
ali([UO  modo  siue  dicti  domiui  comitis  voluntate  expressa ;  vude  protestatus 
fuit  dictus  domiuus  religiosus  procurator,  quod  postquam  remanereut  omues 
fructus  ipsius  ecclesie  cum  dicto  clerico  pro  auno  preseuti,  idem  clericus  solu- 
eret  omuia  ouera  ordinaria  et  extraordiuaria  ipsius  ecclesie  pro  ipso  anno,  et 
concordabuut  jjartes  quod  ad  approbatiouem  omnitim  premissorum  couueniant 
amicabiliter  coram  domiuo  couseruatore,  qui  ratificabit,  confirmabit  et  approba- 
bit  premissa  siugula  auctoritate  sua  et  coram  quo  partes  Ln  quantum  oportebit 
se  per  literas  et  muuimenta  futuro  tempore  plenius  ad  iuuicem  et 

mutuo  assecurabunt.  Super  quibus  omnibus  et  singulis  predicte  partes  peci- 
erunt  a  me  uotario  subscripto  cuilibet  eorundem  sibi  fieri  publicum  instru- 
meutum.  Acta  fuerunt  bec  auno,  iudictioue,  mense,  die  et  pontificatu  ac  loco 
superius  aunotatis ;  presentibus  discretis  viris  domino  Nicholao  de  Erskyu, 
douiino  Andrea  de  Petscoty,  Johanne  Gill  suprascriptis,  et  multis  aliis  testibus 
ad  premissa  vocatis  specialiter  et  rogatis. 

Et  ego  Willelmus  de  Kyunard,  clericus  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  publicus  im- 
periali  auctoritate  notarius,  quia  premissis  omnibus  et  singTilis  dum,  sic  vt 
premittitur,  per  dictas  partes  modis  et  formis  quibus  supra  agerentur  et 
fierent,  vuacum  preuominatis  testibus  preseus  iuterfui,  eaque  sic  fieri  vidi  et 
audiui  et  ad  instantiam  dictarum  partium  in  hanc  publicam  formam  redegi, 
presensque  instrumentrim,  me  aliis  uegotiis  occupato,  per  alium  scribi  feci. 


DE  CAMBUSKEXXETII. 


239 


iJem  meis  signo  et  subscriptione  solitis  et  consuetis  roboraui,  in  testimonium 
omnium  premissorum  :  interlineationem  factam  huius  dictionis  sterlingorum 
in  propria  linea  discendendo  hic  fideliter  approbo. 


168.  Instrumentum  donationis  et  quieteclamationis  ecclesie  de  Kyn- 

NOULE  PER  NlCHOLAUM  DE  ErSKIN  MONASTEEIO  DE  CaMBUSKYNNETH. 

In  Dei  nomine,  amen  :  Per  hoc  presens  publicum  instrumentum  cunctis 
pateat  euidenter  quod  anno  a  natiuitate  eiusdem  millesimo  quadringentesimo, 
et  mensis  iMarcii  die  vicesimo  primo,  in  mei  notarii  publici  et  testium  sub- 
scriptorum  presencia  nobilis  et  poteus  vir  dominus  Nicholaus  de  Erskin,  miles, 
dominus  baronie  de  Ivynnoule,  personaliter  constitutus  approbauit,  ratificauit  et 
pro  se,  heredibus  suis  et  assignatis,pro  perpetuo  confirmauit  reuerendis  religiosis 
viris  et  dominis  abbati  et  conuentui  monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth  et  succes- 
soribus  suis  ordinis  beati  Augustini  Sanctiandree  diocesis  illas  douationem, 
concessionem  quas  sibi  fecit  bone  memorie  dominus  Robertus  de  Erskin,  miles, 
dominus  eiusdem  et  baronie  de  Kynnoule  antedicte,  genitor  suus,  de  aduocatione 
ecclesie  de  Kynnoule  et  jure  patronatus  eiusdem  in  puram  et  perpetuam  elemo- 
sinam,  necnon  dictus  domiuus  Nicholaus  totum  jus  et  clameum  ac  iuris  titulum 
que  et  quem  ipse  in  aduocatione  seu  jure  patronatus  dicte  ecclesie  habuit  vel 
habere  potuit,  pro  se,  heredibus  et  assignatis  suis,  dominis  dicte  baronie  de 
Kjmnoule,  prenominatis  religiosis  viris  et  dominis  et  eorum  successoribus 
sursum  reddidit  pure  et  simpliciter  in  suo  capitulo  dicti  sui  monasterii,  pre- 
sentibus  phiribus  nobilibus  et  reuerende  discretionis  viris,  intuitu  caritatis,  in 
puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  publice,  palam  et  viua  voce  resignauit,  et 
omuino  quietum  clamauit  iniperpetuum :  Tenendam  et  habendam  totam  et 
integram  aduocationem  ecclesie  supradicte  baronie  de  Kynnoule  et  jus 
patronatus  eiusdem  prefatis  religiosis  viris  ac  dominis  abbati  et  conuentui 
monasterii  supradicti  de  Cambuskynneth  et  successoribus  suis  in  purara  et 


240 


UEGISTR  UM  MOXASTEUII 


peipetuani  elemosiuaiii,  adeo  libere  et  quiete,  houorifice,  iutegre  et  bene  et  in 
pace  in  omnibus  et  per  omnia  sicut  in  carta  boue  memorie  dicti  domini 
Pioberti  genitoris  sui  dictis  religiosis  et  suis  successoribus  inde  coufecta  pleue 
contiuetnr,  sine  aliqua  calumpuia,  impedimeuto,  reuocatione,  vel  obstaculo  per 
ipsos  domiuum  Xicliolaiim  lieredes  vel  assignatos  suos  imposteruni  mouendis, 
temptandis  seu  facieudis  :  insuper  prefati  religiosi  viri  ac  domini  pro  se  et 
successoribus  sius  dederunt,  concesserunt,  et  pro  perpetuo  confirmauerunt 
prefatis  domino  Nicbolao  et  heredibus  suis  dominis  dicte  baronie  de 
Kynnoule,  presentationem  vicarie  dicte  ecclesie  ad  pensionem  duodecim 
marcarum  de  fructibus  ipsius  ecclesie  aunuatim  percipiendam  ;  de  quibus 
vero  aduocatione  et  jure  patronatus  dicte  ecclesie,  dicti  dominus  Nicholaus, 
heredes  et  assignati  sui,  simul  et  iu  solidum  faciet  vel  facient  dictos 
religiosos  viros  ac  dominos  abbatem  et  conuentum  et  eorum  successores  adeo 
firmos,  tutos  et  securos  in  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinani  penes  ipsos 
pro  perpetuo  remansuram  iu  omuibus  et  per  omnia  bene  et  fideliter  sine  dolo 
et  fraude,  reuocatione  s6u  repetitioue  aliquali,  prout  eisdeni  dominis  abbati  et 
conuentui  et  suis  successoribus  per  suum  consilium  quotiens  et  quando 
melius,  maturius  et  securius  videbitur  expedire  ;  et  consimili  modo  dicti 
domini  abbas,  conuentus  et  successores  sui,  dictum  dominum  Nicholaum  et 
lieredes  suos  de  presentatioue  dicte  vicarie  ad  prenominatam  pensionem 
annuam  percipiendam  facient  tutos  et  securos  ;  promiseruutque  michi  notario 
publico  subscripto  tanquam  persone  publice  solempniter  stipulanti  prefati 
nobilis  vir  dominus  Nicholaus,  pro  se  heredibus  et  assignatis  suis,  ex  parte  vna, 
necnon  reuerendus  in  Christo  pater  ac  dominus,  dominus  Patricius  Dei  gracia 
abbas  et  conuentus  supradicti,  pro  se  et  successoribus  suis,  ex  parte  altera, 
prestita  super  hiis  boua  fide,  se  pro  perpetuo  habitnros  ratum,  gratum,  firmum 
et  inuiolabile  omnia  et  singula  premissa  in  omnibus  suis  punctis,  modis,  arti- 
culis,  circumstanciis  et  conditionibus  forma  pariter  et  effectu,  in  omnibus  et 


DE  CAMBUSKENXETII. 


241 


per  omnia  vt  supra  continetur ;  saluis  tameii  et  reseruatis  prefatis  religiosis 
dominis  et  successoribus  suis  omnibus  et  singulis  priuilegiis  et  libertatibus 
cartarum,  bullarum,  euidenciarum,  munimentorum,  instrumontorum  et  scrip- 
torum  quorumcunque  que  vel  quas  iude  habent  seu  conficiuntur,  penes  ipsos 
religiosos  dominos  et  successores  suos  pro  perpetuo  inuiolabiliter  reman- 
suris,  omni  exceptione  doli  vel  mali  ingenii  qui  huius  scripti  seriem  in  toto 
vel  in  aliquo  sui  puncto  vel  articulo  infringere  poterit  vel  causare,  per  vtram- 
qu3  partem  prefatam  renunciata  penitus  et  exclusa,  sub  omnium  rerum  et 
possessionum  ambarum  partium  predictarum  j-jiotheca  et  obligatione.  Super 
quibus  omnibus  jier  me  notarium  publicum  subscriptum  sibi  cum  instancia 
fieri  petierunt  publicum  instrumentum.  Acta  sunt  hec  apud  monasterium  de 
Cambuskynneth  supradictum,  in  loco  capitulari  eiusdem,  die  mensis  et  anno 
supradictis ;  presentibus  nobilibus  et  potentibus  dominis,  dominis  Dauid 
riemjTig  domino  de  Bigar,  Johanne  de  Levingstoun  domino  de  Calantar,  mili- 
tibus,  Eoberto  de  Levingstoun,  Eichardo  de  Calenter  et  Andrea  de  Caribir 
scutiferis,  cum  aliis  testibus  ad  premissa  vocatis  speciaHter  et  rogatis. 

Et  ego  Johannes  de  Vchiltre,  Sanctiandree  diocesis  publicus  auctoritate 
apostolica  notarius,  vnacum  memoratis  testibus,  presentibus  approbationi, 
ratificationi,  resignationi,  quieteclaTnationi  premissis  et  renunciationi,  ac 
omnibus  aliis  et  singulis  premissis,  dum  sic  fierent  ut  prefertur  et  agerentur, 
presens  fui,  eaque  fieri  vidi,  scini  et  audiui,  et  ideo  signum  meum  solitum 
et  consuetum,  cum  nomine  meo  et  subscriptione,  loco,  mense,  die  et  anno 
supradictis  apposui,  rogatus  et  requisitus  in  testimonium  premissorum  et 
veritatis. 


1 69-  Kynnoule  interruptio  peescriptionis. 
Uniuersis  sancte  matris  ecclesie  filiis  ad  quorum  noticias  presentes  litere  per- 
uenerint,  Johannes  permissione  diuina  prior  ecclesie  metropolitane  Sanctiandree 


31 


242 


BEGISTRUM  MONASTEUII 


et,  sede  eiusdem  vacante,  vicarius  generalis,  salutem  et  presentibus  fidem  ad- 
hibere  indubiam  :  Quia  per  literas  nostras  patentes  citatorias  iufrascriptas  ad 
certos  diem  et  locum  et  terminum  peremptorium  subscriptos  citari  fecimus 
venerabilem  virum,  magistrum  Jobaunem  Boswell,  asserentem  se  rectorem 
ecclesie  parrocliialis  de  Kyuuoule  Sanctiaudree  diocesis,  omnesque  alios  et 
singulos  interesse  habentes  ad  videndum  et  audiendum  nostram  collationem 
ordinariam  dicto  magistro  Johanni  datam  et  concessam  super  predicta  rectoria 
per  presentationem  reuereudissimi  iu  Christo  patris  Jacobi  Glasguensis  archi- 
episcopi,  caucellarii,  noniine  et  ex  parte  supremi  domiui  nostri  regis  et  nobilis 
et  potentis  domini  Johannis  ducis  Albanie,  eius  tutoris  et  gubernatoris,  sub 
sigillo  secreto  uobis  presentato,  retractari,  cassari  et  annullari  propter  certas 
causas  rationabiles  allegandas  prout  iu  subscripta  citatione  pleuius  continetur  ; 
quibus  die  et  loco  aduenientibus,  coram  nobis  pro  tribunali  sedentibus  in  dicta 
ecclesia  metropolitaua,  in  insula  seu  sacello  beati  Johannis  Baptiste,  comparuit 
venerabilis  vir  dominus  Willehnus  Nory  et  sepefatam  citationem  subinsertam 
deliite  executioni  demandatam,  cuius  executionis  tenor  eciam  subsequitur,  judi- 
cialiter  produxit,  et  vocato  dicto  magistro  Johanne  Boswell,  et  aliis  interesse 
habentibus,  primo  comparuit  magister  Johannes  predictus  cum  suo  prolocutore, 
magistro  Martino  Balfoure  vicario  de  ilonymeill,  iu  quorum  presencia  idem 
dominus  Willeknus  cum  suo  prolocutore,  magistro  Pioberto  Eeid,  proposuit  et 
petiit  collatiouem  ordinariam  dicto  magistro  Johanni  factam  super  dicta  par- 
rochiali  ecclesia  de  Ivynnoule  retractari  propter  causas  in  citatione  contentas, 
et  collationem  ordiuariam  dicto  domino  Willelmo  dari  super  presentatione 
nobilium  et  potentium  personarum  Alexandri  comitis  Huntlie  et  Isabelle 
Gray  eius  sponse  et  coniitisse,  ad  quos,  vt  asseruit,  hac  vice  dicte  ecclesie  pre- 
sentatio  spectabat ;  e  conuerso  vero  idem  magister  ]\Iartinus,  prolocutorio  no- 
miue  quo  supra,  sub  protestatioue  prima  de  non  admittendo  nos  in  iudicem, 
dixit  et  allegauit  litem  impeudere  iu  Eomana  curia  de  et  super  predicta  parro- 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


243 


chiali  ecclesia  per  citationem  executam  coutra  prefatum  magistrum  Johannem 
ad  instanciam  magistri  Willelmi  Stewart,  et  propterea  ipsum  magistrum  Johan- 
nem  versus  eaudem  curiam  iter  arripuisse,  ad  cuius  itineris  arreptionem  pro- 
bandam  publicum  produxitinstrumentum.  Deinde  vocatis  interesse  habenti- 
bus,  prefatus  magister  Eobertus  prolocutor  eo  nomine  quo  sujira  prolocutorio 
prefati  Willelmi  Stewart  non  comparentis  si  et  prout  interesse  pretendebat 
eontumaciam  accusauit,  protestans  quod  de  cetero  non  audiretur  in  presenti 
negotio.  Demum  venerabilis  in  Christo  pater  et  dominus,  Alexander  i^termis- 
sione  diuina  abbas  monasterii  Sancte  Marie  de  Cambuskynneth  ordinis 
Sancti  Augustmi  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  pro  se  et  monasterio  suo  et  eorum 
interesse,  personaliter  et  judicialiter  comparuit,  libelhim  in  duplici  forma  pro- 
duxit,  cuius  eciam  tenor  inferius  designatur,  et  vt  in  eodeni  coutinebatur 
libello  causam  intentauit  et  solempniter  pro  suo  interesse  proposiiit,  et  ad  eius 
instanciam  contra  litis  consortes  procedi,  eiisdem  terminum  ad  respondendum 
prefato  libello  statui  et  assignari  debita  cum  instancia  petiit  et  postulauit.  Nos 
vero  jurisperitorum  et  prelatorum  nobis  assistencium  communicato,  lialiito, 
et  secuto  consilio,  dictis  magistro  Johanni  et  suo  prolocutori  prescriptis  ad 
omnes  declinatorias  exceptiones  proponendas,  quibus  in  presenti  causa  vti 
vellent,  diem  Veneris  vigesimum  secundum  mensis  Nouembris  proximo  futuri 
statuimus  et  assignauimus,  et  vlterius  ad  certos  terminos  processimus  prout 
in  processu  coram  nobis,  teste  notario  nostro  suljscripto,  plenius  continetur. 
Citationis  vero  tenor  cuius  supra  mentio  fiebat  talis  est :  Johannes  permis- 
sione  diuina  prior  ecclesie  metropolitane  Sanctiandree  et,  eiusdem  sede 
vacante,  vicarius  generalis,  curato  ecclesie  parrochialis  de  Ivynnoule  seu  cui- 
cunque  alteri  capellano  curato  vel  non  curato  infra  diocesim  Sanctiandree  diuina 
celebranti,  super  executione  presencium  debite  requisito,  sahitem :  Vobis 
et  vestrum  cuilibet  precipimus  et  mandamus  [quatenus]  citetis  legitime  venera- 
bilem  virum  magistrum  Johannem  Boswell  assertum  rectorem  de  Kynnoule 


244 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


Sauctiandree  diocesis,  omuesque  alios  et  singulos  interesse  habentes,  prinio, 
secundo,  tercio  et  peremptorie,  trina  vice,  vnico  tamen  contextu  pro  triplici 
edicto,  quem  et  quos  tenore  presencium  citamus  quod  compareant  coram  nobis 
seu  commissariis  nostris  pluribus  aut  vno  in  ecclesia  metropolitana  Sancti- 
andree,  iu  insula  beati  Joliannis  Baptiste  situata  infra  eandem,  vicesimo  primo 
die  juridico  citationem  vestram  proxime  et  immediate  sequeute,  quorimi 
vigiuti  vuius  dierum  septem  pro  primo,  septem  pro  secuudo,  et  reliquos  septem 
dies  pro  tertio  peremptorio  termino  ac  citatioue  cauouica  eis  assignamus, 
et  per  vos  volumus  assiguari,  hora  causaram  ad  iustauciam  domiui  Willelmi 
Nory  capellaui  vt  asseritur  preseutati  ad  Imiusmodi  rectoriam  per  uobilem  et 
potentem  domiuum,  Alexandrum  comitem  de  Huntlie  dominum  Gordoune,  se 
gereutem  pro  vero  et  iudubitato  patrouo  dicte  rectorie  hac  vice,  ad  videudum 
et  audieudum  nostram  collatiouem  ordiuariam  dicto  magistro  Johanni  datam 
et  coucessam  super  predicta  rectoria  per  preseutatiouem  reuerendissimi 
domini  Jacobi  Glasguensis  archiepiscopi,  caucellarii,  nomine  et  ex  parte 
supremi  domini  uostri  regis  et  uobilis  et  poteutis  domiui  Johaunis  ducis 
Albanie  eius  tutoris  et  gubernatoris,  sub  sigillo  secreto  nobis  preseutato, 
retractari,  cassari  et  aduullari,  propter  certas  causas  rationabiles  per  dic- 
tum  domiuuiu  Willelmum  allegaudas  et  iu  forma  juris  probandas,  necuon 
dictum  magistrum  Johanuem  assertum  rectorem  autedictum,  omuesque  alios 
et  siugulos  interesse  habeutes  ad  compareudum  dictis  die  et  loco  ad  viden- 
dum  et  audieudum  collationem  ordinariam  dicto  domiuo  Willelmo  dari 
super  presentatioue  dieti  domiui  comitis  de  Huntlie,  vel  ad  allegandum 
causam  rationabUem  quare  huiusmodi  collatio  dari  non  deberet,  sub  pena 
suspensionis  in  presbyteros,  cum  iutimatione  quod  siue  ipsi  sic  citati 
in  dicte  citatiouis  termino  comparere  curaueriut  siue  nou  comparueriut,  nos 
uichUominus  aut  nostri  commissarii  iu  premissis  instaucia  mediante  procede- 
mus   et  procedeut ;    et  preseutes  debite   executas  et  indorsatas   earundem 


L)E  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


245 


latori  reddatis.  Datum  sub  sigillo  officii  vicariatus  nostri  generalis,  apud 
Sanctumandream  vicesimo  sexto  die  mensis  Octobris,  auno  Domini  millesimo 
quingentesimo  vicesimo  primo.  Tenor  vero  prime  executiouis  dicte  citatiouis 
cuius  supra  mencio  facta  est  sequitur  in  hec  vei-ba  :  Vigesimo  octauo  die 
mensis  Octobris  instautis  suprascriptum  magistrum  Johanuem  Boswell 
omnesque  alios  et  singulos  in  negotio  infrascripto  interesse  habentes  publice 
in  ecclesia  parrochiali  de  Kynnoule  tempore  magne  misse,  secundum  tenorem 
presencium  citaui,  et  copiam  autenticam  harum  literarum  super  hustio  magno 
dicte  ecclesie  aftixi,  et  ibidem  stare  promisi,  coram  hiis  testibus  Thoma  Law, 
Johanne  Dauidson  et  Johanne  Nicholson,  ac  teste  manu  propria  domiuus 
Johannes  Philp  curatus  de  Kynnoule  manu  propria.  Secunda  vero  executio, 
que  verius  intimatio  est  dicenda,  in  liac  sequitur  forma :  Quarto  die  meusis 
Nouembris  iustautis  requisitus  accessi  ad  paLacium  reuerendissimi  domini 
archiepiscopi  Glasguensis  iu  ciuitate  eiusdem,  videlicet,  ad  locum  dicti 
magistri  Johannis  Boswell  et  eius  presenciam  ibidem  habere  nequiui,  intima- 
tionem  dicte  citationis  iufra  dictum  palacium  familiaribus  et  seruitoribus 
dicti  archiepiscopi  publicaui,  coram  magistro  Andrea  Sibbald  canonico  Glas- 
guensi,  niagistro  Adam  Stewart  et  Johanne  Dauidsou  cum  diuersis  aliis  et 
teste  manii  propria  Andreas  Philp  curatus  de  Kynnoule  manu  propria  :  Libelli 
vero  tenorem  per  dictum  venerabilem  patrem,  vt  premittitur,  judicialiter  obhiti 
et  producti  in  hec  verba  recepimus  :  Coram  vobis  reuerendo  in  Christo  patre  et 
domino  Jolianne  permissione  diuina  priore  ecclesie  metropolitane  Sanctiand- 
ree,  ac  eiusdem  sede  vacante  vicario  generali,  aliove  iudice  seu  iudicibus  iu 
hac  parte  competente  quocunque,  pars  venerabilis  in  Christo  patris  Alex- 
andri  permissione  diuina  abbatis  monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth  et  religioso- 
rum  virorum  eiusdem  loci  conuentus  contra  et  aduersus  venerabiles  viros 
magistrum  Johanuem  Boswell,  magistrum  Willelmum  Stewart  et  dominum 
Willelmum  Nory  asserentes  se  jus  habere  ad  rectoriam  de  Kynnoule  Saucti- 


KYNNOULE. 


246 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


aiidree  diocesis  et  alios  quosciiniiue  interesse  liabentes  seu  putantes  ad 
dictam  rectoriam  de  Kynnoule  seii  jus  patronatus  eiusdem  seu  contra  quem- 
cunque  pro  eiis  aut  eorum  aliquo  in  judicio  legitime  interuenientem  tanquam 
in  termino  citationis  vestre  reuerende  paternitatis  ad  instanciam  dicti  domini 
Willelmi  Nory  contra  prefatum  magistrum  Johannem  Boswell  emanate  ad 
videndum  et  audiendum  collationem  vestram  ordinariam  dicto  magistro 
Jolianni  datam  et  concessam  super  predicta  rectoria  per  presentationem 
reuerendissimi  domini  Jacobi  miseratione  diuina  arcliiepiscopi  Glasguensis 
et  cancellarii  Scotie  jure  et  nomiue  supremi  domini  nostri  regis  et  illustrissimi 
principis  Johannis  ducis  Albanie  eius  tutoris,  regni  Scotie  giibernatoris,  retrac- 
tari,  cassari,  annullari,  et  contra  alios  interesse  Labentes  ad  coUationem  ordina- 
riam  dicto  domino  Willelmo  dari  super  presentatione  nobilis  et  potentis 
domini  Alexandri  comitis  de  Huntlie  vel  ad  allegandum  causam  rationabilem 
quare  collatio  liuiusmodi  dari  non  deberet ;  dicit,  allegat,  et  sequens  interesse 
per  modum  cause  rationabilis  dat,  facit,  exhibet  ac  in  jure  proponit,  quo  obstante 
dicta  rectoria  ecclesie  parrochialis  de  Kynnoule  et  jus  patronatus  eiusdem  ac 
omnes  et  singulos  fructus,  redditus  et  prouentus  eiusdem  rectorie  cum  pertin- 
enciis  dictis  dominis  abbati  et  conuentui  monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth  inter- 
essentibus  venit  adiudicanda,  et  silencium  dictis  magistris  Johanni  Boswell, 
Willelmo  Stewart  et  domino  Willelmo  Nory  penes  titulum,  proprietatem  et  pos- 
sessionem  dicte  rectorie  de  Kynnoule  et  omnibus  aliis  iuteresse  habentibus  seu 
hdbere  putantibus  ab  ipsis  rationantibus  et  interessentibus  ad  dictam  rectoriam 
seu  jus  patronatus  eiusdem  perpetuo  venit  imponendum  et  vestre  reuerende 
paternitatis  asserta  collatio  data  et  concessa  dicto  magistro  Johanni  Boswell 
venit  cassanda,  annullanda  et  infirmanda  et  noua  collatio  super  pretensa  pre- 
sentatione  dicti  domini  comitis  de  Huntly  prefato  domino  Willelmo  Nory 
minime  venit  danda  seu  concedenda,  ex  et  pro  eo  quia  de  jure  vbi  jus  patrona- 
tus  alieuius  ecclesie,  cum  consensu  episcopi  siue  absque  illo,  religioso  loco 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


247 


iletur  et  sine  consensu  fratrum  eiusdem  loci  fuerit  in  ipsa  ecclesia  institutus, 
secundum  rigorem  est  institutio  irritauda ;  sed,  accedente  episcopi  et  capitnli 
cousensu,  si  quisquam  postmoduni  ad  ecclesiani  ipsam  presentatus  et  institutus 
fuerit  episcopi  auctoritate,  illius  non  debet  institutio  stare,  cum  patronus  quod 
suum  est  et  episcopus  omnes  prouentus  preter  catliederaticum  in  pii  vsus 
loci  conuertendos  [dederint],  et  nulli  dubium  existit  quin,  ipso  jure  detur, 
et  sic  douationis  ratioue  i^ure  facte,  neque  patronus  neque  episcopus,  absque 
consensu  fratrum  talium  piorum  locorum,  preseutandi  seu  confereudi  potes- 
tatem  reassumere  potest.  Sed  sic  est  quod  ecclesie  parrochialis  de  Kynnoule 
jus  patronatus  siue  aduocatio  per  verum  dominum  de  Kynnoule  et  ecclesie 
eiusdem  verum  et  indubitatum  patronum,  religiosis  viris  abbati  et  conuentui 
monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  et  imperpetuum  ser- 
uituris  donatum  est ;  quamquidem  donationem  episcopus  Sanctiandree  cuni 
consensu  capituli  sui  approbauit  et  confirmauit,  et  ecclesiam  ipsam  iu  proprios 
vsus  dictorum  abbatis  et  conuentus  dedit  et  pro  perpetuo  concessit,  abbatem- 
que  pro  tempore  existeutem  in  eadeni  ecclesia,  nomine  sui  prefati  monasterii 
instituit  et  in  possessionem  induci  fecit ;  quas  omnes  donationes  sumnms 
pontifex  cum  cause  cognitione  auctoritate  apostolica  confirmari  fecit  et  con- 
firmauit,  ac  abbatem  similiter  instituit  et  iu  possessionem  sepefate  ecclesie  in- 
duci  fecit,  ac  etiam  supremus  dominus  noster  rex  dicte  ecclesie  jurispatro- 
natus  donationem  dicti  monasterii  confirmationis  munimine  roborauit;  igitur 
vestre  reuerende  paternitatis  collatio  super  presentatione  asserta  dicti  domini 
cancellarii  regio  nomine  quo  supra  prefato  magistro  Joliauni  Boswell  uulla 
est,  inualida,  ac  nullius  momenti  aut  roboris  censenda,  et  ea  propter  de  jure  in- 
firmanda  et  retractanda  venit :  Nec  vestra  reuerenda  patemitas  collationeni 
dicto  domino  WiUehuo  Nory  super  pretensa  presentatione  dicti  coniitis  de 
Huntlie  de  huiusmodi  rectoria  dare  et  concedere  deberet,  ad  que  probanda 
pars   dictorum    dominorum    abbatis   et  conuentus  mouasterii   de  Cambus- 


248 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


kynneth  offert  se  legitime  probaturum,  et  ad  ea  probanda  se  petit  admitti 
que  sunt  juris  per  jura  et  facti  per  alias  legitimas  probationes  citra 
tamen  onus  superflue  probationis  et  se  non  restringens  ad  singula  pre- 
missa  probanda,  sed  dumtaxat  ad  necessaria ;  et  quod  quatenus  probat, 
eatenus  obtineat  de  quo  protestatur.  Qiiare  reuerende  domine  judex, 
cognito  quantum  sufficit  de  premissis,  probatis  de  jure  probandis,  petit  pars 
dictorum  dominorum  abbatis  et  conuentus  monasterii  de  Camlniskynnetli 
interessentium  per  vos  pronunciari,  decerni  et  declarari  dictam  ecclesiam  par- 
rochialem  de  Ivynnoule  et  jus  patronatus  eiusdem  dictis  dominis  abbati  et 
conuentui  monasterii  de  CambuskyTineth  et  monasterio  eiusdem  spectare  et 
pertinere  in  proprios  vsus,  ipsisque  eandem  adiudicari  debere,  prout  adiudicetis 
et  decernatis  ad  vestram  collationem  ordinariam  pretensam  super  pretensa 
presentatione  dicti  domini  cancellarii  jure  regie  celsitudinis  quo  supra  facta 
dicto  magistro  Johanni  Boswell  retractandam,  anniillandam  et  infirmandam 
fore,  retractari,  annullari  et  infirmari  debere,  prout  cassetis,  annulletis,  infirmetis 
et  retractetis,  collationemque  nouam  super  pretensa  presentatione  dicti  comitis 
de  Huntlie  prefato  domino  Willelmo  Nory  minime  dandam  aut  concedendam 
fore,  darique  nec  concedi  debere,  prout  minime  concedatis,  sed  silencium  pro  per- 
petuo  eisdem  magistris  Johanni  Boswell,  Willekao  Stewart  et  domino  Willelmo 
Nory  ac  aliis  interesse  habentibus  seu  habere  putantibus  quoad  titulum,  pro- 
prietatem  seu  possessionem  dicte  rectorie  de  Kynnoule  aut  jurispatronatus 
eiusdem  imponendum  fore  et  imponi  debere  prout  cassando  premissis  im- 
ponatis :  hec  petit  et  iusticiam  sibi  exhibere  in  premissis  vnacum  expensis 
litis,  super  hiis  omnibus  vestrum  benignum  officium  humiliter  implorando, 
reuerende  domine  judex  antedicte.  In  qiiorum  omnium  et  singuloram  fidem 
et  testimonium  preniissorum  actum  huiusmodi  coram  nobis  factum  exinde 
fieri  et  per  notarium  publicum  curie  nostre  in  huiusmodi  causa  coram  nobis 
scribam    subscriptum    subscribi  et  publicari   mandauimus,    sigillique   officii 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


249 


vicariatus  nostri  generalis  jussimus  appensione  communiri :  Datum  et  actum 
in  dictis  metropolitana  ecclesia  et  sacello  diui  Johannis  sub  anno  ab  incarna- 
tione  Domini  millesimo  quingentesinio  vigesimo  primo,  die  Lune  mensis 
Nouembris  decimo  octauo,  hora  causanim  eiusdem  diei  ante  merediem  solita 
et  consueta,  indictione  decima  pontificatus  sanctissimi  in  Christo  patris  et 
domiiii  domini  Leonis  diuina  prouidencia  pape  decimi,  anno  nono  ;  presenti- 
bus  ibidem  pro  tunc  reuerendo  in  Christo  patre  et  domino,  domino  Jacobo 
miseratione  diuina  episcopo  ]\Iorauiensi,  Thoma  Halkerstoune  ecclesie  metro- 
politane  supradicte  archidiacono  principali,  magistris  et  dominis  Georgeo 
Hepburne  decano  Dunkeldensi,  Johanne  Weddale  in  vtroque  jure  licentiato 
rectore  de  Flisk  et  officiali  principali,  Hugone  Spens  decretorum  doctore  in 
sacra  pagina  professore,  ecclesie  collegiate  Sancti  Saluatoris  infra  ciuitatem 
Sanctiandree  preposito,  et  Jacobo  Johneson  huiusmodi  cause  coram  nobis  con- 
scriba  et  notario  publico,  testibus  ad  premissa  rogatis  et  requisitis. 

Et  ego  Eobertus  Lauson  arcium  magister  clericus  Sanctiandree  diocesis 
publicus  auctoritate  apostolica  notarius  et  scriba  in  premissis,  quia  dictarum 
literarum  citatoriarum  prefati  domini  vicarii  generalis  in  judicio  presentationi, 
lecture  eiusdem,  antecitatorum  in  ipsis  literis  vocationi,  procuratorum  partium 
predictarum  comparitioni,  eorum  petitionibus,  allegationibus  et 
et  dicti  venerabilis  patris  de  Cambuskynneth  pro  se  et  suo  conuentu  eciam 
comparitioni  et  sepedicti  libelli  pro  eorum  interesse  productioni  et  protesta- 
tioni,  ceterisque  premissis  omnibus  et  singulis  dum  sic  ^i;  premittitur  diceren- 
tur,  agerentur  et  fierent  vnacum  prenominatis  testibus  presens  interfui,  eaque 
omnia  et  singula  sic  fieri  vidi,  sciui  et  audiui  ac  in  notam  sunipsi,  ideoque 
presentes  literas  siue  presens  publicum  instrumentum  manu  aliena  scriptum 
exinde  confeci,  signoque  nomine  et  subscriptioue  meis  solitis  et  consuetis, 
vnacum  appensione  sigilli  dicti  domini  vicarii  generalis  signaui,  rogatus  et  re- 
quisitus  in  fidem  et  testimonium  veritatis  omnium  et  singulorum  premissorum. 

32 


KYNNOULE. 


250 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


170.    DONATIO  TERRE  DE  KeTLISTOUN. 

KETLisTOUN.  Dauid  lex  Scotoniin  episcopis,  abbatibus,  comitibiis,  baronibus  et  omnibus 

hominibus  totius  tei-re  sue,  salutem  :  Sciatis  nie  concessisse  et  dedisse  abbati 
de  Striueling  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus,  pro  salute  anime  mee  et 
antecessorum  meorum,  Ketlistoun  per  suas  rectas  diuisas  in  perpetuam 
elemosinam  libere  et  quiete  ab  omni  seculari  seruicio  sicut  alias  terras  tenent 
quas  de  me  habent :  Teste  Waltero  cancellario  et  Hugone  de  Moreuilla  et 
Dufoc  vicecomite  de  Striueling  et  Alswyno  et  Petro  clerico,  apud  Kynross. 


171.  Confirmatio  Alexandri  regis  terre  predicte. 
Alexander  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotorum,  omnibus  probis  hominibus  totius 
terre  sue,  salutem :  Sciatis  presentes  et  futuri  nos  concessisse  et  liac  carta 
nostra  confirmasse  quietam  clamationem  quam  Willehnus  de  Ketlistoun  fecit 
pro  se  et  heredibus  suis  coram  venerabili  patre  Galfrido  episcopo  Dunkeld- 
ensi  et  Eogero  abbate  de  Newbotill  et  Johanne  de  Wallibus  et  Johanne 
de  Striueling  et  Johanne  de  Haya  et  Patricium  filiuni  Willelmi,  de  terra  de 
Ketlistoun  cum  eius  pertinenciis,  abbati  et  conuentui  de  Cambuskynneth 
in  plena  curia  eiusdem  abbatis,  et  concessionem  illam  quain  dicti  abbas 
et  conuentus  de  Cambuskynneth  fecerunt  eidem  WUlebno  de  Ketlistoun 
et  proximo  heredi  suo  de  terris  suis  de  Benyn  et  de  Duglyn  pro  dicta 
quieta  clamatioue  et  resignatione ;  et  preterea  donationem  illam  quam 
idem  abbas  et  conuentus  de  Cambuskynneth  postea  fecerunt  eidem 
WUlelmo  et  proximo  heredi  suo  de  terra  de  Badindath  cum  omnibus  perti- 
nenciis  in  excambium  predictarum  terrarura  de  BenjTi  et  de  Duglyn, 
cum  incremento  octo  marcariun  quas  dicti  Willehuus  et  proximus  heres 
suus  singulis  annis  percipiet  per  mauus  abbatis  de  Cambuskynneth  qui 
pro  tempore  fuerit  :  Tenendam  et  habendam  eisdem  Willelmo  et  proximo 


e^fin^^cftojytftf;  iWtmtm;  c^^/Jwm^  ^a^fn^i^  ^c^*^ 


<fntt^%)^ Mft.^ei&n&^^<£f&^i^^  ^ctnt^^^tino  <^ 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETU. 


251 


heredi  suo  in  tota  vita  sua  ita  libere,  quiete,  plenarie  et  honorifice  sicut 
scriptum  super  hoc  plenius  confectum  iuste  testatur,  saluo  seruicio  nostro  : 
Teste  venerabili  patre  domino  Ga^vino  episcopo  Dunkeldensi,  Henrico 
Bailiol  camerario,  Ingeramo  Gurle,  Sj-mone  Croc,  W[altero]  Olifard,  Johaune 
de  Lambertoun,  apud  Striueling,  septimo  die  Januarii,  anno  regni  domini 
regis  tricesimo  primo. 

172.  LlBERATIO  NjUIATIONIS  HOMINr.M  DE  KeTLISTOUN  PRO  LIE  BLUDE- 
WITE  FER  AUDITORES  SCACGARII,  CONFORMITER  INHIBITIOXI  REGIS 
EOBERTI. 

In  compoto  Jacobi  Hamiltoun  de  Kjmcavill  vicecomitis  de  Linlithrpv  reddito 
apud  Edinburgh  decimo  quarto  die  mensis  Julii,  anno  Domiui  millesimo 
quingentesimo  vicesimo  quiuto,  talis  facta  est  aUocatio,  et  eidem  in  decem 
Ubris  de  duobus  bludewitis  Jacobi  Brocas  et  filii  sui  superius  oneratis  com- 
morantium  in  Ketlistoun  et  baronia  eiusdem,  infra  balliam  compotantis,  ex  eo 
quod  dicta  vHla  de  Ketlistoun  et  baronia  eiusdem  pertinere  et  spectare  dinos- 
cuntur  Alexandro  abbati  et  conventui  ac  loco  de  Cambuskynneth,  et  compotans 
minus  iuste  processit  coutra  dictos  Jacobum  et  eius  filium,  nullo  comparente 
ex  partibus  dictorum  abbatis,  conuentus  et  loci  ad  dicendum  seu  allegandum 
pro  priuLlegiis  eorundem,  dicto  eciam  abbate  vno  ambassiatorum  doniini  regis 
pro  tempore  in  regTio  Anglie  pro  republica  huius  regni  existente,  x  lib. 

Ita  est  in  rotulo,  Gawinus  Dunbar. 


KETLISTOUN. 


173.  Ketlistoun  liberum  a  secta  curie  vicecomtatus. 
Eobertus  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotorum,  vicecomiti  nostro  de  Edinburgh  et  balliuis 
suis  de  Liulithqw,  salutem  :  Ad  nostram  accedens  presenciam  veiierabilis  in 
Christo  pater  Willelmus  abbas  de  Cambuskynneth  grauiter  est  conquestus 
quod  vos  terras  suas  de  Kettilstoun  infra  constabulariam  de  Linlithqw  iniuste 


REGISTRUM  MONASTEFdl 


KETLISTOUN. 


compellitis  pro  commuiii  secta  et  seruiciis  contra  formam  carte  quondam 
DauiJ  regis  Scotorum  illustris  iude  coufecte,  quam  iiobis  monstrauit,  et  quam 
cum  consilio  nostro  trium  comitatum  perlegi  et  examinari  fecimus  ;  quo  facto, 
visum  est  nobis  et  ipsi  consilio  nostro  expresse  quod  dicte  terre  in  premissis 
iniuste  compelluntur :  Quare  vobis  firmiter  precipimus  et  mandamus 
quatenus  predictas  terras  contra  formam  predicte  carte  amplius  nullo  modo 
compellatis  sub  pena  que  incumbit.  Datum  sub  sigillo  nostro  secreto  apud 
Scouam,  post  coronatiouem  nostram  decimo  octauo  die  Augusti,  anno  regui 
nostri  primo. 


174.    COXFIRMATIO  WlLLELMI  KEGIS  DE  MARCA  KeKRALL. 

WlLELMUS  Dei  gracia  Eex  Scotorum,  iusticiis,  vicecomitibus,  ministris  et 
omnibus  probis  liomiuibus  totius  terre  sue,  clericis  et  laicis,  salutem  :  Sciant 
presentes  et  futuri  me  coucessisse  et  hac  carta  mea  confirmasse  Deo  et 
ecclesie  Sancte  Rlarie  de  Cambuskynnetli  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruien- 
tibus  vnam  marcam  argenti  annuatim  ad  luminare,  quam  A[da]  Conii- 
tissa  mater  mea  eiis  dedit  in  burgo  de  Karell :  Tenendam  et  habendam 
in  liberam  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  ita  libere  et  quiete  et  honorifice  sicut 
carta  matris  mee  testatur  et  confirmat :  Teste  Willelmo  Ludo  (Waltero 
Bidun)  cancellario,  Hugone  capellano  meo,  Waltero  filio  Alani  dapifero, 
Eoberto  Aueuel,  Willelmo  filio  Thoraldi,  Eoberto  Costentin,  apud  Striueliug. 


175.    CONFIRMATIO  DE  KaEELL. 

VlLLELMUS  rex  Scotorum,  omnibus  probis  hominibus  totius  terre  sue,  salutem  : 
Sciatis  me  concessisse  et  hac  carta  mea  confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte 
Marie  de  Striueling  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  vnum  plenum 
toftum  in  burgo  de  Karell  quod  A[da]  Comitissa  mater  mea  eiis  dedit 
cum  dimedia  carrucata  terre  iu  Petcorthun  cum  communi  pastura  :  Tenendam 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


253 


ita  libere  et  quiete  iu  liberam  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  sicut  carta  A[de] 
Comitisse  matris  mee  testatur  et  confirmat ;  testibus  Eugenio  (Engelramo) 
episcopo  Glasgw,  Nicolao  cancellario,  Matheo  arcliidiacono  Sanctiandree, 
"Waltero  filio  Alani  dapifero,  Alexandro  de  Sancto  Martino,  Gilberto  filio 
Eicbardi,  apud  castellum  puellarum. 


176.    BULLA  CONFIKMATIONIS  DE  KlNTULACH. 

Gregorius  episcopus,  seruus  seruorum  Dei,  dilectis  filiis  abbati  et  conuentui 
monasterii  de  Cambuskynueth  ordinis  Sancti  Augustini  Sanctiandree  diocesis, 
salutem  et  apostolicam  benedictionem  :  Ea  que  pro  diuini  cultus  augmento  et 
animarum  salute  prouide  facta  sunt  vt  illibata  consistant  libenter  apostolico 
munimine  roboramus  ;  exhibita  siquidem  nobis  nuper  pro  parte  vestra  petitio 
coutinebat  quod  olini  dilectus  filius  nobilis  vir  Eobertus  de  Erskin  miles  et 
dilecta  in  Christo  filia  nobilis  mulier  Cristiana  eius  vxor  Glasguensis  diocesis, 
pro  sua  et  progenitorum  suorum  ac  aliorum  fidelium  defunctorum  animarum 
salute,  et  vt  pro  animabus  ipsis  missas  et  alia  diuina  celebrantes  officia, 
totam  terram  eorum  in  loco  de  Kintulach  dicte  diocesis  consistentem  et  ad 
dictos  couiuges  iusto  titulo  pertineutem,  cum  omnibus  iuribus  et  pertinenciis 
suis  vobis  et  monasterio  vestro  imperpetuum  dederuut  et  eciam  concesserunt, 
prout  in  quibusdam  patentibus  literis  inde  confectis  ipsorum  sigillatis  sigillis 
quarum  teuorem  de  verbo  ad  verbum  presentibus  inseri  fecimus  plenius  con- 
tinetur ;  quare  pro  parte  vestra  et  dictorum  couiuguni  fuit  nobis  humLliter 
supplicatum  vt  donationem  huiusmodi  confirmationis  apostolice  robur  adicere 
de  benignitate  apostolica  dignaremur  :  Nos  igitur  huiusmodi  laudabile  opus  in 
Domino  commendantes  ac  volentes  illud  apostolicis  fauoribus  confoueri,  huius- 
modi  supplicationibus  inclinati,  donatiouem  et  coucessionem  huiusmodi  ac 
omnia  alia  et  singula  in  dictis  contenta  literis  rata  et  grata  habentes  illa 
auctoritate  apostolica  ex  certa  sciencia  confirmamus  et  presentis  scripti  patro- 


KISTUL.\CH^ 


254 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


KISTULACH. 


cinio  commummus  :  Tenor  autem  dictarum  literarum  talis  est :  Vniuersis  tam 
posteris  quam  i)resentibus  presentem  cartam  visuris  vel  audituris,  Eobertus 
de  Erskin  domiuus  eiusdem  et  Cristiana  de  Keith  sponsa  sua,  salutem  in 
Domino  sempiternam  :  Nouerit  vuiuersitas  vestra  nos  pro  salute  status  nostri, 
nostrorumque  heredum  et  successorum  dum  vixerimus,  ac  pro  sahite  animarum 
nostrarum  et  eorundem  cum  erepti  fuerimus  ab  hac  hice,  necnon  pro  salute 
animarum  patrum,  matrum,  omniumque  parentum  et  antecessorum  nostrorum 
atque  omniuni  iidehura  defunctorum  caritatiue  dedisse,  concessisse  et  hac 
presenti  carta  confirmasse  monasterio  de  Cambuskynneth  et  canonicis  ibidem 
Deo  seruientibus  et  beate  Marie  semper  virgini,  ac  imperpetuum  seruituris, 
totam  terram  nostram  de  Kyntulach  cum  pertinenciis  in  comitatu  de  Strath- 
erne  infra  vicecomitatum  de  Perth  :  Tenendam  et  habendam  totam  prefatam 
terram  de  KyntuLich  cum  pertinenciis  prefato  monasterio  et  religiosis  eiusdem 
prenotatis  in  liberam,  puram  et  pei"]5etuam  elemosinam,  in  boscis  et  planis, 
moris  et  marresiis,  molendinis  et  multuris,  pratis  pascuis  et  pasturis,  vena- 
tionibus,  aucupationibus  et  piscariis,  necnon  cum  wardis  et  releuiis,  maritagiis, 
eschaetis  et  seruiciis  Hberetenencium  totius  terre  de  Kintulach,  ac  cum  omni- 
bus  et  singulis  aHis  libertatibus,  commoditatibus,  asiamentis  et  iustis  perti- 
nenciis  quibuscunque  tam  sub  terra  quam  supra  terram,  tam  non  nominatis 
quam  nominatis  in  hac  carta,  ad  dictam  terram  de  Kyntulach  cum  perti- 
nentiis  spectantibus  seu  qiioquo  jure  spectare  valentibus  in  futurum,  adeo 
Hbere,  plene,  intcgre  et  honorifice  in  omnibus  et  per  omnia  sicut  aHqua  terra 
infra  regnum  Scotie  in  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  aHcui  monasterio 
dari  potest  ab  aHquo  seu  concedi :  Faciendo  inde  dicti  reHgiosi  tam  posteri 
quam  presentes  diuina  seruicia  in  missis  et  aHis  suffragiis  pro  nobis  et  pro 
omnibus  prenotatis,  singuHs  diebus  iniperpetuum,  iu  quibus  et  quemadmodum 
nobis  sunt  tara  Hteratorie  sub  sigiHo  auctentico  dicti  monasterii  sui  [quam]  in 
bona  consciencia  obHgati  fideHter.     In  cuius  rei  testimoniura  presenti  carte 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


nostre  sigilla  nostra  sunt  appensa  :  Datum  apud  Striueling,  octauo  die  Septem- 
bris  anno  gratie  millesinio  tricentesimo  sexagesimo  primo.  Nulli  ergo  omnino 
hominum  liceat  lianc  paginam  nostre  confirmatiouis  infringere  vel  ei  ausu 
temerario  contraire  :  si  quis  autem  hoc  attemptare  presumpserit,  indignationem 
omnipotentis  Dei  et  beatorum  Petri  et  Pauli  apostolorum  eius  se  nouerit 
incursurum.  Datum  Auinione  quinto  Idus  Aprilis  pontificatus  uostri  auuo 
quarto. 


KIXTULACH. 


177.   KlNTUL.VCII  PiOBEKTO  ErSKIX  ET  CrISTINE  SPONSE  SUE  DONATIO. 

Ojinibus  hanc  cartam  visuris  vel  audituris,  Johanna  comitissa  de  Stratherne, 
salutem  in  Domino  sempiternam  :  Noueritis  nos  iu  nostra  viduitate  dedisse, 
coucessisse  et  hac  presenti  carta  nostra  confirmasse  domino  Eoberto  de  Erskiu 
niiliti,  pro  homagio  suo  et  seruicio,  et  domine  Cristiane  de  Keith  spouse  sue, 
consauguiiiee  nostre  carissime,  et  eorum  diucius  viuenti  ac  heredibus  iuter 
ipsos  procreatis  vel  procreandis,  omnes  terras  nostras  et  tenementa  de  Kintulach 
cum  pertinenciis  infra  comitatum  de  Stratherne  :  Teuendas  et  habendas  pre- 
dictis  domiuo  Eoberto  et  domiue  Cristiane  et  eorum  diucius  viuenti  ac  heredi- 
bus  suis  inter  ipsos  procreatis  vel  procreandis,  quibus  forsau  deficientibus, 
heredibus  predicti  domiui  Eoberti  veris  et  legitimis,  de  nobis  et  heredibus 
nostris  in  feodo  et  hereditate  per  omnes  rectas  metas  et  diuisas  suas  libere  et 
quiete,  plenarie  et  honorifice,  bene  et  in  pace,  in  boscis  et  planis,  viis  et  semitis, 
moris,  maresiis,  pratis,  pascuis  et  pasturis,  aquis  et  stagnis,  molendinis,  brasinis, 
multuris  et  eorum  sequelis  cum  aucupationibus,  venationibus  et  piscationibus 
et  cum  omnimodis  aliis  libertatibus,  commoditatibus,  asiamentis  et  pertineu- 
ciis  quibuscunque  in  omnibus  et  per  omnia  tam  uon  nominatis  quam  nomina- 
tis  ad  dictas  terras  et  tenementa  spectantibus  seu  in  futurimi  spectare  valeuti- 
bus  quoquo  modo  :  Facieudo  iude  predictus  dominus  Eobertus  et  heredes  sui 
predicti  forinsecum  seruicium  domiui  nostri  regis  quantum  pertinet  ad  dictus 


256 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


KiNTDLACH.  teiias  et  tenementa,  et  reddendo  nobis  et  heredibus  nostris  annnatim  vnum 

denarium  argenti  tantum  nomine  albe  firme  ad  festum  Pentbecostes  si  petatur, 
pro  wardis,  maritagiis  seu  releuiis  et  oranibus  aliis  seruitiis,  consuetudinibus, 
exactionibus  seu  demandis  cj^ue  de  dictis  terris  et  tenementis  cum  pertinenciis 
exigi  poterunt  vel  requiri :  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  presenti  carte  nostre 
sigillum  nostrum  est  appensum  ;  hiis  testibus,  veuerabilibus  in  Christo  patribus 
dominis  Willelmo  Dei  gracia  episcopo  Dunblanensi  et  Gilberto  eadem  gracia 
abbate  monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth,  domino  Eoberto  senescallo  Scotie 
tunc  locum  tenente  domini  nostri  regis,  Thoma  de  Morauia  panetario  Scotie ; 
dominis  Thoma  de  Fausyde  et  Eogero  de  Mocfen,  militibus  ;  Waltero  Oliphant, 
Johanne  de  Drummond,  Eoberto  de  Cochrane,  Johanue  Gill  et  Johanne  Mersar 
burgensibus  burgi  de  Perth,  et  multis  aliis. 


178.    EOBERTI   SEXESCALLI   SCOTIE   CONFIEMATIO  COMITIS   DE   StRATHERKE 

SUPER  donatione  de  Kintulach  ET  AD  mortuam  manum  con- 
CESSIONIS  licencia  absque   seculari  seruicio  in  puram  ele- 

MOSINAM. 

Omnibus  hanc  cartam  visuris  vel  audituris,  Eobertus  senescalhis  Scotie  comes 
de  Stratherne,  salutem  in  Domino  sempiternam  :  Nouerit  vniuersitas  vestra 
nos  grauidam  cartam  dilecti  et  speciaUs  nostri  domini  Eoberti  de  Erskin  mihtis 
et  domine  Cristiane  sponse  sue,  non  rasam,  non  aboletam  non  cancellatam,  nec 
in  alicjua  sui  parte  viciatam  sed  omni  prorsus  vicio,  suspicione  et  ambiguitate 
carentem,  diligeuter  inspexisse  veraciter  in  hec  verba :  Yniuersis  tam  posteris 
quam  preseutibus  hanc  cartam  visuris  vel  audituris,  Eobertus  de  Erskin 
dominus  eiusdem  et  Cristiana  de  Keith  spousa  sua,  salutem  in  Domino  sempi- 
ternam  :  Nouerit  \Tiiuersitas  vestra  nos  pro  sahibritate  status  nostri  nostro- 
rumque  heredum  et  successorum  dum  vixerimus,  ac  pro  sahite  animarum 
nostrarum  et  eorundem  cum  erepti  fuerimus  ab  hac  hice,  necnon  pro  sahite  ani- 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETII. 


257 


inarum  patruiii  et  niatrum  omniumquc  parentum  et  antecessorum  nostrorum 
atque  omninm  fidelium  defunctorum,  caritatiue  dedisse,  concessisse  et  hac 
presenti  carta  nostra  confirmasse  monasterio  de  Cambuskynnetli,  et  canonicis 
ibidem  Deo  et  beate  Marie  semper  virgini  seruientibus  et  imperpetnum 
seruituris,  totam  terram  nostram  de  Kyntulach  cum  pertinenciis  in  comitatu 
de  Stratlicrne  infra  vicecomitatum  de  Perth  :  Tenendam  et  habendam  totam 
prefatam  terram  de  Kyntidach  cuni  pertinenciis  pirefato  monasterio  et  religiosis 
eiusdem  prenotatis  in  liberam,  purani  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  in  boscis  et 
planis,  moris  et  maresiis,  molendinis  et  multuris,  pratis,  pascuis  et  pasturis, 
venationibus,  aucupationibus  et  piscariis,  necnon  cum  wardis,  releuiis, 
maritagiis,  eschaetis  et  seruiciis  liberetenencium  totius  terre  de  Kintulach 
ac  cum  omnibus  et  singulis  liljertatibus,  commoditatibus,  asiamentis  et 
iustis  pertinenciis  quibuscunque,  tam  sub  terra  quara  supra  terram,  tam  non 
nominatis  quam  nominatis  in  hac  carta,  ad  dictam  tertiam  de  Kintulach  oim 
pertinenciis  spectantibus  seu  quoquo  jure  spectare  valentibus  in  futurum, 
adeo  libere,  plene,  integre  et  honorifice  in  omnibus  et  per  omnia  sicut 
aliqua  terra  infra  regnum  Scotie  iu  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  alicui 
monasterio  dari  potest  ab  alic^uo  seu  concedi  :  Faciendo  inde  dicti  religiosi 
tam  posteri  cj^uam  presentes  diuina  seruicia  in  missis  et  aliis  suffragiis  pro 
nobis  et  pro  omnibus  prenotatis,  singulis  diebus  imperpetuum ;  in  quibus 
et  quemadmodum  nobis  sunt  tam  literatorie  sub  sigillo  auctentico  dicti 
monasterii  sui  quam  in  bona  consciencia  fideliter  oliligati :  In  cuius  rei 
testimonium  presenti  carte  nostre  sigilla  nostra  sunt  appensa :  datum  apud 
Striueling  octauo  die  Septembris,  anno  gracie  millesimo  tricentesimo  sexa- 
gesimo  primo.  Quamquidem  cartam  in  omnibus  et  per  omnia,  prout  supra- 
scriptum  est  in  forma  pariter  et  effectu,  nos  Eobertus  senescallus  Scotie  comes 
de  Stratherne  predictus  pro  nobis  et  nostris  heredibus  ratificamus,  approbamus 
et  tenore  presentium  confirmamus ;  et  enim  propter  specialem  effectum,  quo 

33 


KINTUI.ACH. 


258 


EEGISTR  UM  MOXASTEEII 


prefato  monasterio  acetiam  predictis  militi  et  spouse  sue  sumus  astricti, 
dedimus  et  coucessimus  eisdem,  damusque  et  coucedimus  pariter  per  preseutes, 
ex  gratia  speciali,  potestatem  plenam  et  liberam  et  licenciaui  specialem  ad 
infeodaudum  dictum  monasterium  et  religiosos  eiusdeni  de  dicta  tena  de  Kin- 
tulach  cum  omuibus  et  singulis  juribus,  libertatibus  et  pertinenciis  preuotatis 
in  forma  suprascripta  adeo  ac  si  [per]  infeodacionem,  qua  in  dicta  terra  de  Kyn- 
tulacli  iidem  dominus  Eobertus  et  domina  Cristiana  infeodati  sunt,  esset  ex- 
presse  contentum  quod  liceret  ipsis  eandem  terram  cum  pertineuciis  ad  quam- 
cunque  manimi  mortuam  eciam  absque  nostri  licencia  assiguare  :  In  cuius  rei 
testimouium  luiic  carte  confirmationis  nostre  sigillum  nostrum  est  appeusum ; 
testibus  venerabili  in  Cliristo  patre  domino  Willelmo  episcopo  Sanctiandree, 
dominis  Jolianne  Seuescallo  fratre  nostro,  Hugone  cle  Egliutoune  et  Thoma  de 
Fausyde,  militibus,  Johanue  Erth,  Eoberto  de  Cochrane  et  Thoma  Simple  ac 
multis  aliis  :  datum  apud  ]\Ieuthfen  duodeciuio  die  mensis  Septembris,  auuo 
Domiui  millesimo  tricentesimo  sexagesuuo  primo. 


179. — KlNTULACH  TERTIE  PAKTIS  TERRAEUM  RESIGNATIO  IN  MANUS  ABBATIS. 

Eeuerendo  iu  Christo  patri  ac  domino,  domiuo  suo  abbati  monasterii  de  Cam- 
buskynneth  et  eiusdem  loci  conuentui,  Johannes  de  Megille  dominus  tertie 
partis  de  Kiutulach,  salutem  in  Domino  sempiternam  :  Ego  Johannes  de 
Megille  predictus  nou  vi  vel  metu  ductus,  dolo  nec  fraude  deceptus,  sed  mea 
mera  spontaneaque  voluntate  commotus  in  manus  vestras  omnes  terras  meas 
tercie  partis  de  Kintulach  cum  pertiuenciis,  in  comitatu  de  Stratherne  iufra 
vicecomitatum  de  Perth  jacentes,  quas  de  vobis  tenere  clamo  in  capite,  per 
fustim  et  bacidimi  sursum  reddo,  pureque  simpliciter  resigno,  ac  omne  jus  et 
juris  clameum  que  iu  eisdem  terris  cimi  pertiueuciis  ego  vel  heredes  mei  habe- 
luus  aut  habere  poterimus  iu  futurum,  sic  cpiod  vos  de  dictis  terris  de  Kin- 
tulach  cum  pertinenciis  pro  vestre  libito  voluntatis  libere  disponere  valeatis : 


DE  CAMBUSKEXXETIL 


259 


In  ciuus  rei  testimonium  presenti  mee  resignationi  sigillum  meum  apposui 
apud  Megille,  decimo  sexto  die  mensis  Februarii  anno  Domini  inillesimo  tri- 
centesimo  octuagesimo  primo. 

180.    KlNTULACH  INHIBITIO  REGIA  NE  VICECOMES  LEUET  CONTKIBUTIONES. 

Dauid  Dei  gracia  Rex  Scotorum  vicecomitibus  et  balliuis  suis  de  Pertli,  salu- 
tem  :  Cum  terra  de  Kiutulacli  cum  pertinenciis  infra  balliam  vestram  sit  con- 
cessa  religiosis  viris  abbati  et  conuentui  de  Cambuskynneth  in  puram  et 
perpetuara  elemosinam,  donatioque  et  concessio  eiusdem  terre  sicut  tam  jjer 
sacrosanctam  sedem  apostolicam  quam  per  nos  confirmatur,  volumus  et  vobis 
mandamus  sub  omni  pena  que  competere  poterit  in  liac  parte,  ne  inhabitantes 
dictam  terram  elemosinatam  ad  sohitiones  aliquarum  contributionum  seu  pro- 
uidenciarum  nostrarum,  aut  ad  aliqiia  aha  seruicia  facienda  ahter  compeUatis 
aut  compelli  permittatis  a  quoquam  quam  comjDenitis  aut  compelh  facitis  ah- 
quas  terras  elemosinatas  hberiores  uifra  balham  vestram  :  datum  sub  sigiUo 
nostro  secreto  apud  Edinburgh,  primo  die  Maii,  anno  regni  nostri  quadra- 
sesimo. 


181.  Kintulach  decretum  inter  abbatem  Fentoune  et  Dunbaenye. 
Be  it  kennit  to  aU  men  be  tliir  lettres,  tliat  in  presens  of  ws,  Johnne  of  Leving- 
stomie,  knicht,  Johnne  of  Eemorgun  and  Eobert  of  Perduvyn,  arbitratouris  for 
the  ta  part,  ^Yalter  of  MiUTeff  of  Drumfergart,  Johnne  "WiUiamson  of  Angous, 
and  Johnne  of  Petscoty,  arbitratouris  for  tlie  tothir  part,  and  in  gude  faith 
lelely  sworue  eftir  our  wit  to  deme  and  to  determe  aslauch  and  riclit  wald,  aU 
actionis  betuene  the  abbot  of  Cambuskynneth  of  the  ta  part,  and  WUliam  of 
Fentoune  the  sone  and  his  man  Eobert  of  Dunbarny  of  the  tothir  part,  baith 
thir  partyis  apperand  before  ws  arbitratouris  foirsaid  chosin  through  thame  in 
the  kirk  of  Perth  the  xiii  day  of  Februar,  the  zeir  of  grace  ane  tliousand  thre 


260 


BEGISTR  UM  MOXA  STERII 


huudreth  fourescore  and  nyne,  and  bodely  suorne  in  gude  faith  to  hald  ferme 
and  stabill  but  fraude  or  gile  oure  ordiuance.  Tliis  done,  the  playntis  till  ws 
schewit  of  baith  the  partiis,  all  thingis  considerit,  we  demit  and  determit  as 
eftir  followis,  that  is  to  say,  Ihat  the  foirsaid  William  sall  do  and  fulfill  to  the 
abbot  of  Cambuskynneth  beforesaid  to  no  haut  (toucliaud)  the  coufirmationis  of 
his  landis  of  Kyntulach  as  ]ie  is  oblist  be  his  lettre  and  his  seill  to  the  said 
abbot,  aud  that  he  sall  assith  the  forsaid  abbot  for  the  releif  of  that  ilk  land, 
that  is  to  say,  the  tane  half  as  for  the  IMartymes  terme  last  bipast,  and  the  tothir 
halfat  AVitsonday  nixt  forto  cum.  Item,  the  foresaid  William  sall  restore  ten 
oxin  and  fyve  ky  to  the  foirsaid  abbotis  nien  of  Kintulach  withiu  fyftene  dayis 
nixt  efter  the  dait  of  tliis  lettcr,  the  quhilk  war  wraugusly  tane  fra  the  said  men, 
aud  zit  with  the  foresaid  William  resettit  and  haklin  :  Item,  to  no  hant  (touch- 
and)  tlie  playnt  that  the  foresaid  William  maid  vpon  the  abbot  of  the  eting  of 
his  part  of  the  medo  of  KyutuLach,  we  ordane  that  the  said  abbot  sall  assyth 
for  the  thrid  part  to  the  said  WiUiam  eftir  the  sicht  of  thame  that  kennit  it : 
Item,  tuechand  Kobert  of  Dunbarny  and  the  said  abbot,  that  quliare  the  for- 
said  Itobert  nyit  that  he  was  man  to  the  said  abbot,  na  till  him  na  feance  maid, 
we  find  that  he  maid  him  feance  and  was  his  man  to  Martymes  last,  and  that 
he  had  nyit  of  his  maill  half  ane  mark  wrangusly  c[uhare  we  demyt  him  to  pay 
the  said  maill,  and  for  nyting  of  ilk  penny  to  pay  ane  pund  of  siluer  :  Item, 
we  fand  him  dempt  lauchfuUy  in  twa  wnlawis  to  the  said  abbot :  Item,  we 
fynd  that  the  forsaid  Eobert  hes  sclanderit  the  forsaid  abbot  and  his 
court  of  Kintulach,  and  through  his  wraug  informatioune  hes  gert  skaith 
the  said  abbot  and  his  men  of  Kintulach,  and  dispituisly  spokin  baith  be- 
fore  his  ene  and  behind  his  bak  ;  quharefor  we  ordaue  and  demis  that  the 
said  Eobert  sall  cum  to  Cambuskynueth  vpon  oure  Lady  day  at  nixt 
cummis  hudles,  hosles,  hatles,  scholes,  beltles,  and  knj^fles,  in  the  tyme 
of  the  hie  mess,  with  ane  candill  of  twa  pund  of  wax  in  his  hand,  and 


DE  CA  MB  USKEXXE  TH. 


2G1 


tliare  before  the  pepill  offer  it  till  oure  Lady,  and  eviii  vpoiie  his  kneis  sall  ask 
the  said  abbot  and  the  convent  of  the  place  forgevenes  of  that  trespas  forsaid  : 
Item,  to  uo  hant  (touchaud)  twa  difforsis  maid  through  the  foresaid  Ilobert  to 
the  said  abbottis  seriand,  we  ordane  that  lie  saU  fynd  certane  borouchis  for  till 
appere  in  the  said  abbotis  court  of  Kintulach  but  fraude  or  gile,  apone  the 
warnyng  of  xv  dayis  or  mare,  for  to  ansuer  apone  the  said  deforsis  as  law  wUl : 
Item,  we  fynd  that  tuichand  the  cateU  that  the  said  abbot  tuke  of  the  said 
Eobertis  was  hiuchfuUy  tane,  as  for  his  maiU  and  his  vnlawis  foirsaid,  the  quhUk 
excedit  the  price  of  the  cateU  had  tliat  cateU  be  tane  armly  bot  for  the  twa 
difforsis,  we  fyud  that  thai  aucht  nocht  for  to  be  had  out  of  that  lordschip 
withouttin  mare  process,  bot  for  the  tothir  twa  causis  was  lauchfiUl  we  ordane 
na  restorance.     Writtin  vnder  our  seUs  day  and  place  foirsaid. 


1 82.    C.\RTA  DE  KlNTULACH. 

Omnibus  hanc  cartam  indentatam  siue  indenturam  bipartitam  visuris  vel 
audituris,  Alexauder  permissione  diuiua  abbas  nionasterii  de  Cambuskynneth 
et  conuentus  eiusdem  ordinis  Sancti  Augustini  Sanctiaudree  diocesis,  salutem 
in  Domiuo  sempiternam  :  Noueritis  nos,  vtUitate  uostra  et  ecclesie  nostre 
vndique  preuisa,  diligenti  tractatu  per  nos  prius  habito,  dedisse,  coucessisse 
et  couiirmasse,  necnon  per  presentes  dare,  concedere  et  confirmare  vener- 
abUi  vtro  uiagistro  Heurico  Quhite,  ecclesiarum  cathedraUum  Morauiensis, 
Duublauensis  et  Brechineusis  cauouico,  rectori  Sancti  Modoci  ac  oiBciali 
Dunblaueusi  et  domiuo  de  Auchuaguff  hereditarie,  et  ipso  deficiente,  et  post 
eum,  personis  sequeutibus,  videUcet  Johauni  Quhite  de  Lumbenny  fiUo  fratris 
dicti  magistri  Henrici,  et  heredibus  de  corpore  suo  legitime  procreatis  seu 
procreandis,  quibus  forte  deficientibus,  Eoberto  Quhit  de  Tewhindade  fratri 
germano  dicti  Johanuis  et  heredibus  de  corpore  suo  legitime  procreatis  seu 
procreandis,  terciam   partem   omnium  et   singularum  ville  et  terrarum   de 


262 


EEGISTEUM  MONASTEEII 


Kiutulach  ciun  tercia  parte  molendiui  dictarum  terrarum  cuni  tenentibus  et 
tenandriis  et  liberetenencium  seruiciis  cum  pertinenciis,  jacentium  infra  par- 
rochiam  de  Dunberny  prope  pontem  de  Erne  infra  vicecomitatum  de  Perth : 
Quequidem  terre  et  tercia  pars  dicti  molendini  fuerunt  quondam  Jacobi 
Fentoune  de  Ogill  hereditarie  et  de  nobis  teute  in  capite  \t  nostra  antiqua 
tenandria,  et  quasquidem  terras  dictus  Jacobus  cum  tercia  parte  molendini 
earundem  cum  tenentibus  et  tenandriis  et  liberetenencium  seruiciis,  necnon 
omne  jus  et  juris  clameum  que  seu  quod  dictus  Jacobus  habuit,  habet  seu 
habere  potuit  in  seu  ad  dictas  terras  cum  tercia  parte  molendini  earundem 
cum  pertinenciis  tam  quoad  possessorium  quam  petitorium  in  manibus  nostris 
tanquam  iu  manibus  domini  superioris  eaiimdem  per  se  personaliter  per  fustim 
et  baculum  sursum  reddidit  pureque  et  simpliciter  resignauit  ac  pro  se  et  here- 
dibus  suis  omni  juri  renunciauit  in  fauorem  prefati  magistri  Henrici  et  persona- 
nmi  prefatarum  pro  certa  summa  pecunie  per  prefatum  magistrum  Henricum 
prefato  Jacobo  iu  numerata  pecunia  persohita  in  magna  quantitate,  ante  quarum 
quidem  tertie  partis  terrarum  et  tertie  partis  molendini  emptionem  factam  per 
prefatum  magistrum  Henricum  a  prefato  Jacobo,  quamphirime  erant  persone  et 
in  magno  uumero  que  poterant  succedere  hereditarie  ad  dictam  terciam  partem 
terrarum  et  terciam  partem  molendini  antequam  ad  nos  seu  successores  nostros 
reuerti  poterunt  seu  prouenire ;  nunc  solum  autem  heredes  prefatarum 
duarum  personarum  de  corporibus  suis  procreati  seu  procreandi  et  persone 
prescripte  succedent  et  ipsis  deficientibus  seu  alieuantibus  aliquam  partem 
prefatarum  terrarum  seu  molendini  absque  nostris  licencia  et  confirmatione, 
ad  nos  reuertentur  prout  in  hac  carta  nostra  continetur;  Tenendas  et  habendas 
omnes  et  singulas  predictas  terras  et  terciam  partem  predicti  molendini  cimr 
tenentibus  et  tenanchiis  et  liberetenencium  seruiciis  cum  pertinenciis  j)re- 
fato  magistro  Henrico  hereditarie,  ipso  deficiente,  jjost  eum  personis  pre- 
dictis  videhcet,  Johanni   Quhit   et    heredibus   de    corpore   suo    procreatis 


I>E  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


263 


seu  procreandis,  quibus  forte  deficientibus,  prefato  Eoberto  Quhite  et 
heredibus  de  corpore  suo  procreatis  seu  procreaudis,  de  nobis  et  succes- 
soribus  nostris  in  feodo  et  bereditate  imperpetuum,  prout  jacent  in  lonoitu- 
dine  et  latitudine  per  omnes  rectas  metas  suas  antiquas  et  diuisas,  in 
domibus,  edificiis,  boscis,  planis,  moris,  marresiis,  viis,  semitis,  aquis,  stagnis, 
sikiis,  riuolis,  lacubus,  pratis,  pascuis  et  pasturis,  petariis,  turbariis,  car- 
bonariis,  cuniculariis,  columbariis,  fabrilibus,  brasinis,  brueriis  et  genestis, 
lignis,  lapicidiis,  lapide  et  calce,  molendinis,  multuris  et  eorum  sequelis, 
aucupacionibus,  venacionibus  et  piscationibus,  cum  curiis  et  earum  exitibus, 
amerciamentis,  berezeldis  cum  communi  pastura,  libero  introitu  et  exitu  ac 
cum  omnibus  aliis  et  singulis  libertatibus,  commoditatibus,  proficuis  asia- 
mentis  ac  iustis  pertineuciis  suis  cpiilmscunque  tam  non  nominatis  quam 
nominatis,  tam  sub  terra  quam  supra  terram,  procul  et  propc,  ad  dictam 
terram  et  integram  partem  terrarum  predictarum  et  terciam  partem  molendini 
cum  pertinenciis  spectantibus  seu  iuste  spectare  valentibus  quomodolibet  in 
futurum  et  adeo  libere,  quiete,  plenarie,  honorifice,  bene  et  in  pace  in 
omnibus  et  per  omnia  sicut  alique  terre  infra  regnum  Scotie  alicui  con- 
ceduntur,  dictis  tamen  terris  et  tercia  parte  dicti  molendini  cum  pertinenciis, 
deficientibus  prefatis  magistro  Heurico,  Johanne  et  Eoberto  et  heredibus  suis 
predictis,  reuertentibus  ad  nos  et  successores  nostros  pro  perpetuo  per- 
mansuris,  ad  boc  accedente  consensu  dicti  magistri  Henrici  expresso : 
Eeddendo  inde  annuatim  prefati  magister  Henricus,  Johannes  et  Eober- 
tus  et  heredes  sui  procreati  seu  procreandi  predicti  nobis  et  succes- 
soribus  nostris  seruicium  debitum  et  consuetum  dari  de  dictis  terris,  et 
vni  capellano  et  successoribus  suis  pro  perpetuo  celebraturis  pro  anima 
prefati  magistri  Henrici  septemdecim  marcas  annui  redditus,  prout  in 
ipsius  fundatione  continebitur :  volumus  eciam  quod  dicte  terre  et  tercia  pars 
prefati  molendiui  cum  suis  pertinenciis  reuertantur  ad  nos  et  successores 


264 


BEGISTRUM  MOXASTERII 


nostros  pro  perpetuo  permansure  vt  predicitur,  aceciam  si  contingat  dictas 
terras  aut  aliquam  partem  earundem  alienari  hereditarie  absque  nostris 
licencia,  consensu  et  confirmatione  seu  successorum  nostrorum;  semper  tamen 
saluo  predicto  annuo  redditu  dicto  capellano  et  succcssoribus  suis  secundum 
tenorem  infeodatiouis  predicte :  insuper,  pro  consiliis  nobis  et  loco  nostro  im- 
pensis  et  impendendis  per  prefatum  magistrum  Henricum,  eidem  et  prefatis 
Johanni  et  Eoberto  et  eorum  heredibus  prenominatis,  damus  et  concedimus 
omne  jus  et  juris  clameum  quod  seu  que  habemus,  habuimus  seu  habere 
poterunus  in  seu  ad  dictas  terras  et  tertiam  partem  prefati  molendini  cum 
suis  pertinenciis  ob  non  legitimum  introitum  heredis  seu  heredum  ad  dictas 
terras  seu  ad  terciam  partem  molendini  earundem  seu  ratione  recognitionis 
ob  alienationem  maioris  partis  earundem  seu  aliter  ex  aliqua  causa  seu  foris- 
factura  quibuscunque,  prefiitum  magistrum  Henricum  pro  tempore  suo  ab- 
soluimus  a  quocunque  alio  seruicio  preterquam  a  consilio  suo  dando.  In 
cuius  rei  testimonium  parti  huius  carte  indentate  siue  indenture  bipartite  apud 
nos  et  successores  nostros  permansure  sigillum  proprium  dicti  magistri 
Henrici  vnacum  sua  subscriptione  manuali,  parti  vero  eiusdem  apud 
dictum  magistrum  Henricum  et  heredes  suos  prenominatos  permansure 
sigillum  nostrum  commune  sunt  appensa,  apud  monasterium  nostrum  pre- 
dictum  primo  die  Junii,  anno  Domini  millesimo  quingentesimo  tricesimo ; 
presentibus  ibidem  venerabilibus  et  discretis  viris  magistris  et  dominis 
Jacobo  Wilsone  canonico  Dunblanensi,  Henrico  Myll,  Alano  Balward  vicario 
de  Kalender,  Alexandro  Fentoune  et  Andrea  Sym  vicario  de  Cumry  presby- 
teris,  Henrico  Abircrummy  et  Georgeo  Painter  laicis,  cum  diuersis  aliis. 


183.  [Lettees  of  eeveksion  or  the  xHrRD  part  of  Kintulach.] 
To   all    and    sundry  to    quhais    knaulege   thir   present  lettres   sall   tocum, 
William,  be  the  mercy  of  God  bischop  of  Dunblane,  with  consent  and  assent 


DE  CAMBUSKEXXETH. 


265 


of  ane  reueretid  fader  in  God,  James,  administratour  generall  of  the  frutis  of 
the  bishopry  of  Dunblane,  dene  and  cheptoure  of  the  saniyn,  IMaister  Henry 
Quliite,  chanon  of  the  cathederall  kirlcis  of  Jlurreff,  Dunblane,  and  Brecliin, 
rector  of  Sanct  Modoce  official  of  Dunblane,  generall  lard  of  Auchnagufe,  and 
Lard  of  the  thrid  part  of  the  landis  of  Kintuloch  and  the  thrid  part  of  the 
mylne  of  the  samyn,  with  thare  pertinentis,  liand  within  the  sliirefdome  of 
Perth,  besyde  the  brig  of  Erne,  -witliin  the  parocliin  of  Dumbery,  and  schir 
Stevin  Cidrois,  chapeUane  of  tlie  cliapellanry  of  the  Trinite  altare  situat 
within  the  cathedrall  kirk  of  Dunblane,  fonndit  be  the  said  maister  Henry. 
greting  in  God  euirlesting  :  Wit  zoure  vniuersiteis  that  albeit  ane  venerabill 
fader  Alexander  be  the  permissioun  of  God  abbot  of  Cambuskynneth,  and 
the  convent  of  the  samyn,  ourlordis  of  the  thrid  partis  of  the  said  landis  of 
Kintuloch,  and  the  thrid  part  of  tlie  mylne  of  the  samyn,  witli  the  pertinentis, 
hes  infeft  me,  the  said  Maister  Henry  Quhite,  in  the  said  landis  of  Kintulacli, 
and  in  the  thrid  part  of  the  mylne  of  tlie  samyn,  with  thare  pertinentis,  and 
eftir  me  to  cum  to  Johnne  Quhite  and  the  aris  gottin,  or  to  be  gottin,  of  his 
body,  and  failzeing  thareof  to  Robert  Quhite  and  the  airis  gottin  and  to  lie 
gottin  of  his  body,  and  failzeing  thairof  to  re\-ert  and  returne  to  the  sadis 
abbot  and  convent  and  thare  successouris,  pjerpetually  foreuir,  quhare  of 
before  in  the  sadis  landis  ■wes  diuers  and  mony  airis  iu  grete  nowmer  to 
succeid  or  the  sadis  landis  micht  returne  to  the  sadis  abbot  and  convent,  and 
als  that  albeit  that  I,  the  said  Maister  Henry,  hes  infeft  ane  chapellane  to 
serue  in  the  cathedrall  kirk  of  Dunblane  of  sevintene  markis  of  annuellrent 
zeirlie,  with  consent  and  assent  of  the  sadis  abbot  and  convent,  and  thare 
successouris,  of  the  sadis  landis  and  mylne,  with  thare  pertinentis,  like  as  it  is 
contenit  in  the  fundatioune  maid  tharupoun,  nenirthelcs  we,  the  said  "William 
bischop  of  Dunblane  and  cheptour  of  the  samyn,  Maister  Henry  Quhite  and 
chapellane  foresaid,  wUI  and  grantis  ws,  lelely  and  treuly,  and  be  the  faith  and 

34 


KINTaLACH. 


2GG 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


treutli  iu  oure  boJy,  biudis  and  oLlissis  vs  aud  oure  successouris,  present  and 
for  to  cum,  that  liow  sone  aud  quliatsumeuir  tyme  tliat  it  sall  happin  the  said 
venerabill  fader  and  his  convent,  or  thair  successouris,  eftir  the  sadis  laudis 
cumis  and  returnis  to  thame  ouy  maner  of  way  to  remane,  and  infeftis  the 
said  chapellane  aud  his  successoris  heretabillie  beaud  for  the  tyme,  and 
makis  him  aud  tliame  als  sicker  as  can  be  deuisit  but  incouuenieut  iu 
als  mekle  gude  annuell  liaud  iu  als  gude  and  competent  place  zeirlie 
to  be  joysit  be  thame,  that  than  iucoutiuent  we,  oure  successouris  and 
cheptoure,  Maister  Ileiiry  aud  chapellaue  forsaid  beand  for  the  tyme,  saU 
renuuce  and  ouregif  aud  purelie  resigue  to  the  said  venerabill  fader  and 
convent  aud  thare  successouris  beaud  for  the  tyme,  the  said  annueU  that 
the  said  chapeUaue  beaud  for  the  time  hes  of  the  thrid  pait  of  the  landis 
of  Kiutulach,  and  the  thrid  part  of  the  mylue  of  the  samyn  with  thare  perti- 
nentis  to  remaue  to  the  said  abbot  aud  conveut,  aud  thare  successouris  per- 
petualie,  swa  that  we  the  saidis  Williara,  bischop  of  Dumblaue,  oure  deue  and 
cheptoure  of  the  samin  aud  chappellane  of  the  said  altare  beaud  for  the  tyme, 
and  oure  successouris,  and  the  said  maister  Henry,  he  beaud  on  life,  beand 
lauchfully  warnit  personaly,  or  apouu  the  Sonday  in  tyme  of  the  hie  mess  at 
the  said  altare  of  the  Triuite,  situat  within  the  said  Kirk  of  Dunblane,  in 
preseus  of  aue  notare  aud  witues  as  efferis,  and  gif  the  bischop,  dene,  cheptoure 
aud  chapeUaue  for  the  time  abseutis  thaimseU  fraudfully,  thai  beaud  lauclifuUy 
warnit  tharof  before,  as  said  is,  thau  it  salbe  lefuU  to  the  sacUs  abbot  and 
conveut,  and  thare  successouris  for  the  tyme,  tiU  haiff  fuU  ingress  and  regress 
to  the  said  auuuellis,  but  ouy  impedimeut,  swa  that  the  said  bischop,  dene, 
cheptoure  aud  chapellaue  for  the  tyme  will  uocht  resaue  the  said  iufeftment  of 
samekUl  auuueU,  ueuirtheles  aU  wayis  the  said  iufeftment  of  the  said  annueU, 
als  gude  and  als  competent  place,  to  remane  with  the  abbot  and  convent  of 
luchafiray  beaud  for  the  tyme,  to  the  vtUitie  and  proffit  of  the  sadis  bischop. 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETII. 


dene,  cheptoure  and  chapellane  that  heis  for  the  tyme,  and  frathinfurth  tlie 
sadis  venerabill  fader  Alexauder,  abbot  of  Cambuskynuetli,  aud  thare  succes- 
souris,  to  pat  thare  haud  to  thc  said  aniuiell  of  seviuteue  markis  of  the  said 
thrid  of  the  laudis  of  Kintulach,  with  the  thrid  part  of  the  raylue  of  the  samyn, 
aud  apply  the  samyn  to  thare  proper  vse  siclike  as  the  remauent  of  the  sadis 
laudis  without  clame  or  impediment  in  tyme  cuming.  In  witues  of  the  quliilk 
thiug  to  thir  oure  lettres  of  reuersiouu,  our  auctentilv  seill,  with  the  seill  of  tlie 
said  reucrend  fader  admiuistratoure,  and  tlie  commouu  sele  of  oure  said  cliep- 
toiire,  and  the  propir  selis  of  the  said  maister  Henry  Quhite,  fuudatour,  and 
schir  Steuin  Cuh-oss,  chapellane,  ar  hungin  at  Dunblane,  the  xxvi  and  ferd 
days  of  IMarche,  the  zeres  of  God  ane  thousand  fyve  hundreth  and  tlu-etty 
thre,  aud  xxxiiii. 

WiLLELMUS,  episcopus  Dunblanensis.  GEORfilus  Newtoux,  archidiaconns 
Jacobus,  administrator  Dunhlauensis.  Dunblaueusis. 

WiLLELMUS  Deummond,  dccanus  Duu-  Johannes   Chesholme,   caucellarins 

bhxnensis.  Dunblauensis. 

Robektus  Masoun.  Jacobus  Wilsoun.  Eobektus  Wemys. 

Geoegius  Wawane. 


KINTUI.ACH 


184.  De  ecclesia  pe  Kinclevyn  et  Lkcroth. 
Omnibus  Christi  tidelibus  preseus  seriptum  visuris  vel  audituris,  riicliaidus 
Dei  gratia  episcopus  Dunkeldensis  eternam  in  Domino  sahitem  :  Nouerit  vni- 
uersitas  vestra  nos  de  communi  consensu  et  assensu  decani  et  capituli  nostri 
Dunkeldensis  et  virorum  religiosorum  abbatis  etconuentus  de  Cambuskyunetli 
de  ecclesiis  de  KinclevjTi  et  de  Lecroth  nostre  diocesis  auctoritate  nostra  poutifi- 
cali  in  forma  subscripta  ordinasse,  ^ddelicet,  f|uod  cum  ecclesia  de  Kincleviu  iii 
duas  partes  esset  diuisa  quarum  altera  pars  ad  preceutorem  ecclesie  Duukeld- 
ensis  pertinebat,  et  altera  pars  ad  viros  religiosos  abbatem  et  conuentum  de 


■268 


REGISTRUM  MOKASTERII 


Cambuskyuiietli,  propter  quarn  sectiouem  uon  modicum  imniiucbat  periculum 
animarum  et  eideui  ecclesie  minus  houeste  deseruiebatur,  nos  huiusmodi  peri- 
culis  remedium  adhibere  voleutes  et  tam  ecclesie  uostre  Dunkeldensis  quam 
dicti  mouasterii  de  Cambuskyuueth  vtilitatem  in  hac  parte  attendentes,  de 
communi  vtriusque  capituli  voluutate  concedimus  et  ordiuamus  quod  dicta 
ecclesia  de  Kiuclevyu  cum  onini  cura  et  ouere  iutegre  et  pleuo  jure  cum  terris 
decLmis  et  obuenciouibus  et  omnibus  aliis  iuste  ad  ipsam  pertiueutibus  ad 
precentoriam  ecclesie  Dunkeldensis  pertineat  imperpetuum,  saluis  dictis  abbati 
et  cauonicis  sex  niarcis  annuis  per  manus  precentoris  ecclesie  Dunkeldeusis 
qui  pro  tempore  fuerit  singulis  aunis  ad  festuui  Sancti  Martini  in  hieme  in 
dicta  ecclesia  de  Kinclevin  imperpetuum  percipiendis,  nomiue  simplicis  beue- 
ficii,  sine  oumi  ciu-a  et  onere  ordinariis  vel  extraordLnariis,  remotis  omni  cou- 
tradictioue,  cauillatione  et  impedimeuto  ex  aliqua  causa  vel  occasione 
proueniente:  et  si  coutingat  precentorem  Dunkeldensem  quipro  tempore  fuerit 
vltra  quindenam  post  terminum  statutum  a  solutioue  dictarum  sex  marcarum 
cessare,  quod  absit,  qualibet  ebdomada  vltra  quindeuam  post  terminum  qua 
cessauerit  dimediam  marcam  ad  fabricam  pontis  de  Dunkeld  nomiue  peue 
persoluet :  nos  vero  episcojtus  Duukeldeusis  et  successores  nostri  compellemus 
dictum  preceutorem  taui  ad  solutiunem  dictarum  sex  marcamm  quam  ad 
dictam  penam  firmiter  obseruandani,  et  dictos  abbatem  et  conueutum  contra 
quoscuuque  iudempues  conseruabimus.  Dictus  vero  precentor  ecclesie  de 
Kinclevin  per  ydoneum  capellanum  honeste  faciet  deseruire,  et  de  episco- 
palibus  et  omnibus  oneribus  ad  dictam  ecclesiam  pertineutibus  respondebit,  et 
idem  preceutor  vnum  capenanum  ydoneum  et  houestum  preter  suum  vicarium 
inueuiet  iu  ecclesia  Dunkekleusi  ad  missam  Saucte  Marie  virginis  siugulis 
diebus  imperpetuum  celebraudam,  qui  decano  et  capitulo  Dunkeldeusi  presen- 
tabitur  et  horis  canonicis  iu  habitu  honesto  intererit  et  jus  vicarie  percipiet : 
concedimus  eciam  et  ordiuamus  quod  supradicta  ecclesia  de  Lecroth  in  qua 


DE  CAMBUSKENNEriL 


2C9 


dicti  abbas  et  conueutus  de  Cambusk^-nueth  aute  istam  uostram  ordiuatiouem 
uullum  ius  habuerunt  cum  omui  cura  et  ouere  mtegre  etpleno  jure,  cum  terris, 
decimis  et  obuentiouibus  et  omuibus  aliis  ad  ipsam  iuste  pertiuentibus  ad  dictos 
abbatem  et  couueutum  ex  nostra  collatione  pertineat  imperpetuum  in  vsus 
proprios  prout  melius  videriut  expedire  conuerteudo  :  Faciendo  eidem  ecclesie 
de  Lecroth  per  vnum  ydoneum  capellauiun  nobis  et  successoribus  nostris  pro 
tempore  presentaudum  deseruire  ita  quod  non  teneantur  nec  comj)ellantur 
presentare  ad  dictam  ecclesiam  perpetuum  vicarium  ;  saluis  nobis  etsuccesso- 
ribus  nostris  episcopalibus  in  eadem  ecclesia  prout  antiquitus  facere  consue- 
uerunt ;  et  si  qua  iustrumenta  regum  vel  pontificum  fuerint  iuuenta  que  istam 
nostram  ordiuationem  aliquibus  temporibus  possint  impedire  vacua  sint  et 
inania  et  vtriusque  capituli  assensu  et  voluntate  viribus  carentia,  contingente 
vero  casu  quod  aliquis  velit  dictos  abbatem  et  couueutum  super  predicta 
ecclesia  de  Lecroith  impuguare,  uos  episcopus  L)uukeldensis  et  successores 
nostri  eosdem  contra  quoscuuque  defendemus  ;  et  sciendum  estquod  jus  quod 
dicti  abbas  et  conuentus  habueruut  iu  dicta  ecclesia  de  Kinclcvyn  tale  fuit 
quod  dicti  abbas  et  conuentus  perceperunt  dimedietatem  omnium  decimarum, 
et  integre  omnes  oblationes  et  obuentiones  propter  quas  dicti  abbas  et  con- 
uentus  dicte  ecclesie  de  Kincleviu  per  ydoneum  capellanum  honeste  fecerunt 
deseruire  :  et  vt  hec  nostra  ordinatio  perpetue  firmitatis  robur  obtiueat,  presenti 
scripto  penes  dictos  abbatem  et  conuentum  de  Cambuskynueth  permansuro 
sigillum  nostrum  vnacum  commmii  sigillo  capituli  nostri  Dunkeldensis  feci- 
mus  apponi,  et  alteri  scripto  eiusdem  tenorispenes  capitulum  nostrum  Dun- 
keldense  remanenti  sigillum  nostrum  vnacum  sigillo  communi  abbatis  et 
conuentus  de  Cambuskynneth  est  appensum  :  datum  apud  Dunkeld,  in  crastino 
Omnium  Sanctoruui,  auno  gracie  millesimo  duceutesimo  sexagesimo. 


270 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


1  85.    KlNCLEVIN  ECCLESIE  COMPOSITIO. 

Memorandum  quoJ  cuni  anno  Domini  millesimo  tricentesimo  quintodecimo, 
die  lime  proximo  ante  festum  Sancti  Vrbani  Pape  et  IMartiris  in  ecclesia  fra- 
trum  de  Monte  Carmeli  iuxta  Pertli  religiosi  viri  abbas  et  conuentus  de  Cam- 
buskynnetli,  per  fratrem  Willelmum  de  Anand  predicti  monasterii  priorem  ac 
procuratorem  ad  hoc  legitime  constitutum,  peterent  coram  venerabili  patre 
domino  Willelmo  Dei  gracia  episcopo  Dunkeldensi  vt  discretus  vir  dominus 
Duncanus  tunc  preeentor  Dunkeldensis  qiii  ibidem  personaliter  citatus  com- 
paruit  predictis  religiosis  annuam  pensionem  sex  marcarum  ipsi  monasterio  ab 
ipso  debitam  in  ecclesia  de  Kinclevin  ratione  cuiusdam  compositionis  seu 
ordinationis  bone  memorie  domini  Pachardi  dudum  episcopi  Dunkeldensis  inter 
predictum  monasterium  de  Cambuskynneth  et  ecclesiam  Dunkeldensem  de 
consensu  vtriusque  capituli  facte  ac  die  et  loco  supradictis  exhibite,  in  cuius 
pensionis  solutione  per  octo  annos  fuerat  cessatum,  vnacum  arreragiis  dictorum 
octo  annorum  auctoritate  sua  ordinaria  soluere  compelletur,  prout  in  ipsa  ordi- 
natione  continetur,  et  quod  ad  soluendum  in  posterum  eandem  pensionem  sine 
difficultate  singulis  annis  statutis  terminis  eadem  auctoritate  condempuaretur  : 
tandem  post  aliquales  altercationes,  de  consilio  venerabilium  patrum  domini 
Willelmi  Dei  gracia  episcopi  Dunkeldeusis  supradicti  ac  domiui  Nicholai 
eadem  gracia  episcopi  Dunblanensis  et  venerabilium  virorum  magistrorum 
Willelmi  et  Willelmi  Laudonie  et  Dunblanensis  archidiaconorum  ac  ecclesie 
Dunkeldensis  predicte  canonicorum,  qui  ibidem  presentes  aderant,  partes  pre- 
dicte  amicabiliter  admuicem  tractantes,  pars  rea  ad  satisfaciendum  de  jre- 
missis  ratione  paupertatis  ecclesie  sue  in  omnibus  que  peciebantur  se  non 
posse  sufficere  asserebat,  vnde  predicti  domini  episcopi  aceciam  archidiaconi 
predictas  partes  concordare  cupientes,  a  predicto  procuratore  monasterii  de 
Cambuskynneth  supplicando  obtinuerunt  quod  ipse  arreragia  predicta  dicto 


1)E  CAMBUSKENNETII. 


271 


preeeutori  condonauit  et  de  solutione  dicte  peusionis  in  posterum  sic  conuenit 
quod  quia  ecclesia  sua  de  Kinclevin  adliuc  exilis  extitit,  dictus  precentor 
primo  auuo  vnam  marcam  sterliugorum  eisdem  religiosis  persoluet  et  secundo 
anno  duas  marcas  et  tertio  auno  tres  marcas  et  quarto  auno  quatuor  marcas, 
et  quinto  anno  quiuque  marcas  ac  sexto  anno  sex  marcas  statutis  termiuis 
persoluet,  incipiente  primo  termino  solutionis  in  festo  Sancti  Martini  in  hieme 
proxime  futuro,  et  a  sexto  anno  extunc  secundum  teuorem  compositionis  pre- 
dicte  singidis  annis  statutis  terminis  sine  difficultate  de  predicta  pensione  in 
solidum  satisfaciat,  saluo  dicto  doinino  Duncano  proprietatis  si 

viderit  expedire  :  et  istam  conueutiouem  predicte  partes  acceptarunt,  laudaue- 
runt  et  approbaueruut,  et  se  eam  in  omnibus  [observaturos  esse]  fideliter 
promiserunt :  In  cuius  rei  testinionium,  omnes  predicti  domini  episcopi  ac 
etiam  prefati  arcbidiaconi  sigilla  sua  preseuti  scripto  apposueruut :  acta  et 
data  die,  loco,  mense  et  anno  supradictis. 


186.    LlXLITHQOW  ACRE  TEREE  EESIGXACIO. 

Ueneeabili  in  Cbristo  patri  ac  domino  Henrico  permissioue  diuina  abbati 
monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth,  suus  humilis  seruitor  Johannes  Eannal- 
dus,  fiUus  et  heres  quondam  Patricii  Eannaldi  burgensis  de  Linlithqw,  reuer- 
encias  omnimodas  et  honores  :  Ad  sursum  reddendum  pro  me  pureque  simplici- 
ter  resiguandum  in  manibus  vestre  dominationis  vnam  acram  terre  arabilis 
cum  pertiuenciis  jacentem  infra  vicecomitatum  de  Linlithqw  ad  finem  orien- 
talem  burgi  eiusdem  prouidos  viros  Heuricum  Forester,  Alexandrum  Leuis- 
touue  commorantes  Henricum  admissione  et  eorum  quemlibet 

coniunctim  et  diuisim  meos  veros  legitimos  indubitatos  ac  irreuocabiles  pro- 
curatores 

tuuore  preseucium  literarum,  quam  eciam  acram  terre  cum  pertinenciis  ego 
dictus  Johauues  non  vi  aut  metu  ductus  nec  errore  lapsus  sed  mea  pura 


I.INLITHGOW. 


272 


BEGISTIiUM  MOXJSTEBII 


et  spontanea  voluntate  in  maniis  vestre  venerabilis  paternitatis  sursum  redJo 
ac  per  fustim  et  baculum  pureque  simpliciter  resigno  per  presentes,  ac  totum 
jus  et  clameum  juris,  proprietatem  et  possessionem  que  et  quas  in  dicta  acra 
terre  cum  pertinenciis  habeo,  liabui  seu  quouismodo  liabere  potero  quieteclamo 
imperpetuum,  et  insuper  omnia  et  singula  facieuda,  gerenda  et  exercenda  que 
ad  officium  huiusmodi  procuratoris  de  jure  seu  consnetudine  regni  pertinere 
dinoscuntur :  ratum  et  gratum  habens  et  habiturus  irreuocabiliter  et  im- 
perpetuuni  totum  et  quicquid  dicti  mei  procuratores  seu  eorum  aliquis  coniunc- 
tim  et  diuisim  resignatione  premissa  duxerint  seu  duxerit  faciendum  :  In  cuius 
rei  testimonium  quia  sigillum  proprium  non  habui,  sigillum  Thome  Forestare 
presentibus  apponi  cum  instaucia  procuraui,  coram  hiis  testibus,  Henrico 
Levistouue  de  Myddill  Benyne  et  Dauid  Newland,  balliuis  burgi  de  Liulithqw, 
magistro  Patricio  Brocas,  Petro  Hill  et  Johaune  M^^Nakill  capellanis,  Johanne 
Palmar  et  Duncano  Newlandis,  balliuis,  cum  multis  aliis  testibus  ad  pre- 
missa  vocatis  specialiter  et  rogatis,  apud  Linlithqow,  decimo  die  mensis  Feb- 
ruarii,  anno  Domini  millesimo  quadringentesimo  nonagesimo  tertio. 


187.    LlNLITHQW  TENEMENTI  POSSESSIO. 

In  Dei  nomine  amen  :  Per  hoc  presens  publicnm  instrumentum  cunctis  pateat 
euidenter  quod  anno  ab  Incarnatione  eiusdem  miUesimo  quadringentesimo 
quadragesimo,  mensis  vero  Augusti  die  vigesima  secunda,  indictione  tercia, 
pontificatus  sanctissimi  in  Christo  patris  et  domini  nostri  domini  Eugenii 
diuina  prouidencia  pape  quarti  anno  decimo,  in  mei  notarii  publici  et  tes- 
tium  subscriptorum  presencia  personaliter  constitutus  venerabilis  in  Christo 
pater  ac  dominus,  dominus  Dauid  permissione  diuiua  abbas  monasterii 
de  Cambuskynneth,  procurator  legitimus  religiosi  viri  domini  Johaimis  de 
Annand  canonici  dicti  monasterii,  sicut  per  suas  literas  de  procurationis 
officio  tunc  temporis  ostensas  et  perlectas  plenius  apparebat,  cum  instancia 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


273 


sepius  requisiuit  discretum  virum  Alexanclruni  Haitln^y  balliuum  burgi  de 
Linlithqow  quatenus  secum  personaliter  adiret  tenementum  dicti  domini  Johan- 
nis  jacens  ex  parte  occidentali  fori  dicti  burgi  inter  terram  Cristoferi  Gynnis  ex 
parte  orientali  ex  parte  vna,  et  tenementum  Johannis  Were  ex  parte  occidentali 
ex  parte  altera,  ac  sibi  sasinam  legitimam  exinde  nomine  et  ex  parte  eonuentus 
dicti  monasterii,  auctoritate  in  hac  parte  sibi  commissa  juxta  tenorem  sue 
carte  traderet  indilate  :  predictus  vero  balliuus  hincinde  diligeuter  consultus, 
perlectis  literis  super  auctoritate  et  potestate  sibi  in  hac  parte  commissa, 
resignatione  prius  facta  de  dicto  tenemento  in  manibus  suis  per  procuratores 
legitimos  dicti  domini  Johannis  de  Annand  super  sohim  dicti  tenementi, 
tandem  dictus  balliuus  sasinam  legitimam  inuesturam  et  corporalem  pos- 
sessionem  prefati  tenementi  cum  pertinenciis  dicto  domino  abbati  tradidit 
nomine  et  ex  parte  coniientus  dicti  monasterii  suisque  successoribus  in 
puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  juxta  tenorem  sue  carte  perpetuo  reman- 
suram,  et  interuailo  facto,  procuratores  dicti  domini  Johannis  cum  instancia 
pecierunt  et  specialiter  procurauerunt  sigillum  commune  dicti  burgi  prefate 
carte  appendi,  vnacum  sigillo  dicti  balliui  propter  maiorem  euidenciam  pre- 
missorum,  quod  sibi  concessum  fuit  per  balliuum  et  consules  dicti  burgi  : 
super  quibus  omnibus  et  singulis  dictus  dominus  alibas  a  me  notario  publieo 
infrascripto  sibi  fieri  peciit  publicum  instrumentum.  Acta  fuerunt  hec  super 
solum  dicti  tenementi  hora  qnasi  nona  ante  merediem  anno,  die,  mense, 
indictione  et  pontificatu  quibus  supra ;  presentibus  prouidis  et  discretis 
viris  Jacobo  de  Parklye  de  eodem,  domino  Alexandro  Masoune  presliytero, 
Johanne  de  Listonne,  Johanne  "Were,  Willelmo  Broune,  Johanne  Symson, 
Patricio  de  Parkle,  Johanne  CoUane,  Andrea  M^Peth,  Eoberto  Nieliolai  et 
Johanne  Litstar  seriando,  cum  multis  aliis  testibus  ad  premissa  vocatis 
specialiter  et  rogatis. 

Et  ego  Jacobus  de  Foulis  clericus  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  publica  auctori- 
35 


LIXLITHGOW. 


LINLITHGOW 


274 


REGISTRUM  MOXASTEEII 


tate  imperiali  notarius  publicus,  predictis  omnibus  et  singulis  dum,  sic  vt 
premittitiu',  fierent  et  agerentur  vnacum  preuominatis  testibus  presens 
personaliter  interfui ;  eaque  sic  fieri,  dici,  vidi  et  audiui,  et  iu  notam 
cepi ;  indeque  presens  publicum  instrumentum  manu  propria  scripsi  et 
meis  signo  et  subscriptione  roboraui,  rogatus  et  requisitus  in  testuuonium 
veritatis  omuium  premissoruni. 


188.  Carta  de  Muetoun. 
OllNlBUS  hauc  cartam  visuris  vel  audituris,  Dauid  Flemyng  dominus  de 
Bigar,  salutem  in  Domiuo  sempiternam  :  Noueritis  nos  de  consensu  Malcolmi 
Flemyng  filii  nostri  et  lieredis,  diuine  pietatis  intuitu  et  pro  salute  auime 
boue  memorie  domini  ^Malcolmi  Flemyng  quondara  domini  nostri  geuitoris, 
Cristiaue  quondam  genetricis  uostre,  pro  salute  anime  nostre,  sponse  nostre 
carissime  Isabelle,  necnou  et  pro  auimabus  omnium  predecessorum  et 
successorum  nostrorum  et  omnium  fidelium  defunctorum,  dedisse,  con- 
cessisse  et  liac  presenti  carta  nostra  confirmasse  Deo,  beate  ]\Iarie  virgini, 
monasterio  de  Cambuskynneth  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  et 
imperpetuum  seruituris,  omnes  et  singidas  terras  nostras  de  Murtoune  que 
dudum  vocabautur  Ladylaud  cum  pertinenciis  jacentes  in  vicecomitatu  de 
Striueling  :  Teuendas  et  habeudas  omnes  et  singulas  teiTas  predictas  cum 
pertinencLis  a  nobis  et  heredibus  nostris,  prefatis  canonicis  et  suis  successori- 
bus  in  puram  et  perpetuam  et  pacificam  elemosLnam  imperpetuiun,  per  omnes 
rectas  antiquas  metas  et  diuisas  suas,  cum  vniuersis  suis  commoditatibus, 
libertatibus,  asiamentis  ac  iustis  pertinenciis  suis  quibuscunque,  in  pratis, 
pascuis  et  pasturis,  boscis,  planis,  viis,  semitis,  moris,  maiTesiis,  aquis,  stagnis, 
veuationibus,  aucupationibus,  piscationibus,  cum  molendinis,  midturis  et 
eorundem  sequelis,  turbariis,  petariis,  cum  curiis,  curiarum  exitibus  et 
eschaetis,  ac  cum  omnibus  aliis  et  singulis  commoditatibus,  libertatibus,  asia- 


DE  CAMBVSKENNETH. 


275 


raentis  et  iustis  pertinenciis  suis  quibuscunqne  prefatis,  tam  non  nominatis 
quam  nominatis,  tam  sub  terra  quam  supra  terram,  tam  prope  quam  procul 
ad  preffitas  terras  cum  pertinenciis  spectantibus  seu  quomodolibet  iuste 
spectare  valentibus  in  futurum,  adeo  libere,  integre,  honorifice,  pleuarie,  bene 
et  in  pace  sicut  aliqua  terra  elemosinaria  infra  regnum  Scotie  melius  et  liberius 
datur  et  conceditur :  Faciendo  inde  prefati  canonici  et  successores  sui  pro 
oninibus  animabus  supradictis  in  missis  et  horis  orationes  speciales 
singulis  futuris  diebus  imperpetuum,  pro  omnibus  aliis  oneribus  seruiciis 
secularibus,  consuetudinibus,  exactionibus  et  demandis  que  de  supradictis 
terris  cum  pertinenciis  per  quoscunque  futuris  temporibus  exigi  poterunt  vel 
requiri.  Et  nos  vero  prefatus  Dauid  pro  nobis  et  heredibus  nostris  omnes  et 
singulas  terras  prefatas  de  Murtoune  que  dudum  vocabantur  Ladyland  cum 
pertinenciis  prefatis  canonicis  et  suis  successoribus  contra  omnes  mortales 
warantizabimus,  acquietabimus  et  imperpetuum  defendemus ;  volentes  insuper 
et  concedentes  presentem  cartam  nostram,  quando  per  dictos  canonicos  vel 
suos  successores  videbitur  expediens,  addere,  corrigere  et  in  nieliorem  formam 
renouare.  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  sigillum  nostrum  huic  presenti  carte 
nostre  est  appensum  apud  Striueling,  octauo  die  mensis  Nouembris,  anno  Domini 
mdlesimo  tricentesimo  nonagesimo  nono ;  hiis  testibus,  magnifice  et  egregie 
potestatis  domino,  domino  nostro  domino  Eoberto  duce  Albanie,  de  Fyff  et  de 
Menteith  comite,  dominis  Mordaco  Senescallo  filio  suo  et  herede,  Thoma  de 
Erskyn  domino  de  Alway,  Nicholao  de  Erskin,  Johaune  de  Levinstoune  de 
Calenter,  Roberto  Normaville,  militibus,  Thoma  Boyd,  Alexandro  de  Leving- 
stoune,  Wnielmo  de  Hammiltoune  armigeris,  et  multis  aliis. 


189.    CONFIEMATIO  EEGIS  DE  jMUETOUNE. 

PiOBEETUS  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotorum,  omnibus  probis  hominibus  totius  terre 
sue,  clericis  et  laicis,  salutem  :  Sciatis  nos  inspexisse  et  veraciter  intellexisse 


276 


HEaisTnrM  moxasterii 


quaodam  cartam  dilecti  cousanguiuei  uostii  Dauid  Flemyug  factam  et  cou- 
cessani  Deo  et  Leate  Marie  virgini,  monasterio  de  Cambuskyunetli  et  canonicis 
ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  et  imperpetuum  seruituris  de  omnibus  terris  de 
Murtoune  que  dudum  vocabantur  Ladyland  cum  pertiueuciis,  cuius  carte  tenor 
sequitur  de  verbo  iu  verbuiu  sub  liac  forma  :  Omnibus  lianc  cartam  visuris 
vel  audituris,  Dauid  Flemyng  dominus  de  Bigar,  salutem  in  Domiuo  sempi- 
ternam  :  Noueritis  nos  de  consensu  IMalcolmi  Flemyug  filii  nostri  et  heredis, 
diuiue  pietatis  intuitu,  et  pro  salute  anime  bone  memorie  domini  Malcolmi 
Fleuiyng  quoudam  domiui  uostri  genitoris,  Cristiane  quondam  genetricis 
nostre  et  pro  salute  anime  nostre,  sponse  nostre  cbarissime  Isobelle,  necnon 
et  pro  animabus  omuium  predecessorum  et  successorum  uostrorum  et  omuiuui 
fidelium  defunctorum,  dedisse,  concessisse  et  liac  presenti  carta  nostra  confir- 
masse  Deo,  beate  ]\Iarie  Virgini,  monasterio  de  Cambuskynnetli  et  canonicis 
ibidem  Deo  seruieutibus  et  imperpetuum  seruituris,  omnes  et  singulas  terras 
nostras  de  Murtoune  que  dudum  vocal>antur  Ladyland  cum  pertinenciis  jacen- 
tes  in  vicecomitatu  de  Striueliiig  :  Tenendas  et  babendas  omnes  et  singulas 
terras  predictas  cum  pertiuenciis  a  nobis  et  beredibus  nostris  prefatis 
cauonicis  et  suis  successoribus,  iu  puram  perpetuam  et  pacificam  elemosinam 
imperpetuum  et  per  omnes  rectas  autiquas  metas  et  diuisas  suas  cum  vniuersis 
suis  commoditatibus,  libertatibus,  asiamentis,  ac  iustis  pertinenciis  suis  quibus- 
cunque  in  pratis,  pascius  et  pasturis,  boscis,  planis,  viis,  semitis,  moris, 
maresiis,  aquis,  staguis,  venatiouibus,  aucupatiouibus,  piscationibus  cum 
molendinis,  multuris  et  eorundem  sequelis,  tiubariis,  petariis,  cum  curiis, 
curiarum  exitibus  et  escliaetis  ac  cum  omnibus  aliis  et  singulis  commodi- 
tatibus,  libertatibus,  asiamentis  et  iustis  pertineneiis  suis  quibuscunque  pre- 
fatis,  tam  nou  nominatis  quaui  nomiuatis,  tam  sub  terra  quam  supra  ten-am, 
tam  prope  quam  procul  ad  prefatas  terras  cum  pertinentiis  seu  quomodolibet 
iuste  spectare  valentibus  in  futurum,  adeo  libere,  integre,  lionorifice,  plenarie. 


BE  CAMBUSKEXNETII. 


liene  et  in  pace  sicut  aliqua  terra  elemosinaria  iufra  reguum  Scotie  melius  et 
liberius  datur  et  conceditur  :  Faciendo  inde  prefati  canonici  et  successores 
sui  pro  omnibus  animabus  supradictis  in  missis  et  lioris  orationes  speciales 
singulis  futuris  diebus  imperpetuum  pro  omuibus  aliis  oueribus,  seruiciis 
secularibus,  cousuetudinibus,  exactionibus  et  demandis  que  de  supradictis 
terris  cum  pertinenciis  per  quoscunque  futuris  temporibus  exigi  poterunt  vel 
requiri :  Et  nos  vero  prefatus  Dauid  pro  nobis  et  lieredibus  uostris  omnes 
et  singulas  prefatas  terras  de  Murtuuue  (pie  dudum  vocabantur  Ladylaud 
cum  pertiuenciis  prefatis  canonicis  et  suis  successoribus  contra  omnes  mor- 
tales  warantizabimus,  acquietabimus  et  imperpetuum  defendenjus.  Voleutes 
iusuper  et  concedentes  presentem  cartam  nostram  quando  per  dictos  canoui  - 
cos  vel  suos  successores  videbitur  expediens  addere  corrigere  et  in  melioreni 
formam  renouare.  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  sigillum  nostrum  Iiuic  presenti 
carte  nostre  est  appensum,  apud  Striueliug,  octauo  die  mensis  Nouembris, 
auno  Domini  millesimo  tricentesinio  nonagesimo  nono  ;  liiis  testilnis,  magni- 
fice  et  egregie  potestatis  domino,  domino  uostro  Eoberto  duce  Albanie  comite 
de  Fyff  et  de  Menteith,  dominis  Murdaco  Senescallo  filio  suo  et  Iierede,  Thoma 
de  Erskin  domino  de  Alway,  Nicholao  de  Erskin,  Johanne  Levingstoune  de 
Calenter  et  Eoberto  Normavile,  militibus,  Thoma  Boyd,  Alexandro  de  Leving- 
stouue,  Willelmo  de  Hammiltouue,  armigeris,  et  multis  ahis  :  Quamquidem 
cartam,  douationem  et  coucessionem  in  eadem  contentas,  in  omnibus  punctis 
suis  et  articulis,  conditionibus  et  modis  ac  circumstantiis  suis  quibuscunque 
forma  pariter  et  effectu  in  omnibus  et  per  omnia  approbamus,  ratificamus  et 
pro  nobis  et  heredibus  nostris,  vt  premissum  est,  in  puram  et  perpetuam 
elemosinam  et  ad  mamim  mortuam  imperpetuum  confirmamus,  nichil  nobis 
aut  successoribus  nostris  de  predictis  terris  cum  pertinenciis  faciendo  nisi 
tantum  oratiouum  sufiragia  deuotarum.  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  presenti  carte 
nostre  confirmationis  nostrum  precipunus  apponi  sigiUum ;  testibus  venera- 


278 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


bilibus  in  Christo  patribus  "Waltero  episcopo  Sanctiandree,  Gilberto  episeopo 
Abirdonensi  cancellario  nostro,  carissimo  primogenito  nostro  Dauid  duce 
Eothesaie  comite  de  Carrik  et  Atholie  et  senescallo  Scotie,  Eoberto  duce 
Allmnie  comite  de  Fyff  et  Menteith  fratre  nostro  germano,  Archibaldo  comite 
de  Douglas  domino  Galwidie,  Jacobo  de  Douglas  domino  de  Dalkeith  et  Thoma 
de  Erskin  consanguineis  nostris  dilectis,  militibus,  apud  Lythqw,  vicesimo 
quarto  die  mensis  Februarii,  anno  gracie  millesimo  quadriiigentesimo  et  regni 
nostri  anno  decimo. 

]  90.  Cakta  de  Mobbiscroft  et  de  piscatueis  de  Carsy  et  Tulybody 
ET  de  asiamentis  de  Torwod. 

MOBBisoiiopT.  Dauid  rex  Scotorum,  onmilius  prnbis  hominibus  totius  terre  sue  clericis  et 

laicis,  salutem  :  Sciatis  me  concessisse  et  hac  carta  niea  confirmasse  abbati  de 
Striueling  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  terram  que  jacet  inter  Forth 
et  viam  que  descendit  de  Striueling  ad  naues  vsqiie  ad  riuum  qui  descendit  a 
molendino  regis  in  Forth  per  suas  i-ectas  diuisas,  et  piscaturas  de  Karsy  et  de 
Tulibody  et  asiamenta  in  nemore  meo  de  Keltor  in  proiirios  vsus  suos,  ad 
tenendum  de  me  et  heredibus  meis  in  liberam  et  perpetuam  elemosinam 
libere,  quiete,  honorifice  sicut  aliquam  elemosinam  in  regno  meo  liberius 
dedi  tenendam  :  Teste  Waltero  Senescallo  cancellario,  Hugone  de  Morevilla, 
Waltero  filio  Alani,  Adam  de  Eokesburg,  Nicholao  clerico,  Johanne  capellano, 
apud  Striueling. 


191.  De  teera  DE  Mal.^r. 
HuGO  Dei   gracia  humilis  minister    ecclesie  Sanctiandree,   ^^iiuersis  sancte 
matris  ecclesie  fidelibus  tam  futuris  quam  presentibus,  salutem  :    Nouerint 
omnes  nos  dedisse  et  hac  carta  nostra  confirmasse  abbati  et  fratribus  nostris 


DE  CAMBUSKENNEril. 


27!) 


canouicis  de  Striueling  et  eorum  ecclesie  totam  terram  nostram  de  Malar  per 
suas  rectas  diuisas,  tenendam  de  uobis  et  successoribus  nostris  liberam 
quietam  et  absolutam  ab  onmi  cousuetudine  et  seruicio  quod  ad  nos  vel  ad 
successores  nostros  pertinet :  Eeddendo  de  ea  nobis  siugulis  anuis  decem 
solidos  ad  festum  Sancti  Martiui  :  Testibus  Jocelin  arcbidiacono  Dunkeld- 
ensi,  Willehno  de  Eidall  clerico,  Alexandi'0  capellano  episcopi,  Eoberto 
canouico  de  Edinburgli  fratre  episcopi,  Elwyuo  decano  Duukeldeusi,  magistro 
AVillelmo  Audree  et  Jobanue  de  Kelcho,  clericis  episcopi,  Eoberto  de  Corue- 
wall,  Audrea  fratre  episcopi,  Alexaudro  filio  "Wnielmi  filii  Torakli,  Eogero  de 
Mortemer,  Gamillo  ostiario,  Petro  fratre  abbatis  de  Duufermeling,  et  aliis 
multis. 


192.  De  tekea  de  Petcokthy. 
Ada  comitissa  mater  regis  Scotorum,  omnibus  probis  homiuibus  suis  et 
amicis  tam  presentibus  quam  futuris,  salutem  :  Sciatis  me  concessisse  et 
dedisse  et  hac  mea  carta  confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte  Marie  de  Striue- 
ling  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  vnum  plenum  toftum  m.  burgo  meo 
de  Kerell  et  dimediam  carucatam  terre  in  Petcorthyn,  cum  communi  rationa- 
bili  pastura  in  liberam  et  perpetuam  elemosinam,  pro  salute  auime  mee  et  pro 
auima  comitis  Henrici  et  antecessorum  meorum ;  prohibeo  igitur  ne  quis  eis 
super  illa  terra  iuiuriam  vel  molestiam  inferat :  testibus  hiis,  Alexaudro  de 
Saucto  ilartino,  Gilberto  de  Ymfrauille,  Hugoue  de  Baill,  Illeberto  clerico, 
apud  Hadingtoime. 


PETCORTHY 


193.    CONFIRMATIO  WlLELMI  EEGIS  DE  CROFTA  DE  PeRTH. 

'WiLELMXJ.s  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotorum,  omnibus  probis  hominibus  totius  terre 
sue  clericis  et  laicis,  salutem  :  Sciant  presentes  et  futuri  me  dedisse  et  con- 
cessisse  et  hac  carta  mea  confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte  Marie  de  Striue- 


280 


REGISTRUM  MOXASTERII 


ling  et  canonicis  ibidem  Ueo  seruientibus  vnum  plenarium  toftum  in  nouo 
burgo  raeo  de  Perth  :  Tenendum  eis  in  liberam  et  perpetuam  elemosiuam  ita 
libere,  quiete,  plenarie  et  honorifice  sicut  alie  abbacie  mee  toftum  aliquod  in 
aliquo  burgorum  meorum  liberius,  quietius,  plenius  et  honorificentius  tenent : 
Testibus  comite  Dunecano,  comite  Gileberto,  M  comite  Ethol,  Galfrido 

de  ^lahiill,  Hugoue  Giffert,  Geniasio  Auenell,  Eadulfo  de  Ver,  Eoberto  de 
Rerkeley,  Jolianne  de  Ilastinggis,  Geruasio  Piiddell,  apud  Perth. 


194.   PeRTH  QUIXQUAGINTA  SOLIDOEUM  DONATIO  liEGIA. 

Malcolmus  re.x;  Scotorum,  episcopi.s,  abbatibus,  comitibus,  iusticiis,  vice- 
comitibus,  prepositis,  ministris  et  omnibus  ahis  probis  hominibus  totius 
terre  sue,  Francis  et  Anglis,  Scottis  et  Galwediensibus,  salutem  :  Sciant 
clerici  et  laici  presentes  et  futuri  me,  pro  salute  anime  mee  et  animarum 
antecessorum  meorum,  in  liberam  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  concessise 
et  dedisse  et  hac  mea  carta  confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte  Marie 
de  Striueling  et  abbati  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  famulantibus  quin- 
quaginta  solidos  de  cano  meo  de  Perth  singulis  annis  habendos,  similiter 
redditum  illum  quem  canonici  de  Edeneburgh  de  cano  de  Perth  annuatim 
de  me  habere  solebant ;  ita  quod  per  illos  quinqiiaginta  solidos  remanebit 
michi  quietum  iUud  canum  vniiis  nauis  quod  predicti  canonici  de  Striue- 
ling  annuatim  apud  Perth  de  me  soliti  sunt  habere :  volo  itaque  et 
precipio  vt  predicti  abbas  et  canonici  de  Striueling  illos  quinquaginta  solidos 
habeant  ita  libere  et  quiete,  et  ita  honorifice  et  de  me  et  heredibus  meis  in 
perpetuam  elemosinam  teneant  sicut  ipsi  ceteras  elemosinas  suas  liberius  et 
quietius  tenent :  Testibus  Ada  comitissa,  comite  Dunecano,  Nicholao  can- 
cellario,  Eoberto  priore  de  Orenestet  (Eestenet),  Willelmo  de  Veteriponte, 
Eoberto  capellano,  apud  Perth. 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


281 


195.  Sextexcia  diffinitiua  crofte  apud  Perth  contra  Joiiannem 

DUNYNG. 

Cristi  nomine  inuocato,  nos  Johannes  Weddale  in  vtroque  jure  licen- 
ciatus,  canonicus  Morauiensis  ac  officialis  Sanctiandree  principalis,  per 
hanc  nostram  sentenciam  diffinitiuam  quam  ferimus  in  hiis  scriptis,  pronun- 
ciamus,  deceruimus  et  declaramus  honorabilem  virum  Johannem  Donyng 
burgensem  de  Perth  in  viginti  solidis  annuatini  pro  spacio  viginti 
annorum  vltime  elapsorum  ante  annum  Domini  millesimum  quingen- 
tesimum  vicesimum  ratione  intromissionis  per  se  et  alios  suo  nomine 
vnius  crofte  terre  vulgariter  ane  croft  of  land  pertinentis  dominis  abbati  et 
conuentui  monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth,  jacentis  prope  locum  Cartusien- 
sium  de  Perth  ex  parte  boreali  et  occidentali  vie  communis,  et  ex  parte 
australi  terrarum  heredum  quondam  Alexandri  Bunche  pro  firma  dicte  crofte 
annuatim  dictis  abbati  et  conuentui  soluenda  condempnandum  fore  et  con- 
dempnari  debere,  prout  condempnamus,  non  obstante  exceptione  peremp- 
toria  per  dictum  Johannem  proposita,  admissa  et  minime  probata ;  dictumque 
Johannem  de  aliis  summis  petitis  in  libello  dictorum  abbatis  et  conuentus 
absohiendum  fore,  prout  absoluimus,  dictumque  Johannem  in  expensis  in  lite 
factis  et  fiendis  eadem  nostra  sententia  condempnantes,  ipsarum  tamen  expen- 
sarum  taxatione  nostro  judicio  imposterum  reseruata :  Lecta,  lata  et  in  scriptis 
redacta  fuit  hec  nostra  sentencia  diffinitiua  in  ecclesia  beati  Johannis  ewan- 
geliste  pedagogii,  infra  ciuitatem  Sauctiandree  loco  consistoriali  eiusdem  et 
sigillo  officii  officialatus  Sanctiandree  principalis  roborata,  die  octauo  mensis 
Augusti,  anno  Domini  millesimo  quingentesimo  vigesimo ;  presentibus  ibidem 
venerabilibus  et  discretis  viris,  magistris  Eoberto  Schanwall  commissario 
nostro  generali  ac  vicario  de  Kirkcaldy,  Abraham  Creichtoun  rectore  de 
Vpsetlingtoune,  Johanne  Spens,  Thoma  Wemis,  Alexandro  Martin,  Alexandro 
Scott,  et  diuersis  aliis. 

36 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


196.  Eedditus  de  Plane. 


Dauid  Dei  gracia  Eex  Scotorum,  omuiljus  probis  liominibus  totius  terre  sue 
clericis  et  laicis,  saliitem:  Sciatis  nos  diuine  pietatis  intuitu  ac  pro  salute  anime 
nostre  et  anime  Margarete  regine  Scotie  socie  nostre  et  animarum  progenito- 
rum,berecUun  et  successorum  nostrorum  dedisse,eoncessisse  et  hac  presenti  carta 
nostra  confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte  Marie  de  Cambuskynnetb  et  cano- 
nicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  et  imperpetuum  seruituris  annuum  reddituni 
nostrum  decem  librarum  argeuti  nobis  de  terris  de  lie  Plane  infra  vicecomi- 
tatum  de  Striueling  annuatim  debitarum :  Tenendum  et  habendum  dictis 
religiosis  et  eorum  successoribus  de  nobis,  beredibus  et  successoribus  nostris 
regibus  Scotie  qui  pro  tempore  fuerint,  in  liberam,  puram  et  perpetuam 
elemosinam  libere,  quiete,  plenarie,  iutegre  et  honorifice  sine  contradictione  seu 
diminutione  quacunque  ex  quacunque  causa  vel  casu  proueniente  ad  cuius- 
cunque  vel  quorumcunque  manus  dicte  terre  de  le  Plane  infra  vicecomitatum 
de  Striueling  vt  premittitur  integre  vel  particulariter  deueuiant  in  posterum  : 
volumus  itaque  [et]  pro  nobis  heredibus  et  successoribus  nostris  perpetuo  con- 
cedimus  quod  predicti  canouici  et  successores  sui  dictis  decem  libris  argenti 
pacifice  gaudeant,  annuatim  babeant  et  integre  imperpetuum  possideant ;  et  si 
contiugat,  quod  absit,  quod  domini  seu  tenentes  dictarum  terrarum  de  lie 
Plaue  dictas  decem  libras  argenti  vltra  terminos  vsuales  detinuerint,  dictis 
religiosis  tempore  debito  soluere  recusantes,  mandamus  firmiter  et  precipimus 
vicecomiti  nostro  et  balliuis  suis  de  Striueling  qui  pro  tempore  fuerint  quod 
dictos  dominos  seu  tenentes  earundem  terrarum  et  onmia  bona  sua  mobLIia  et 
iramobilia  vbicunque  inuenta,  quanto  strictius  poterunt,  compellant  et  distrin- 
gant,  quod  prefatis  religiosis  vt  premissum  est  de  termino  in  tenninum  integre 
persoluant  et  plene  satisfaciant  super  nostram  plenariam  forisfacturam  :  In 
cuius  rei  testimonium  preseuti  carte   uostre  sigillum  nostrum  precipimus 


DE  CAMBUSKEXNETH. 


283 


apponi ;  testibus  venerabilibiis  in  Christo  j)atribiis  Willelmo  episcopo  Sancti- 
andree  et  Patricio  episeopo  Brechinensi  caucellario  nostro ;  Roberto  seuescallo 
Scotie  comite  de  Stratherne  uepote  nostro,  Willelmo  comite  de  Douglas, 
Roberto  de  Erskin,  Dauid  de  Grahame  et  Waltero  de  Haliburtoune,  militibus, 
apud  Perth,  vicesimo  quinto  die  mensis  Augusti  anno  regni  nostri  tricesimo 
sexto. 


197.  Plane  annuus  kedditus. 
Dauid  Dei  gracia  Eex  Scotorum,  omnibus  probis  liominibus  totius  terre  sue, 
clericis  et  laicis,  salutem  :  Sciatis  quod  licet  omnium  donationum  nostrarum  in 
parliamento  nostro  tento  apud  Sconam  sit  reuocatio  generalis  facta,  hoc  non 
obstante,  per  deliberationem  consilii  nostri,  tenti  apud  Edinburgh  septimo 
decimo  die  meusis  Februarii,  nos  diuine  pietatis  intuitu  ac  pro  salute  aninie 
nostre  et  anime  Margarete  regine  Scotie  socie  nostre  et  animaruni  progenito- 
rum  heredum  et  siiccessorum  nostrorum  dedisse,  concessisse  et  liac  preseuti 
carta  nostra  confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte  Marie  de  Cambuskynueth  et 
canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  et  imperpetuum  seruituris  annuum  reddi- 
tum  nostrum  decem  librarum  argenti  nobis  de  terris  de  lie  Plane  infra  vice- 
comitatum  de  Striueling  annuatim  debitarum  :  Tenendum  et  habendum  dictis 
religiosis  et  eorum  successoribus  de  nobis  et  heredibus  et  successoribus  uostiis 
regibus  Scotie  qui  pro  tempore  fuerint  in  liljeram,  puram  etperpetuam  elemos- 
iuam  libere,  quiete,  plenarie,  integre  et  houorifice  sine  contradictione  seu  dimi- 
^utione  quacunque  ex  quacunque  causa  vel  casu  proueniente,  ad  cuiuscunque 
vel  quoruncunque  manus  dicte  terre  de  lie  Plane  infra  vicecomitatum  de 
Striueliug  vt  premittitur  integre  vel  particulariter  deueniaut  in  posterum : 
volumus  itaque  et  pro  nobis  heredibus  et  successoribus  uostris  perpetuo  con- 
cedimus  quod  predicti  canonici  et  successores  sui  dictis  decem  liliris  argeuti 
pacifice  gaudeant  annuatim  habeant  et  iutegre  imperpetuum  possideaut ;  et  si 


284 


EEGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


contiugat,  quod  absit,  quod  domini  seu  tenentes  dictarum  terrarum  de  lie 
Plane  dictas  decem  libras  argenti  vltra  terminos  vsuales-  detinuerint,  dictis 
religiosis  tempore  debito  soluere  recusantes,  mandamus  firmiter  et  precipimus 
vicecomiti  nostro  et  balliuis  suis  de  Striueling  qui  pro  tempore  fuerint  quod 
dictos  dominos  seu  teuentes  earundem  terrarum  et  omuia  bona  sua  mobilia 
et  immobilia  vbicunque  iiiuenta,  quanto  strictius  poteruut,  compellant  et  dis- 
tringant  quod  prefatis  religiosis  vt  premissum  est  de  termino  in  terminum 
integre  persoluant  et  pleue  satisfaciant  super  nostram  plenariam  forisfac- 
turam  :  In  cuius  rei  testLmonium  presenti  carte  nostre  sigillum  nostrum  pre- 
cipimus  apponi ;  testibus  venerabilibus  in  Cluisto  patribus  Willelmo  et  Wal- 
tero  episcopis  Sanctiandree  et  Glasguensi,  et  Patricio  episcopo  Brecliiueusi 
caucellario  nostro,  Eoberto  senescallo  Scotie,  comite  de  Stratherne  nepote 
nostro,  Willelmo  comite  de  Douglas,  Eoberto  de  Erskin,  Dauid  de  Grahame  et 
Waltero  de  Haliburtoune,  militibus,  apud  Edinburgh,  vicesimo  quiuto  die 
mensis  Februarii,  anno  regni  nostri  tricesimo  octauo. 


198.    BULLA  DE  ANNUO  REDDITU  LE  PlANE. 

Vrbanus  episcopus  seruus  seruorum  Dei  ad  perpetuam  rei  memoriam  :  Hiis 
qui  pietatem  sapiunt  et  vtilitatem  ecclesiasticarum  personarum  presertim  reli- 
giosarum  vacantium  studio  pie  vite  conspiciunt  vt  illibata  permaneant  liben- 
ter  adicimus  apostolici  muniminis  firmitatem,  sane  peticio  pro  parte  dUectorum 
filiorum  abbatis  et  conueutus  monasterii  de  Cambuskyuneth  orduiis  Sancti 
Augustiui  Sauctiandree  diocesis  peticio  continebat  quod  dudum  carissimus  in 
Christo  filius  noster  Dauid  Eex  Scotie  illustris,  de  propria  salute  cogitaus  ac 
cupiens  illi  aliquod  dare  de  suis  qui  sibi  contulit  vuiuersa,  pro  sue  ac  carissuue 
in  Cliristo  filie  nostre  Margarete  regiue  Scotie  illustris  sue  vxoris,  necnon  pro- 
genitorum  heredum  et  successorum  ipsorum  auimarum  salute,  ipsis  abbati 
et  conuentui  et  ipsius  monasterii   ecclesie,  que  sub  vocabulo  beate  Marie 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


285 


constructa  est,  annuiim  redclitum  decem  libranim  argenti  eidem  regi  de 
terris  de  lie  Plane  infra  vicecomitatum  de  Striueliug  dicte  diocesis  debitum 
dedit  et  etiam  concessit,  prout  iu  auctenticis  literis  inde  confectis  et  dicti  regis 
sigillo  munitis,  quarum  tenor  de  verbo  ad  verbum  presentibu.s  inseri  fecimus, 
plenius  continetur :  quare  pro  parte  dictorum  abbatis  et  conuentus  nobis 
fuit  humiLiter  supplicatum  vt  premissis  robur  confirmationis  adicere  ac 
omnem  defectiun,  siquis  forsan  in  eis  interuenerit,  supplere  de  benignitate 
apostolica  dignaremur :  nos  itaque  liuiusmodi  supplicationibus  inclinati 
donationem  et  concessionem  liuiusmodi  ac  alia  inde  secuta  rata  et  grata 
habentes,  Ula  auctoritate  apostolica  ex  certa  sciencia  confirmamus  et  presentis 
scripti  patrocinio  communimus,  supplentes  omnem  defectum  si  quis  interuen- 
erit  in  eisdem  :  Tenor  autem  dictarum  literarum  talis  est :  Dauid  Dei  gracia 
Eex  Scotorum,  omuibus  probis  hominibus  totius  terre  sue,  clericis  et  laicis, 
salutem:  Sciatis  nos  diuine  pietatis  intuitu  ac  pro  salute  anime  nostre  et  anime 
Margarete  regine  Scotie  socie  nostre  et  animarum  progenitorum,  heredum  et 
successorum  nostrorum  dedisse,  concessisse  et  hac  presenti  carta  nostra  con- 
firmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  Sancte  Marie  de  Cambuskynneth  et  canonicis  ibidem 
Deo  seruientibus  et  imperpetuum  seruituris  annuum  redditum  nostrum  decem 
librarum  argenti  nobis  de  terris  de  le  Plane  infra  vicecomitatum  de  Striueling 
annuatim  debitarum  :  Tenendum  et  habendum  dictis  religiosis  et  eoram  suc- 
cessoribus  de  nobis,  heredibus  et  successoribus  nostris  regibus  Scotie  qui  pro 
tempore  fuerint  in  liberam,  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  libere,  quiete, 
plenarie,  integTe  et  honorifice  sine  contradictione  siue  diminutione  quacimque 
ex  quacunque  causa  vel  casu  proueniente  ad  cuiuscunque  vel  quorimcunque 
manus  dicte  ten-e  de  le  Plane  infra  vicecomitatum  de  Striueling  vt  premitti- 
tur  integre  vel  particulariter  deueniant  in  posteram  :  volumus  itaque  et  pro 
nobis  heredibus  et  successoribus  nostris  perpetuo  concedimus  quod  predicti 
canonici  et  successores  sui  dictis  decem  libris  argenti  pacifice  gaudeant  annu- 


286 


REGISTUUM  MONASTERII 


atim  habeant  et  integre  imperpetuum  possideant ;  et  si  contingat,  quod  absit, 
quod  domini  seu  tenentes  dictarum  terrarum  de  le  Plane  dictas  decem  libras 
argenti  vltra  terminos  vsuales  detinuerint,  dictis  religiosis  tempore  debito 
soluere  recusautes,  maudamus  firmiter  et  precipimus  vicecomiti  nostro  et 
balliuis  suis  de  Striueling  qui  pro  tempore  fuerint  quod  dictos  dominos  seu 
tenentes  earundem  terrarum  et  omnia  bona  sua  mobilia  et  inmobilia  vbicun- 
que  iuuenta,  quanto  strictius  poterunt,  compelJant  et  distringant  quod  prefatis 
religiosis,  vt  premissum  est,  de  termino  in  terminum  integre  persoluant,  et 
plene  satisfaciant  super  nostram  plenariam  forisfacturam  :  In  cuius  rei  testi- 
monium  presenti  carte  nostre  sigillum  nostrum  precipimus  apponi ;  testibus 
venerabilibus  in  Christo  patribus  Willelmo  episcopo  Sanctiandree  et  Patricio 
episcopo  Brechinensi  cancellario  uostro,  Roberto  senescallo  Scotie  coniite  de 
Stratherne  nepote  nostro,  Willelmo  comite  de  Douglas,  Eoberto  de  Erskin, 
Dauid  de  Grahame  et  Waltero  de  Haliburtoune,  militibus,  apud  Perth,  vice- 
simo  quinto  die  mensis  Augusti,  anno  regni  nostri  tricesimo  sexto  :  nuUi  ergo 
omnino  hominum  liceat  hanc  paginam  nostre  confirmationis  communitionis 
infringere  vel  ei  ausu  temerario  contraire ;  si  quis  autem  hoc  attemptare 
presumpserit,  indignationem  omnipotentis  Dei  et  beatorum  Petri  et  Pauli 
apostolorum  eius  se  nouerit  incursurum.  Datum  apud  Montem  Flasconensem, 
xvi°  kaiendas  Jidii,  pontificatus  nostri  anno  septimo. 


199-    COMPOSITIO  INTEK  NOS  ET  DUNFEEMELING  DE  DECIMIS  CaMBUS- 
BAROUN  ET  VETEEIS  PAECI. 

Uniueesis  Sancte  matris  ecclesie  filiis  preseus  scriptum  visuris  vel  audituris, 
Willelmus  de  Lambertouue  miseratione  diuina  ecclesie  Sanctiandree  minister 
humilis,  salutem  in  Domino  sempiternam  :  Nouerit  vniuersitas  vestra  quoJ 
cum  mota  esset  controuersia  coram  ofiiciali  nostro  diucius  agitata  inter 
religiosos  viros  abbatem  et  conuentum  de  Dunfermeling  actores  ex  parte  vna, 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


287 


et  abbatem  et  conueutum  de  Cambuskynneth  reos  ex  altera,  super  jure  per- 
cipiencU  decimas  garbales  veteris  parci  de  Striueling  de  nouo  redacti  in 
culturam  tempore  domini  Koberti  Dei  gratia  regis  Scotie  illustris,  tandem  ex 
consensu  parcium  coram  nobis  dicta  controuersia  amicabiliter  et  finaliter  in 
hunc  niodum  conquieuit,  videlicet,  quod  dicti  abbas  et  conuentus  de  Cambus- 
kjTineth  habebuut  ad  firmam  de  predictis  abbate  et  conuentu  de  Dunfermeling 
imperpetuimi  omnes  decimas  garbales  ville  de  Cambusbarouu,  cum  decimis 
veteris  parci  prenomiuati,  et  gaudebunt  eisdem  tanquam  suis  pro  centuni 
soHdis  Striuelingorum  eisdem  annuatim  sohiendis,  scilicet  dimedietatem  ad 
festum  Sancti  Martini  iu  hieme  et  aliam  dimedietatem  ad  festum  Penthe- 
costes,  excepta  decima  crofte  Hugonis  Parcarii  in  parco  prenominato  jacentis, 
cuius  crofti  decima  predictorum  abbatis  et  conueutus  de  Cambuskynneth  est 
per  teuorem  cuiusdam  compositionis  inter  predicta  monasteria  ab  antiquo 
inite  et  per  sigilla  auctentica  roborate,  prout  patet  plenius  in  eadem ;  et  si 
contingat  dictum  parcum  iterato  recludi,  de  dictis  centum  solidis  annuis  defal- 
cabuntur  viginti  solidi,  et  extunc  dicti  canonici  liberi  erunt  et  immunes  a 
solucione  dictorum  viginti  solidorum,  et  sic  soluent  pro  residuis  decimis  sex 
marcas  ad  terminos  prenominatos  quamdiu  dictus  parcus  fuerit  incultus ;  et 
si  iterato  redigatur  in  culturam,  sohient  centum  soHdos  annuos  vt  premissum 
est.  Si  autem  contingat  in  decimis  garbalibus  ville  de  Cambusbaroun  et 
parci  antedicti  sterilitatem,  vastitatem  seu  distructionem  iu  toto  vel  in  parte 
notabih  per  commixnem  guerram  fieri,  illo  anno  vel  iUis  annis  quo  vel  quibus 
talem  lesionem  habuerint  et  per  fideles  probare  poterunt  in  sokitionem  firme 
sue  fiat  eis  allocatio.  In  cuius  rei  testimonimu  huic  scripto  cirographato, 
parti  peues  dictos  abbatem  et  conuentum  de  Dunfermehng  remanenti  sigilhim 
nostrum  vnacum  sigillo  capitiUi  de  Cambuskynneth  est  appensum,  parti 
vero  penes  predictos  abbatem  et  conuentum  de  Cambuskynneth  residenti 
predictum    sigillum    nostrum    vnacum    sigillo    capituh    de    Dunfermehng 


288 


REGISTEUM  MONASTERII 


est  appensum.  Datum,  actum  et  scriptum  apud  Dimfermeling,  die  annun- 
ciationis  beate  Marie  virginis,  anno  Domini  millesimo  tricentesimo  decimo 
nono. 


PRECEPTUM. 


200.  COMPOSITIO  INTER  NOS  ET  DUNFERMELING. 

Memorandum,  quod  constituti  in  presencia  reuerendi  patris  domini  Willelmi 
Dei  gracia  episcopi  Sanctiandree  abbates  de  Dunfermeling  et  de  Cambus- 
kynnetb  die  lune  in  vigilia  beati  Martini,  apud  ToiTy,  anno  Domini  millesimo 
tricentesimo  vicesimo,  altercantes  super  quadam  compositione  facta  inter 
dictos  abbates  et  eorum  monasteria,  auctoritate  et  consensu  dicti  domini  epis- 
copi  et  in  scriptis  redacta  super  decimis  garbalibus  ville  de  Cambusbaroim 
et  veteris  parci  de  Striueling,  tandem  ex  consensu  dicti  domini  episcopi  con- 
cordarunt  in  bunc  modum,  videlicet  quod  abbas  et  conuentus  de  Cambus- 
kynneth  non  sobient  pro  dictis  decimis  garbalibus  dictis  abbati  et  conuentui 
de  Dunfermeling  nisi  secundum  quod  dicte  decime  per  procuratores  vtriusque 
partis  poterunt  assedari,  quousque  dicte  decime  peruenerint  in  estimationem 
centum  solidorum,  principali  compositione  prius  facta  super  dictis  decimis 
auctoritate  dicti  domini  episcopi  extunc  in  suo  robore  duratura.  In  cuius  rei 
testimonium  sigillum  dicti  domini  episcopi  vtrique  parti  eius  scripti  indentati 
est  appensum.    Datum  die,  loco  et  anno  supradictis. 

201.  Preceptum  soluendi  debita  monasterio. 

EoBERTUS  Dei  gracia  Eex  Scotorum,  iusticiis,  vicecomitibus,  prepositis  et  eorum 
balliuis  ad  quos  presentes  litere  peruenerint,  salutem  :  jMaudamus  vobis  et 
precipimus  quatenus  onines  illos  in  vestris  balliis  seu  burgis  qui  debita  debent 
religiosis  viris  abbati  et  conuentui  monasterii  de  Cambuskynnetli  ad  eadem 
debita  eis  vel  eorum  certo  attornato  latori  presencium  iuste  et  siue  dilatione 
reddenda  secimdum  quod  dicti  religiosi  vel  dictus  eorum  attomatus  dicta 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


289 


debita  sibi  cleberi  ab  eisdeni  rationabiliter  probare  poterunt  vel  poterit  corara 
vobis  prout  iustum  fuerit  compellatis,  ita  quod  pro  vestro  defectu  amplius 
inde  iustam  querimoniam  non  audiamus ;  presentibus  post  annum  minime  vali- 
turis.  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  lias  literas  nostras  sibi  fieri  fecinius  patentes  ; 
Apud  Striueling,  septimo  die  Junii,  anno  regni  nostri  sexto. 


PRECEPTUM. 


202.    PlSCARIE  DECRETU.M   PRO  MONASTERIO  CONTRA  PREPOSITUM,  BALLIUOS 
ET  COMMTNITATEM  DE  StRIUELING. 

Jacobus  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotorum,  omnibus  probis  liominiljus  suis  ad  ciuos 
presentes  litere  peruenerint,  salutem  :  Sciatis  nos  quoddam  actum  siue  decre- 
timi  per  dominos  nostri  consilii  inferius  descriptos  datum  et  promulgatum 
vtique  intellexisse  sub  hac  forma :  At  Edinburgli,  the  nyntene  day  of 
Februar,  the  zeir  of  God  ane  thousand  foure  hundreth  fourscore  and  fyftene 
zeris,  the  Lordis  of  the  Counsale  vnderwrittin,  that  is  to  say,  nobill  and 
michty  lordis  Archibald  Erle  of  Angus,  &c.  chancellare  of  Scotland,  Arclii- 
bald  erle  of  Argile,  &c.  Maister  of  Housliald  to  oure  souerane  lord,  Patrik 
erle  Eothuile,  lord  Halis,  &c.,  ane  venerabill  fader  in  God,  Johne  prior  of 
Sanctandros,  William  lord  Borthuik,  Jolm  lord  Drummond,  Laurence  lord 
Oliphant,  William  lord  Sanct  Johnns,  Johnne  Ogilby  of  Eingasc,  maister 
Eichard  Lausone,  and  maister  James  Henrison,  decretis  and  deliueris  that  for 
ocht  that  thai  haue  zit  sene,  the  provest,  baiUies  and  communite  of  StriueKng 
sall  desist  and  cess  fra  the  occupatioun  of  the  fischeing  of  the  watter  of 
Forth  betuix  the  abbay  of  Cambuskynneth  and  Polmais,  and  of  the  fisclieing 
of  the  watter  of  Kersy  and  Tulibody,  to  be  broukit  and  joisit  be  aue  venerabill 
fader  in  God,  Henry,  abbot  of  Cambuskynnetli,  and  the  convent  of  the  samyn, 
eftir  the  forme  of  the  charteris  and  euidentis  maid  to  tliame  tliarujjone, 
schewin  and  producit  before  the  Lordis,  and  als  decretis  and  deliueris  that  the 

37 


290 


BElHSTnUM  MONASrEPdl 


s.iid  provest,  baillies  aud  eumnmnite  sall  coutent  aud  pay  to  tlie  sadis  abljot 
and  conueut  tlie  proffittis  of  the  sadis  fischeiugis  in  sa  far  as  thai  may  suftici- 
entlie  preif  the  sadis  prouest,  baillies  aud  commuuite  hes  taken  vp  and 
intromettit  with  the  samyn  of  tlie  twenty-fyve  zeris  contenit  in  the  summondis, 
to  the  production  of  tlie  quhilk  preif  tlie  Lordis  assiguis  to  the  saidis  abbot 
aud  conveut  the  xxi  day  of  ^laii  nixt  to  cum,  with  coutiuuatiouu  of  days,  and 
ordanis  thame  to  haue  lettres  to  summoud  thare  witnes  and  the  party  to 
heir  thaim  sworne.  Extractuui  de  libro  actorum  per  me  Johaunem  Tiry 
clericum  deputatum  venerabilis  viri  magistri  Johanuis  Fresale  decani  de 
Lestakig,  clerici  rotulorum  et  registri  ae  cousilii  supremi  domini  nostri  regis, 
sub  meis  siguo  et  subscriptioue  mauualibus  :  Quodquideui  actum  siue  de- 
cretum  ac  omuia  et  siuguhi  in  eodem  conteuta  iu  ouinibus  suis  punctis  et 
articulis  approbamus,  ratificamus  et  per  preseutes  vt  premissum  est  confirma- 
mus.  Datum  sub  testimonio  magui  sigilli  nostri  apud  Striueling,  octauo  die 
meusis  Aprilis,  auuo  rJomiui  ruilles^imo  ipiadringentesirao  uouagesinio  quinto, 
et  regni  nostri  octauu. 

Confirmatio  Acti. 


203.  Decketum  contka  pkepositum,  balliuos  et  commuxitatem  de 
Stkiueling  pko  moxastekio  de  Cambuskynnetji. 

Jacobus  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotorum,  omuibus  probis  homiuibus  suis  ad  quos 
presentes  litere  perueneriut,  salutem  :  Sciatis  nos  quoddam  actum  per  dominos 
uostri  consilii  latum  et  promulgatum  vtique  iutellexisse  sub  hac  forma :  At 
Edinburgh,  tlie  twenty-sevint  day  of  Februar,  the  zeir  of  God  aue  thousaud 
fyve  hundreth  and  thretty-aue  zeris,  aueut  the  summondis  rasit  at  the 
iustauce  of  ane  venerabill  fader  in  God,  Alexauder  abbot  of  Cambuskynueth 
aud  convent  thairof,  aud  of  Audro  Cowy,  Hucheoun  Mathovv,  Johnne  Ewin, 
and  Eobert  Ewih,  his  .sone,  pure  tennentis  aud  fischearis  to  the  said  veuerabill 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETII. 


291 


fader  and  convent  of  tliare  fischeing  on  tlie  -watter  of  Forth,  agauis  Johnne 
Forestar,  Walter  Grahame,  baillies  of  Striueliug,  Jaraes  Dreghorne,  Tliomas 
Paterson,  James  Drew,  Duncane  Drew,  James  Suerd,  Johnne  Pennek,  Alox- 
ander  Bauerage,  AVilliam  Watsou.Walter  Ewisou,  Duncaue  Ewison,  his  brutliir, 
James  Lamb,  Johne  M'Ky  and  Thomas  Duncanesou,  for  tlie  wrangus,  violent 
and  maisterfull  spoilatioun  be  thameselff,  thare  seruaudis  and  complicis  being 
with  thame  in  cumpany,  in  thare  names,  of  thare  causiug,  commaud,  assist- 
ence  aud  ratihal:>itioun,  away  taking  and  witliahling  fra  tlie  sadis  pure  tenentis 
recently  vpon  tlie  xxvi  day  of  Julii  last  bipast,  vnder  silence  of  the  niclit,  out 
of  the  said  venerabill  fader  and  convent  landis  callit  Abbotishude,  liand 
within  the  schirefdome  of  Chakmannane,  of  cobillis  aud  nettis,  as  at  mare  lenth 
is  coutenit  in  the  summoudis  thairvpoiin,  tlie  said  venerabill  fader  comper- 
aud  for  himself  and  his  convent,  and  the  pure  tenneutis  comperand  be  maister 
Heury  Lauder,  aud  the  sadis  Johnne  Forestar,  Walter  Grahame  and  thare 
collegis  comperand  be  maister  Heury  Spittall,  thare  procuratour,  quhilk  re- 
ferrit  the  sadis  personis  auent  the  said  summondis  to  the  said  venerabill 
faderis  couscience  and  ^^•ill,  tharefore  the  said  venerabill  fader  assignis  to  tlie 
saidis  personis  the  xxvi  day  of  jMarche  nixt  tocum,  Avith  continuatioun  of 
dayis,  to  compere  in  Striueling,  aud  to  heir  and  se  him  decLare  his  will  aneut 
the  said  sumniondis  and  lettres  to  be  directit  heirupoun,  gif  neid  beis,  in 
forme  as  effeiris.  Extractum  de  libro  actorum  per  me  dominum  ^Vlexandruni 
Scott  deputatum  reuerendi  in  Christo  patris  et  doniini  Gawini  episcopi 
Abirdoneusis  clerici  rotulorum  registri  ac  consilii  supremi  domini  uostri  regis, 
sub  meis  signo  et  subscriptione  manualibus  :  quod  quideui  actum  ac  omuia  et 
singrUa  in  eodem  contenta  approbamus,  ratificamus  et  per  presentes  vt  pre- 
missum  est  confirmamus :  Datum  sub  testimonio  magni  sigilli  nostri  apud 
Ediuburgh,  octauo  die  meusis  ^lartii,  anno  regni  nostri  decimo  nono. 


292 


nEGISTEUM  MONASTEPdl 


204.    PlSCAKIE  DE  FOKTII  SUPKA  MONASTERIUM  PKECARIO  POSSIDET 
VICARIUS  SXKIUELDfG. 

In  Dei  nomine  amen :  Per  lioc  presens  publicum  iustrumentum  cunctis 
pateat  euidenter  et  notum  sit  quod  anno  Incarnationis  dominice  millesimo 
quingentesimo  vicesimo  sexto,  mensis  vero  Nouembris  die  decimo  sexto,  indic- 
tioue  decima  quinta,  pontificatus  sanctissimi  in  Christo  patris  et  domini  uostri 
domini  Clementis  diuina  prouidencia  pape  septimi  anuo  tertio,  sedente  pro 
tribunali  venerabili  vii-o  magistro  Hugone  Spens  sacrarum  literarum  professore, 
decretorum  doctore  prepositoque  ecclesie  collegiate  Sancti  Saluatoris  infra 
ciuitatem  Sanctiandree,  ac  delegato  sedis  apostolice  subdelegatoque  suorum 
colleifarum,  videlicet,  magistroriun  Jacobi  Symson  officiaUs  Sanctiandree  prin- 
cipalis  et  Eoberti  Eeid  subdecani  Morauiensis  in  capella  Sancte  Anne  infra 
ciuitatem  Sanctiandree,  loco  consistoriali  eiusdem  comparuerunt  in  iudicio 
venerabilis  iu  Christo  pater  Alexander  abbas  monasterii  de  Cambuskynnetli, 
pro  se  et  conventu  suo  et  eorum  successoribus,  et  magister  Willelmus 
Hammiltoune  vicarius  de  Striueling  ab  vna  et  altera  partibus,  et  approbarunt 
contractum  inter  ipsos  factum  penes  decimas  piscariarum  aque  de  Forth 
infra  hos  limites,  videlicet  a  monasterio  de  Cambuskynneth  vsque  ad  caput 
pomerii  vulgariter  lie  Orchardheid,  quas  decimas  prefatus  Magister  WiUel- 
mus  pro  presenti  possidet,  et  coutentus  est  ipse  dominus  abbas  pro  se  et 
conuentu  suo  ac  eorum  successoribus  quod  ipse  vicarius  precario  possideat 
huiusmodi  decimas  piscium  captorum  et  capiendorum  quamdiugaudeathuius- 
modi  vicaria  de  Striueling  et  quod  percipiat  easdem  decimas  piscium  pacifice 
sine  impedimento  quocunque.  Et  mouitus  est  prefatus  venerabilis  pater  ad 
obseruandum  presens  actum  in  suis  punctis  sub  pena  suspensionis  pro  se  et 
conuentu  suo.  Et  prefatus  vicarius  fatetur  quod  ipse  venerabilis  pater  legiti- 
mam  fecit  interruptionem  ad  impedieudum  prescriplionem  penes  decimas  pis- 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETII. 


293 


cariaiuin  aque  de  Forth  respondendo  ad  libellum  et  proponendo  excep- 
tiones  contra  eundem :  super  quibus  omnibus  et  singulis  ambe  partes  predicte 
a  me  notario  publico  et  scriba  iu  ijremissis  subscripto  pecierunt  hinc  inde 
iustrumentum  et  instrumenta.  Acta  fuerunt  hec  hora  vndecima  aute  merediem 
iudiciahter  coram  magistris  Jacobo  Lamb  rectore  de  Quetht,  Martino  Balfour 
vicario  de  Monymele,  et  Duucauo  Burnet  vicario  de  Ouchterhous,  testibus  ad 
premissa  requisitis. 

Ego  Patricius  Scott  presbyter  Sauctiaudree  diocesis  publicus  apostolica 
auctoritate  notarius,  quia  premissis  omnibus  et  singuhs  dum  sic  vt  premittituv 
dicerentur,  agerentur  et  fierent,  vnacum  prenomiuatis  testibus  presens  per- 
sonaliter  interfui,  eaque  omnia  et  singula  sic  fieri  vidi,  sciui  et  audiui,  ac  in 
notam  sumpsi,  ideoque  hoc  preseus  publicum  instrumentum  exinde  confeci, 
subscripsi  et  publicaui,  signoque  uomine  et  subscriptioue  meis  solitis  et 
cousuetis  signaui,  rogatus  et  reqiusitus  in  fidem  et  testimonium  omnium  et 
singidorum  premissorum. 

205.   IX  CAUSA  PISCARIE  DECIMALIUM  SALMONUM  DE  FORTH  INHIBITIO 
PER  ORDINARIUM. 


Patricius  Dei  et  apostolice  sedis  gratia  episcopus  Sauctiandree,  vuiuersis 
et  singuHs  ecclesiarum  rectoribus,  vicariis,  capellaiiis  curatis  et  uon  curatis, 
notariis  et  tabellionibus  aliisque  executoribus  et  subexecutoribus  religiosis  et 
secularibus  quibuscuuque  iufra  nostras  ciuitatem  et  diocesim  Sanctiandree 
vbilibet  constitutis,  salutem  :  In  presencia  nostra  constituti  venerabiles  et 
rehgiosi  viri  abbas  et  couuentus  monasterii  beate  Marie  de  Cambuskynueth 
uostre  diocesis  ordiuis  Sancti  Augustini  viue  vocis  oraculo  nobis  exposuerunt 
et  conquesti  sunt  quod  Licet  ipsi  expoueutes  primo  a  quadam  interlocutoria, 
deinde  a  ditfinitiua  senteuciis  iniquis  et  iuiustis  pro  quodam  Thoma  Carmichel 


294 


REGISTRUM  MONASTEnil 


asserto  vicario  parrochialis  ecclesie  de  Striueling  contra  eos  per  venerabiles 
viros  magistros  Willelmum  de  Elpliiustoune  canonicum  et  Gilbertum  Eerik 
archidiaconum  ecclesie  Glasguensis,  pretendentes  se  iudices  delegatos  a  sede 
predicta  deputatos  iu  causa  perceptionis  salmonum  decimalium  captorum  in 
aqua  de  Forth  infra  paiTochias  ecclesiarum  parrocliialium  de  Cambuskynneth, 
Sancti  Niniani  prope  Striueling,  Clakmannane  nostre  diocesis,  latis  et  promul- 
gatis  ex  causis  probabilibus  et  certis  grauaminibus  ipsis  exponentibus  per  pre- 
tensos  judices  minus  iuste  illatis  ad  sedem  eandem  jam  prouocauerunt  et 
appellaueruut,  et  suas  appellationes  predictas  Willelmo  de  Eljihinstoune  asserto 
iudici  predicto  in  absencia  dicti  Gilberti  intimari  et  publicari  fecerunt  infra 
tempus  a  jure  statutum,  ac  eciam  apostolos  ab  ipso  "Willelmo  preteuso  iudice 
desuper  receperunt,  et  causam  ipsam  ad  sedem  predictam  legitime  deuoluerunt, 
de  quibus  omnibus  coram  nobis  legitimis  et  auteuticis  documentis  plenam 
fecerunt  fidem :  nichilominus  vt  cum  ipsi  exponentes  asserunt,  allegant  et 
proponunt  dicti  pretensi  iudices  delegati  vt  speratur  dictas  suas  sentencias 
iniustas  et  iniquas  contra  ipsos  appellantes  executioni  demandare  intendunt 
seu  exequi  proponunt  per  suos  processus  et  literas  executoriales  desuper 
fulminatas  et  fulrninandas  in  vilipendium  litis  pendencie  ac  scandalum  et 
dampnum  ipsorum  appellantium  et  sedis  apostolice  ad  quam  jam  appellarunt : 
Quare  de  jure  ante  lapsuni  temporis  appellantibus  a  jure  ad  prosequendum 
eorum  appellationes  indulti  et  in  huiusmodi  suis  appellationibus  expressi 
ac  declarationem  desertionis  earundem  factam  fieri  non  debere,  vobis  igitur 
magistro  Thome  Carmichell  in  causa  huiusmodi  ex  aduerso  2irincif)ali  vniuer- 
sisque  aliis  et  singulis  supradictis  duximus  inhibendum  et  tenore  presencium 
stricte  iuhibemus,  ne  vos  vel  aliquis  vestrum  per  vos,  alios  seu  alium,  publice 
vel  occulte,  directe  vel  indirecte,  quouismodo  dictas  sententias  seu  earum 
aliquam  aut  processus  vel  literas  executoriales  desuper  fulminatas  seu  ful- 
minandas  exequamini  seu  alter  vestrum  exequatur  seu  executioni  demandare 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


295 


presumatis,  seu  aliquis  vestrum  presumat,  douec  et  quousque  termimis  juris  iu 
eisclem  appellatiouibus  et  earum  altera  expressus  iutegre  fuerit  elapsus  et 
apiiellatioues  liuiusmodi  deserte  declarate  fueriut  sub  pena  excommunicatiouis 
maioris  quam  in  vos  et  in  vestrum  quemlibet  mandatis  nostris  huiusmodi 
nou  parentes  et  parentem  cuin  effectu  exnunc  prout  extunc  et  e  contra 
ferimus  iu  liiis  scriptis.  Actum  sub  sigillo  nostro  rotundo  apud  dictum 
monasterium  de  Cambuskynnetli  nono  die  mensis  Nouembris,  anno  Domiui 
millesimo  quadriugentesimo  sexagesimo  octauo  et  nostre  consecrationis  anno 
quinto. 

206.    ACTUII  COXTKA  DOMINU.M  TULIDODY  PRO  riSCAKIA. 

DlE  primo  niensis  ]\Iarcii,  auno  Douiini  millesimo  quingentesimo  vigesimo 
primo,  subscriptus  Joliaunes  Creichtouue  de  Stratliurd  mouitus  est  ex  sua  pro- 
pria  confessione  siibpena  excommunicationis  submittens  se  nostre  jurisdictioni 
in  lioc  casu  ad  perimplendum  et  obseruandum  subscriptum  appuuetuamen- 
tum  in  omnibus  suis  punctis  et  articulis,  secundum  tenorem  eiusdem,  cuius 
tenor  sequitur  et  est  talis  :  Nobilis  vir  Jobannes  Creiclitoune  de  Stratburd, 
miles  Duukeldensis  diocesis  se  nostre  submitteus  jurisdictioni  coufessus  est  se 
nullum  jus  vel  juris  titulum  habuisse  vel  habere  ratione  terrarum  de  le 
Orchard  de  Tuliljody  ad  piscandum  super  aquam  de  Forth,  nisi  sohim  ex 
toleraucia  abbatis  et  conuentus  de  Cambuskynneth,  promittens  se  in  futurum 
non  intromissurum  per  se  vel  suos  tenentes  cum  dicta  aqua  et  piscaria  absque 
Hcencia  et  assedatioue  dictorum  abbatis  et  couuentus  etc.  Extractum  de  Hbro 
actorum  domini  officiaHs  Sanctiandree  infra  arcliidiacouatum  Laudonie.  lu 
cuius  rei  testimonium  sigiUum '  dicti  officiaHs  presentibus  est  affixum  apud 
Edinburgh,  duodecimo  die  mensis  anno  Doniini  etc.  quin- 

gentesimo  vicesimo  septimo. 


29G 


EEGISTRUM  MONASTEEII 


207.    CONTRA  POLMAIS  WeLANB  PRO  PISCARLA. 

In  Dei  nomine,  anien  :  Per  hoc  presens  publicum  instrumentnm  cunctis 
pateat  euidenter  quod  anno  Incarnationis  dominice  millesimo  quingentesimo 
vigesimo,  die  vero  mensis  Augnsti  nono,  indictione  octaua,  pontificatus 
sanctissimi  in  Christo  patris  et  domini  nostri  domini  Leonis  dinina  proui- 
dencia  pape  decimi  anno  octauo,  in  mei  notarii  publici  et  testium  subscrip- 
torum  presencia  personaliter  constituta  discreta  mulier,  Elena  Murray  domina 
de  Estir  Polmais,  in  presencia  venerabilis  patris  Alexandri  permissione  diuina 
abbatis  monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth,  non  coacta  neque  compulsa,  vt  assemit, 
dixit  se  intromisisse  cnm  piscaria  qnadam  de  Fortli  in  presentem  diem 
absque  aliquo  titulo,  et  de  futuro  eidem  venerabili  patri  fideliter  promisit 
non  intromittere  cum  eadem  nisi  de  speciali  licencia  et  assedatione  eiusdem, 
et  non  aUas.  Super  quibus  omnibus  et  singulis  prefatus  venerabilis  pater  a 
me  notario  publico  subscripto  sibi  fieri  petiit  vnum  seu  plura  publicum  seu 
publica  instrumentum  seu  instrumenta.  Acta  erant  hec  in  noua  aula  dicti 
venerabUis  patris  apud  locum  de  Camljuskynneth  ex  parte  occidentali  eiusdem 
constructa,  presentibus  ibidem  pro  tunc  venerabilibus  et  magne  religionis 
viris,  dominis  Willelmo  Patersone  dicti  loci  suppriore,  Johanne  Piannaldsone, 
Johanne  Clerk  et  Alano  Stewart,  testibus  ad  premissa  rogatis  et  requisitis. 

Et  ego  Thomas  Bronne  clericns  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  sacra  auctoritate 
apostolica  notarius  pnblicus,  quia  premissis  omnibus  et  singulis,  dum  sic  \-t  pre- 
mittitur  agerentur,  dicerentur  et  fierent,  vnacum  prenominatis  testibus  presens 
personaliter  interfui,  eaque  omnia  et  singula  sic  fieri  vidi,  sciui  et  andiui,  ac  in 
notam  cepi,  ideoqne  hoc  presens  pnbUcum  instmmentum  manu  mea  propria 
fideliter  scriptura  exinde  confeci,  publicaui  et  in  hanc  publicam  formam  redegi, 
signoque  uomine  et  cognomine  ac  subscriptione  manuaH  meis  solitis  et  consuetis 
signaui  et  subscripsi  in  fidem  et  testimonium  omnium  et  singnlorum  premis- 
sorum  per  prefatum  venerabilem  patrem  rogatus  et  requisitus.    Thomas  Broun. 


DE  CAMBUSKEXNETn. 


297 


208.  Strii-elixg  anxuus  in  excambium  siolendinokum  pe 
Clacmanan  kedditus. 
Alexandek  Dei  gi-acia  rex  Scotorum,  omuibus  probis  liominiljus  totius  tcrre 
sue,  clericis  et  laicis,  salutem  :  Sciant  presentes  et  futuri  nos  Jedisse  et  con- 
cessisse  et  hac  carta  nostra  confirmasse  Deo  et  beate  Marie  de  Striueling  et 
canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  et  imperpetuum  seruituris,  in  excambium 
molendini  nostri  de  Clacmannan,  viginti  marcas  singulis  annis  percipiendas  de 
firma  burgi  nostri  de  Striueling,  scilicet,  medietatem  ad  Penthecosten  ct  aliam 
medietatem  ad  festum  Saucti  ilartini ;  quare  volumus  vt  predicti  canonici 
predictas  ^aginti  marcas  ad  predictos  terminos  habeant  et  teneaut  de  firma 
predicti  burgi  nostri  de  Striueling  in  lilieram,  puram  et  perpetuam  elenio- 
sinam  adeo  libere  et  quiete,  plenarie  et  honorifice,  sicut  aliqua  elemosina 
in  tota  terra  nostra  liberius  et  quietius,  pleuius  et  honorificentius  tenetur  et 
possidetur :  Prohibemus  eciam  firmiter  ne  prepositi  nostri  de  Striueling 
predictis  canonicis  sepedictas  -viginti  marcas  vltra  terminos  eis  statutos 
detineant  super  nostram  plenariam  forisfacturam  :  Yolumus  cciam  vt  dicti 
canonici  preter  dictas  ^dginti  marcas  percipiant  de  firma  eiusdem  burgi  nostri 
de  Striueling  tres  marcas  annuas  quas  percipere  consuerunt  ex  dono  ante- 
cessorum  nostrorum :  Testibus  magistro  Matheo  Cancellario,  Henrico  de 
Baill,  Johanne  de  Makkiswell,  Barnardo  Fraser,  Waltero  Cumyn,  Dauid 
Marschell,  Johanne  de  Ilaya,  Waltero  Bysset,  Alexandro  de  Striueling, 
apud  Striueling  vltimo  die  ApriHs,  anno  regni  domini  regis  sexdecim. 

209.  Steiueling  .vnnui  eedditus  duokum  solidoeum. 
Omnibus  hanc  cartam  visuris  vel  audituris,  Johannes  Barboure  Ijurgeusis 
burgi  de  Striueling,  salutem  in  Domino  sempiteruam  :  Nouerit  vniuersitas 
vestra  me  misericordia  et  pietate  inductum  et  ob  salutem  anime  mee  et  ani- 
marum  antecessorum  et  successorum  meorum  et  omnium  fidelium  defunetonuu 
concessisse,  dedisse  et  hac  presenti  carta  mea  pro  me  et  lieredibus  meis  con- 
38 


STRIUELING. 


298 


EEGISTRUM  MONASTErJI 


STRIUELING. 


firmasse  Deo  et  beate  virgini  ]\Iarie  ac  altari  beatissimi  confessoris  Niniaui 
situato  et  fundato  infra  ecclesie  parrocliialis  mouasterii  de  Cambuskyn- 

ueth  et  capellano  ad  idem  altare  celebranti  in  diuinis  et  perpetuo  celebraturo 
quendam  annuuui  redditum  duoriim  solidorum  miclii  annuatim  debitorum  et 
percipiendorum  integre  ad  duos  anui  terminos  vsuales,  videlicet,  Peutbecostes 
et  Sancti  Martiui  in  liieme  per  equalcs  portiones  de  toto  et  integro  tenemeuto 
Johanuis  Eayuy,  pelliparii,  burgensis  dicti  burgi  cum  pertinenciis  jaceute  in 
prefato  burgo  in  le  myddilraw  eiusdem,  inter  terram  Malcolmi  Wobstare  ex 
parte  occidentali  ex  parte  vna,  et  terram  Jobannis  Nomiavile  ex  parte  orientali 
ex  parte  altera  :  Tenendum  et  habenduni  predictum  annuum  redditum  duoruni 
solidorum  preelicto  altari  post  decessum  meum  ab  hac  hice,  et  capellauo  ibidem 
in  tUuiuis  Deo  seruienti  et  seruituro,  et  successoribus  suis  capellanis  ad  idem 
perpetuo  celebraturis,  a  me,  heredibus  et  assignatis  meis  libere,  quiete,  plenarie, 
integre,  honorifice  bene  et  in  pace,  cum  omni  suo  jure,  rectitudine,  consuetudine, 
proprietate  et  possessione  in  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  et  hereditarie 
imperpetuum,  et  ita  libere  et  pure  sicut  aliqua  elemosina  infra  rcgnuin  ab 
aUquo  datur,  conceditur  siue  donatur  :  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  quia  sigiUum 
ad  preseus  non  habui,  sigiUum  discreti  viri,  domiui  Patricii  Scot  vicaru 
ecclesie  parrochiaUs  de  StriueUng,  presentibus  cum  instancia  procuraui 
apponi,  apud  StriueUng  octauo  cUe  meusis  Octobris,  anno  Domini  miUesimo 
quadriugentesimo  tricesimo  sexto ;  hiis  testibus,  magistris  Pioberto  de  Tulous, 
Koberto  Gardnar,  rectoribus  de  StriueUug  et  Moniabrok,  bacaUariis  in  de- 
cretis,  Thoma  Forester,  Johanne  Brady,  Thoma  Wikl,  burgensibus  dicti  burgi, 
et  Alexandro  de  Hvnctroddis,  baUiuis  tunc  eiusdem  burgi,  cum  muUis  aUis. 

210.    IXDEXTURA  INTEK  NOS  ET  JOHANXEM  SCUG.ALL  DE  TENEMENTO 

IX  Stkiueling. 
Hec  indentura  facta  apud  monasterium  de  Cambuskynneth  decimo  die  mensis 
Decembris,   auiio    Domini    miUesimo    quadringentesimo    duodecimo,  inter 


TiE  CAMBUSKENXETH. 


299 


reuerendum  in  Christo  patrem  et  dominum,  dominu.m  Patricium  permissione 
diuina  abbatem  monasterii  predicti,  et  eiusdem  loci  conuentum  ex  vna  parte, 
et  Johannem  de  Scugall  apud  Vtliirbannock  commorantem  a  parte  alteva, 
continet  et  testatur  quod  prefati  domiui  abbas  et  conuentus  vnanimi  suo 
consensu  et  assensu  et  pro  vtilitate  dicti  sui  monasterii  assedarunt  et  in  feodo 
ad  iirmam  dimiserunt  prefato  Johanni  et  heredibus  suis  totum  et  integrum 
vnum  tenementum  suum  cum  pertinentiis  jaceus  in  burgo  de  Striueling  et 
iu  vico  cpii  dicitur  Hilweynd,  ducente  et  aduersus  pontem  de  Fortli  ex  parte 
occidentali  eiusdem,  inter  tenementum  Henrici  Cristeson  ex  parte  australi  a 
parte  vna,  et  tenementum  heredum  quondam  Alexandri  Fabri,  Ijurgensis 
burgi  supradicti,  ex  parte  boreaU  ex  parte  altera  :  Tenendum  et  habeu(Uim 
totum  et  integrum  predictum  tenementum  cum  pertinentiis  predicto  Johanni 
et  heredibus  suis  de  cUctis  religiosis  viris  et  successoribus  suis  in  feodo 
ad  firmam  hereditarie  et  imperpetuum,  cum  vniuersis  suis  commocUtatibus, 
Ubertatibus,  asiamentis,  jure,  clameo,  proprietate  et  possessione  ac  iustis 
pertinentiis  sids  cpnbuscuncpte  dicto  tenemeuto  spectantibus  seu  iuste 
spectare  valentibus  quomodoUbet  in  futurum,  adeo  Ubere,  integre,  plenarie, 
bene  et  in  pace  sicut  aliquod  tenementum  cum  pertinentiis  per  quoscuncpie 
seu  quibuscunque  in  feodo  ad  firmam  assedari  posset  infra  burgum  :  Eeddendo 
inde  annuatitn  quinc[ue  soUdos  legaUs  monete  Scotie  ad  duos  anni  terminos 
vsuales,sciUcet,Penthecostes  et  Sancti  Martini  in  hieme,per  equales  medias  por- 
tiones  et  domino  capitaU  eiusdem  debitum  seruicium  et  consuetum,  sine  vUeriori 
dilatione,  dolo  vel  fraude  :  et  si  contingat,  quod  absit,  dictum  Joliannem  vel 
heredes  suos  a  solutione  dicti  annui  redditus  quinque  soUdorum  per  integrum 
cpiadrennium  spacium  post  aUquem  soUitionis  terminum  in  burgo  supersedere 
seu  casu  aUquo  cessare,  Ucebit  de  jure  et  facto  dictis  reUgiosis  viris  et  suis 
successoribus  sine  Ucencia  cuiuscunque  dictum  suum  tenementum  cum  per- 
tinentiis  Ubere  et  sine  impedimento  reingredi  et  ad  vsus  proprios  reassumere 


STRIUELIXG 


300 


BEGISTRUM  MONASTEPdl 


STRIUELINO 


quousque  sibi  vel  suis  successoiibus  per  predictum  Jobaniiem  et  heredes 
suos  de  toto  et  integro  auniio  redditu  suo  omnium  terminorum  tunc  elapso- 
rum  nou  soluto,  viiacum  dampnis  suis,  laboribus,  expensis  et  interesse  occa- 
sione  dicti  anuui  redditus  quinque  solidorum  non  solutorum  plenarie  et 
integre  fuerit  satisfactum,  uullo  obstante  in  contrarium  :  Preterea  si  i;)redictus 
Johaunes  vel  heredes  sui  dictum  teuementum  vendere  vel  alienare  disposuerit 
vel  disposuerint,  prefati  religiosi  viri  et  siiccessores  sui  totum  illud  tene- 
mentum  cum  pertinentiis  aute  omnes  alios  et  leuiori  precio  obtinebunt  ab 
eisdem,  et  prefati  religiosi  viri  et  successores  sui  dictum  tenementum  cum 
pertineutiis  dicto  Johanni  et  heredibus  suis  coatra  omues  mortales  warantiza- 
buut,  acquietabunt  et  imperpetuum  defendent :  et  ad  hec  omiiia  et  singula 
premissa,  modo  et  forma  prescriptis  ex  vtraque  parte  fideHter  obseruanda  et 
perimplenda,  partes  predicte  se  firmiter  obligarunt :  In  quonmi  omnium  testi- 
monium  sigilla  communia  dictorum  religiosorum  virorum  et  burgi  de  Striue- 
ling  jiredicti  per  dictum  Joliauiiem  cmu  instantia  procurata  huius  indenture 
partibus  alternatim  sunt  appeusa,  data,  loco,  die  et  anno  supradictis ;  IiLis 
testibus,  Eoberto  de  Levingstoim  de  Callenter,  Koberto  Forsith,  Adam  Legate, 
Eichardo  Johannis,  burgeiisibus  de  Striueling,  et  niultis  aliis. 


211.  Stkiueling  processus  antique  Scole  in  Vinella  beate  Maeie. 


Uniuersis  et  singulis  ad  quorum  noticias  presentes  Htere  peruenerint,  pre- 
positus,  balliui,  consules  et  commuuitas  burgi  de  Striuehng,  salutem  in  eo  qui 
est  omnium  vera  salus  :  Cum  pietatis  et  meriti  sit  opus  et  nostro  congruit 
officio  vnicuique  secundum  rei  geste  veritatem,  presertim  coram  nobis  proba- 
tam  et  compertam,  testimonium  veredicum  perhibere  in  casu  iUo  permaxime 
quo  agente  veritatis  occidtatio  preiudicium,  grauamen,  dampnum  aut  dis- 
Xjeudium  generare  poterit  innocenti,  proinde  est  quod  presencium  per  tenorem 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETII. 


301 


attestamur  et  fidele  perliibemus  testimonium  quod  alias  iu  quatuor  nostris  et 
nostri  burgi  predicti  curiis  capitalibus  discretus  vir  Jacobus  Eeidlieuch,  bur- 
gensis  dieti  burgi,  procurator  et  procm'atorio  nomiue  venerabilis  in  Cliristo 
patris  Henrici  permissione  diuina  abbatis  mouasterii  de  Cambuskyuueth.  et 
couuentus  eiusdem  coram  nobis  in  nostro  pretorio  consedentibus  processit  et 
processus  fecit,  videlicet,  in  curia  capitali  post  Pascham,  mensis  Aprilis  die 
decimo,  anno  Domini  millesimo  quadringentesimo  octuagesimo,  et  in  curia 
capitali  post  festum  Sancti  Michaelis  archangeli,  mensis  Octobris  die  secundo, 
iu  curia  capitali  post  festum  natiiutatis  Domini,  mensis  Januarii  die  decimo 
terlio,  et  in  curia  capitali  post  rascham,  mensis  Aprilis  die  vltimo,  anno  Domini 
mUlesimo  quadringentesimo  octuagesimo  primo  hoc  proximis  successiue  et 
immediate  alternatim  sequentibus  super  toto  et  integro  tenemento  antique 
scole  cum  pertinentiis  jacente  in  vinella  beate  Marie  ex  parte  orientali 
eiusdem  quod  fuit  quondam  Laurencii  Dridane  ex  parte  boreali  tenementi 
quondam  Walteri  Galbraith  et  ex  parte  australi  vici  regii  ob  defectum 
sohitiouis  cuiusdam  annui  redditus  quinque  solidonim  dictis  abbati  et 
conueutui  ac  monasterio  predicto  de  predicto  toto  et  integro  teuemento  cum 
pertineutiis  debitorum,  de  quo  annuo  redditu  nichil  per  certos  annos  et 
terminos  perceperunt  aut  leuauerunt  predicti  abbas  et  conuentus,  seu  per- 
cipere  aut  leuare  potuerunt ;  vnde  prefatus  Jacobus  Eeidheuch  nomine  quo 
supra,  cum  Willelmo  Benny  seriando  et  diuersis  testibus  burgi  nostri  predicti 
burgensibus,  videlicet,  Alexaudro  Joffrason,  Johanne  Tais,  "Willekno  Martin, 
Johanne  Thomsou,  Johanne  Litstare  et  Ahxno  Kessaneson,  nostris  auctoritate 
et  mandato  ad  predictiun  tenementum  accesserunt  vicissim  iu  qualibet  ipsarum 
nostrarum  curiarum,  et  nichil  inibi  preter  terram  et  lapides  vnde  predictum 
tenementum  astriugi  pro  dicto  annuo  redditu  aliqualiter  potuit  inuenerunt, 
que  uobis  in  siugulis  predictis  cui'iis  presentarunt :  Et  in  vltima  dieta  pre  - 
dictarum  ciu^iarum  comparuit  dictus  Jacobus  procurator  nomine  quo  supra  et 


STRIUELING, 


302 


EEGISTBUM  MOXASTEEII 


STRIUELING. 


petiit  iudieium  quod  possessio  illius  tenemeuti  cum  pertinentiis  in  defectu 
dicti  annui  redditus  non  soluti  redundare  et  reiierti  debeat  ipsis  abbati  et 
conuentui  ac  monasterio  predicto  et  super  hoc  plegium  obtinet  et  inuenit ; 
plegio  vero  recepto  et  non  contradicto,  parte  prosequente  tunc  de  curia 
exeuute  et  parte  aduersa  sepe  vocata  ad  comparendum,  defendendum  et 
resistendum  parti  prosequenti,  vel  ad  satisfaciendum  dictis  abliati  et 
conuentui  de  prefato  annuo  redditu  de  annis  et  terminis  preteritis  non  solutis, 
vnacum  dampnis  et  expensis  super  processu  antedicto  factis  et  faciendis 
non  coraparente,  curia  consulta,  et  parte  prosequente  introducta,  possessio 
illius  tenementi  cum  pertinentiis  adiudicata  fuit  predictis  abbati  et  conuentui 
per  os  Thome  Cathkin  iudiciarii  siue  dempstarii '  dicte  curie,  quo  adiudicato 
Johannes  Crag  tunc  temporis  vnus  balliuorum  burgi  prefati  statum  legitimum 
possessionis  illius  tenementi  cnm  pertineutiis,  saluo  jure  cuiuslibet  per  terre  et 
lapidis  traditionem,  vt  moris  est  burgorum,antedicto  Jacolio  nomine  proeuratorio 
quo  supra  donauit,  publiceque  proclamari  fecit  quod  si  quis  vel  qua  jus  vel 
interesse  ad  tenementum  cum  pertinentiis  vendicare  aut  reclamare  vokierat 
aut  clamauerat  babere,  infra  tempus  legitimum  a  jure  statutum  et  indultum 
veniret  et  de  annuis  redditibus  preteritis,  expensis  et  aliis  refundendis  satis- 
faceret  et  dictum  tenementum  cum  pertinentiis  haberet  sohitum  et  quietum 
et  possideret  pro  perpetuo,  prout  expostulat  et  requirit  juris  ordo  :  Et  hoc 
omnibus  quorum  interest  vel  interesse  poterit  notificamus  per  presentes.  In 
cuius  rei  testimonium  sigillum  nostrum  commune,  vnacum  sigillo  dicti 
Johannis  Crag  balliui  nostri  qui  dictam  nostris  ex  mandato  et  precepto 
contulit  possessionem  presentibus  apj)oni  fecimus  apud  burgum  nostram 
sepedictum,  vicesimo  quarto  die  mensis  Junii,  anuo  Domini  millesimo 
quadringentesimo  octuagesimo  primo  ;  coram  hiis  testibus  eciam  in  dicte 
sasine  datione  presentibus,  Alexandro  Cunynghame  de  Auchinbowy  preposito 
dicti  burgi,   Duncano   Forestar,  Thoma  Cragingelt,  Karolo  Eeid,  Eichardo 


DE  CA.UnUSKENXETH. 


303 


Eeidlieuch,  Alexandro  Muscliet,  Alexaudro  Nortoune,  Joliaune  Legate,  Alex- 
andro  Keidlieucli,  Jacobo  Cunyngliame  et  Waltero  Himny  cum  diuersis  aliis. 


STRIUELING. 


212.  STrauELiNG  in  vinella  Sancte  Maiue  processus  tenementi. 
UxiUERSis  et  siugulis  ad  quorum  noticias  preseutes  litere  perueuerint,  pre- 
positus,  balliui,  cousules  et  commuuitas  burgi  de  Striueliug,  salutem  in  eo  qui 
est  omuium  vera  salus  :  Cum  pietatis  et  meriti  sit  opus  et  nostro  cou- 
gruit  officio  vnicuique  secundum  rei  geste  veritatem  presertim  coram  uobis 
proliatam  et  compertam  testimouium  veridicum  perliibere  in  casu  illo  per- 
maxime  quo  veritatis  occultatio  preiudicium,  dampnum  aut  dispendium 
generare  poterit  iuuoceuti,  hinc  est  quod  presencium  per  teuorem  attestamur 
et  fidele  perhibemus  testimoniimi  quod  alias  in  quatuor  uostris  et  uostri 
burgi  predicti  curiis  capitalibus  prouidus  vir  Jacobus  Reidheuch  burgensis 
dicti  burgi  procurator  procuratorioque  nomiue  venerabilis  in  Christo  patris 
Henrici  permissione  diuina  abbatis  monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth  et  conuen- 
tus  eiusdem  de  cuius  procuratoris  maudato  uobis  eius  per  literas  procuratorias 
predicti  domini  abbatis  et  ipsius  conuentus  sub  eorum  sigillo  commuui 
sigillatas,  et  iuibi  perlectas  satis  luculeuter  constabat  documeutis,  coram  nobis 
iu  uostro  pretorio  cousedentibus,  processit  et  processus  fecit,  videlicet,  iu  curia 
capitali  post  Pascham  mensis  Aprilis  die  decimo,  auno  Domini  millesimo 
quadringentesimo  octuagesimo,  in  curia  capitali  post  festum  sancti  Michaelis 
Archaugeli,  meusis  Octobris  die  secundo,  in  curia  capitali  post  festum 
natiuitatis  Domini,  mensis  Januarii  die  decimo  tertio,  et  in  ciuia  capitali  post 
Pascham,  mensis  ApriUs  die  vltimo,  anuo  Domiui  millesimo  quadriugentesimo 
octuagesimo  primo  hoc  proximo  successiue  et  immediate  alteruatim  sequeute 
super  toto  et  iutegro  tenemeuto  quoudam  Johaunis  Wilsone  cum  pertiueutiis 
jacente  infra  dictum  burgum  in  vinella  sancte  Marie  Virgiuis  ex  parte 
occidentali  eiusdem  et  terram  Thome  Horue  ex  parte  australi  et  communeni 


304 


EEGISTRUM  MONASTEPJI 


STRIDELING. 


viuellam  ducentem  ad  castvum  dicti  burgi  ex  parte  boreali,  ob  defectum 
solucionis  cuiusdam  aunui  redditus  quinque  solidorum  ipsis  domino  abbati 
et  conuentui  de  prefato  toto  et  integro  tenemento  cum  pertinentiis  debitorum 
de  quo  annuo  redditu  nicbil  per  certos  annos  et  terminos  receperunt  ac  leuaue- 
runt  predicti  domini  abbas  et  conuentus  seu  recipere  aut  leuare  potuerunt, 
inde  prefatus  Jacobus  Eeidlieucb  procurator,  ac  procuratorio  nomine  quo  supra, 
cum  Wilebno  Benny  seriando  et  diuersis  testibus  burgi  uostri  predicti  burgen- 
sibus,  videlicet,  Alexandro  Joffrason,  Jobanne  Sille,  Willelmo  Martin,  Jobanne 
Tais,  Johanne  Tbomsone,  Jobanne  Litstare  et  Alano  Crag,  nostris  auctoritate 
et  mandato  ad  predictum  tenementum  accesserunt  vicissim  in  qualibet 
ipsarum  nostrarum  curiarum  et  nichil  inibi  preter  terram  et  lapides  vnde 
dictum  teneinentum  astringi  pro  dicto  aunuo  redditu  aliqualiter  potuit 
inuenerunt,  que  nobis  in  singulis  predictis  curiis  presentarunt ;  et  in  vltima 
dieta  predictarum  curiarum  comparuit  dictus  Jacobus  Eeidbeucb  procurator 
nomine  quo  supra,  et  peciit  iudicium  quod  possessio  illius  tenementi  cuni 
pertinentiis  in  defectii  dicti  anuui  redditus  non  sohiti,  redundare  et  reuerti 
debeat  ipsis  domino  abbati  et  conuentui  et  super  hoc  plegium  obtulit  et 
inuenit ;  plegio  vero  recepto  et  non  contradicto,  parte  prosequente  de  curia 
exeunte  et  parte  aduersa  sepe  vocata  ad  compareudum,  defendeudum  et 
resistendum  parti  prosequenti  vel  ad  satisfaciendum  dictis  domino  abbati 
et  conuentui  de  prefato  annuo  redditu  de  annis  et  terminis  preteritis  nou 
solutis,  vnacum  dampnis  et  expensis  super  processu  antedicto  factis  et 
faciendis,  et  non  comparente,  curia  considta  et  parte  prosequente  introducta, 
possessio  illius  tenementi  adiudicata  fuit  dictis  domino  abbati  et  conuentui 
per  os  Thome  Cathkin  tunc  iudiciarii  siue  dempstarii  dicte  curie ;  quo  adiudi- 
cato,  Johannes  Crag  timc  temporis  vnus  balliuorum  burgi  prefati  statum 
legitimum  possessionis  illius  tenementi  cum  pertinentiis,  sahio  jure  cuiuslibet, 
per  terre  et  lapidis  traditionem,  vt  moris  est  bm-gorum,  antedicto  Jacobo  Eeid- 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


305 


lieucli  nomine  procuratorio  c|iio  snpra  tradiilit  vt  congruit  ac  douauit  publice- 
que  proclamare  fecit  quod  si  quis  vel  qua  jus  vel  interesse  ad  dictum  tene- 
nieutum  cum  pertinentiis  vendicare  aut  reclamare  voluerat  vel  clamanerat 
liabere,  infra  tempus  legitimum  a  jure  statutum  et  indultum  veniret,  et 
de  annuis  redditibus  preteritis,  expensis  et  aliis  refundendis  satisfaceret 
et  dictum  tenementum  cum  pertiuentiis  haberet  solutum  et  quietum 
et  possideret  pro  perpetuo,  prout  expostulat  et  requirit  juris  ordo  ;  et 
lioc  omnibus  ciuorum  interest  vel  interesse  poterit  notificamns  per  pre- 
sentes.  In  cuius  rei  testimonium  sigilhim  nostrum  commune,  vnacum 
sigillo  dicti  Johannis  Crag  balliui  uostri  qui  dictam  nostris  ex  niandato  et 
precepto  contuUt  possessionem  presentibus  apponi  fecimus,  apud  burgum 
nostrum  supradictum  vicesimo  die  mensis  Juuii,  anno  Domini  millesimo 
quadringentesimo  octuagesimo  primo,  coram  hiis  testibus,  Alexandro  Cunyng- 
hame  de  Auchinbo^^y,  Matlieo  Forester,  Duncano  Forestare,  Adani  BuUy, 
Alexandro  Muschet,  Herberto  Murray,  Tlioma  de  Cragingelt,  Karolo  Reid, 
Johanne  Avsone  et  Thoma  Narne,  cum  diuersis  aliis. 


STRIUELING. 


213.  Strtueling  oppidi  tenementum  ob  processum  eecuperatum,  et 
abbati  possessio  hata. 
In  Dei  uomine  amen  :  Per  hoc  presens  publicum  instrumeutnm  cuuctis 
pateat  euidenter  qnod  anno  incarnationis  Dominiee  millesimo  quadringente- 
simo  octuagesimo  secuudo,  meusis  vero  Nouembris  die  vicesimo,  indictione 
prima,  poutificatus  sanctissimi  iu  Christo  patris  et  domiui  nostri  domini 
Sexti  diuiua  prouideucia  pape  quarti  anuo  duodecimo,  et  regni  exceUentissimi 
supremi  domini  nostri  Jacobi  tertii  Dei  gracia  Scotorum  regis  iUustrissimi 
anno  vigesimo  tertio,  in  mei  notarii  pubUci  et  testium  subscriptorum  presencia 
personaUter  constitutus  honorabnis  vir  Joliannes  Crag  tunc  temporis  vnus 
baUiuoram  burgi  de  StriueUng  ex  mandato  prepositi,  aUorum[que]  baUiuoruni 

39 


306 


BEGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


STRIUELISG. 


ac  consulum  clicti  burgi,  ad  quoddam  tenementum  quod  fuit  quondam  Joliannis 
Wilsone,  jacens  infra  dictum  burgum  in  vinella  Sancte  Marie  inter  terram  Thome 
Horne  ex  parte  australi,  et  communem  viam  regiam  ducentem  ad  castrum 
dicti  burgi  ex  parte  boreali  alias  per  venerabilem  in  Christo  patrem  Henri- 
cum  permissione  diuina  abbatem  monasterii  de  Cambuskynnetli  et  conuentum 
eiusdem  vigore  quorundam  processuum  in  quatuor  curiis  capitalibus  dicti 
nostri  burgi  desuper  ductorum,  ob  defectum  solutiouis  cuiusdam  amiui  redditus 
quinque  solidorum  ipsis  domino  abbati  et  conuentui  de  predicto  tenemento 
debitorum,  et  ex  certis  annis  et  terniinis  minime  solutorum  juridice  obtentum 
et  lucratum,  coram  testibus  subscriptis  accessit,  et  de  prefato  toto  et  integro 
tenemento  cum  pertinentiis  prefato  venerabili  in  Christo  patri  abbati  monasterii 
de  Cambuskynneth,  per  terre  et  lapidis  traditionem,  statum,  sasinam  et  pos- 
sessionem  realem,  actualem  et  corporalem,  secundum  tenorem  litere  testimoni- 
alis  dictorum  processuum  sub  sigillo  communi  dicti  burgi  ipsis  domiiio  alibati 
et  conuentui  desuper  confecte  contulit  et  donauit  liereditarie  et  perpetne  cum 
effectu  :  De  et  super  quibus  omnibus  et  singulis  dictus  dominus  abbas  a  nie 
notario  publico  infrascripto  sibi  fieri  petiit  vnum  aut  plura  publicum  seu  pub- 
lica  intrumentum  aut  instrumenta,  cum  appensione  sigilli  dicti  Joliannis 
Crag  balliui  commuuienda  :  Acta  fuerunt  hec  super  sohun  dicti  tenementi, 
liora  secunda  vel  eocirca  post  meridiem,  sub  anno,  die,  mense,  indictione  et 
pontificatu  quibus  supra ;  preseutibus  honorabilibus  et  discretis  viris  domino 
Wi]lelmo  Gonrlaw  vicario  de  Ivilmoronok,  Johanne  Abircrummy,  Patricio 
Creichtoun,  Thoma  Cragingelt,  Johanne  Creichtoun,  Thoma  Tailzefer,  Leonardo 
de  Abircrummy  et  Johanne  Ayson,  testibus  cum  multis  aUis  ad  premissa 
vocatis  specialiter  et  rogatis. 

Et  ego  Jacobus  Darow  presbyter  Sanctiandree  diocesis,  pubHcus  auctori- 
f  atibus  imperiali  et  regali  notarius,  prefati  tenementi  cum  pertinenciis  sasine 
dationi   ceterisque  premissis  omnibus   et  singulis    dum,  sic  vt  premittitur. 


DE  CAMBUSKENXETH. 


307 


dicerentur,  agerentur  et  fierent  \-nacimi  preuomiuatis  testibus  presens  interfui, 
eaque  omnia  et  singula  sic  fieri  vidi,  sciui  et  audiui  ac  in  notam  recepi, 
indeque  presens  publicum  instrumentum  alterius  manu,  me  aliis  prepedito 
peragendis,  scriptum  confeci,  et  bic  me  manu  propria  subscribendo  in  hanc 
publicam  formam  redegi,  signoque  ac  noniine  meis  solitis  et  consuetis,  vna- 
cum  appensione  sigilli  dicti  Jobannis  Crag  balliui  signavd,  rogatus  et  requisitus 
in  fidem  ac  testimonium  omnium  et  siugulorum  premissorimi. 


srRIUELING 


214.  Striueling  ANNUI  KEDDITUS  assignantur  altaribus  et  annui 

REDDITUS  ORTORUM. 


In  nomine  Patris  et  Filii  et  Spii-itus  Sancti,  amen  :  Per  hoc  presens  scriptum 
auteuticum  in  manifestam  noticiam  veniat  presentibus  et  in  perpetuam  rei 
memoriam  sit  futuris  :  Gloriosus  Deus  in  sanctis  suis  et  mirabUis  iu  maiestate 
sua  omiiium  qui  ab  ipso  tauquam  a  foutali  lumine  splendorem  recipiuiit  eter- 
naliter  coruscantem  sanctorum  conditor,  caput  et  coroiia,  quam([uani  per  os 
propbete  nos  ipsum  in  suis  sanctis  jusserit  collaudare  lioc  nedum  ad  sue 
proprie  laudis  cumidum  iustituit  vt  puta  honor  membris  impensus  in  gloriam 
tanti  capitis  debeat  redundare,  verum  eeiam  inferiores  sanctos  nostros  vohiit 
esse  patronos,  vt  dum  nostris  prepedientibus  culpis  ad  sue  maiestatis  sohum 
pro  nostris  necessitatibus  per  nos  accedere  formidamus,  ipsi  quibus  honorem 
impendimus  uostrorum  negociorum  apud  Dei  clemenciam  intercessores  et  pro- 
curatores  seduli  pro  nobis  valeant  exaudiri :  Et  quod  nostris  meritis  obtinere 
non  valemus  talibus  multiplicatis  iutereessoribus  vberius  et  celerius  largiatur, 
quod  attendentes  venerabUes  et  religiosi  viri  dominus  Dauid  CeUe  permissione 
diuma  abbas  monasterU  de  Cambuskinneth,  infrascripti  negotii  tam  deuote 
quam  laudabiUter  concepti  primus  motor  et  precipuus  instigator,  et  eiusdem 
loci  conuentus  totis  precordiis  cupientes  sue  monasteriaUs  ecclesie  pecuUares 


308 


BEGISTPdTM  MOXASTERII 


STRICELINO, 


placare  j)ati'ouos  ac  pro  suanim  2">ossibilitatum  modulis,  obsequiis  debitis 
bouorare  postquam  vniuersa  et  siugula  sue  ecclesie  supradicte  priuata  altaria 
ymaginum,  vestimentorum  aliorumque  necessariorum  ornamentis  non  siue 
interuis  suorum  cordium  compassionibus  attendisset  plurimum  indigere  atque 
pro  eorum  necessario  faciendis  reparationibus  nunc  ad  partem  et  priuate,  nunc 
vero  palam  et  publice,  quam  iilures  per  vices  et  tempora  inter  se  inuicem  et 
mutuo  pertractantes  considerassent  huiusmodi  altarium  necessarias  reparationes 
siue  oportunorum  sumptuum  et  expensarum  appositionem  nec  congrue  posse 
fieri  nec  sine  reddituum  pro  talibus  sumptibus  certa  premissa  facienda  annex- 
tione  perpetua  aliquatenus  commode  susteutari ;  igitur  in  festo  sauctorum 
Innocentium  anuo  Domini  millesimo  quadringentesimo  quadragesimo  quinto 
prefati  domini  abbas  et  conuentus  in  eiusdem  abbatis  camera  propter  hoc 
conuentualiter  congregati  frequenti  comniunicatione  et  non  tam  morosa  quam 
matura  deliberatione  prehabitis,  ad  omnipotentis  Dei  et  Domini  Jesu  Christi 
eiusque  gloriosissime  matris  semper  virginis  IMarie  totius  humani  generis  et 
dicti  monasterii  patroni  specialis,  necnon  omnium  sanctorum  et  sanctarum  et 
precipue  illorum  et  illarum  in  quorum  honoribus  fabricata  suut  altaria  supra- 
dicta,hxudem,gloriam  et  houorem  omnibus  tutioribus,  melioribus  eteflicatioribus 
modis,  via  et  forma  quibus  potuerunt  pro  se  et  suis  successoribus  imperpetuum, 
vnanimi  consensu  et  assensu  ipsorum  oranium  dederunt,  concesseruut  et 
hoc  preseuti  scripto  imperpetuum  valituro  irreuocabiliter  coufirmauerunt 
omnes  et  singulos  iUos  j)aruos  annuos  redditus  terrarum  ville  de  Striuehng 
sibi  et  suo  monasterio  supradicto  pertinentes,  dictis  altaribus  pro  eorum 
reparationibus  faciendis  et  sustentandis  fore  annectendos,  vniendos  et  more 
quo  seqiutur  proportionaliter  diuidendos  :  in  primis  quidem  confirmauerunt, 
dederimt  et  imperpetuum  annexuerunt  altari  Sancti  Andree  apostoli  illum 
annuum  redditum  de  terra  Schakelok  modo  diuisa  inter  magistrum  Dauid 
Guld  et  Symonem  Broune  sex  solidorum  et  octo  denariorum ;  item  dedenmt. 


DE  CAMBUSKEXNETH. 


309 


confirmauermit  et  imperpetuum  annexuerunt  altari  sanctorum  Joliannis  Ewan- 
"eliste  et  Baptiste  annuum  [redditum]  quatuor  solidorum  de  terra  quondam 
Roberti  Bonar  modo  Joliannis  Eichardi ;  item  eidem  altari  annuum  reiUlitum 
vifinti  denariorum  de  terra  quondam  Johannis  Barhour  modo  Jobannis  Darach 
de  Cruce  ;  item  eidem  altari  de  terra  Johannis  Tuch  xii  d :  Item  dederunt, 
confirmauerunt  et  imperpetuum  annexueruut  altari  beati  Laurencii  martiris 
annuum  redditum  trium  soUdorum  de  Croftmagra  ;  item  anuuum  reddi  - 
tum  trium  solidorum  de  terra  magistri  Johannis  Legati;  item  annuum 
redditum  octo  denariorum  de  terra  Eoberti  de  Colly  :  Item  dederunt,  con- 
firmauerunt  et  imperpetuum  annexuerunt  altari  beati  Nicholai  aunuum 
reddituni  trium  solidorum  et  quatuor  denariorum  de  terra  vulgariter  nuncu- 
pata  beati  Nicholai  quam  possidet  de  presenti  domiuus  Archibaldus  Quhite- 
heid  rector  de  Eothesay;  item  eidem  altari  annuum  redtlitum  quatuor 
sohdorum  de  tribus  particatis  beate  Marie ;  item  annuum  redditum  duorum 
soUdorum  de  terra  quondam  Willehni  Spry  modo  Eoberti  Narne  :  Item  con- 
firmauerunt  et  imperpetuum  anuexuerunt  altari  Sancti  Niuiaui  anuuum 
redditum  quatuor  solidoruni  de  terra  quondam  Henrici  Caut  modo  Johannis 
Darach  de  Cruce  :  Item  de  terra  quonJam  Eoberti  Wricht,  annuum  redditum 
duorum  solidorum  preter  illos  annuos  redditus  duoJecim  denariorum  quos 
idem  Eobertus  dicto  altari  de  eadem  terra  primitus  confirmauit ;  item 
annuum  redditum  octo  denariorum  de  terra  Willelmi  Crab :  Item  dederunt, 
confirmauerunt  et  imperpetuum  annexueruut  altari  beate  Ivatherine  virginis 
martuis  annuum  redditum  quinque  solidorum  de  terra  quondam  Johanuis 
Scugale  modo  Johannis  ^Yillelmi ;  item  de  terra  Joseph  modo  Dauid  Leuin- 
stoune,  quatuor  solidos.  Item  dederunt,  coufirmauerunt  et  imperpetuum  annex- 
uerunt  altari  omnium  sanctorum  annuum  redditum  decem  sohdorum  de  terra 
quondam  Eichardi  Marres  modo  Eoberti  Forsitli :  Preterea  prefati  domini  abbas 
et  conuentus  ad  dictorum  altarium  reparationem  et  reparationis  sustentationem 


STRIUKLING. 


310 


EEGISTRUM  MuNASTERII 


sTRiuELiNG  volueiuiit,  statueruut  et  ^'nammiter  clecreuerunt  quod  de  siugulis  dicti  monas- 

terii  ortis  et  gardiuis  infrascriptis  singulis  altaribus  aunuus  redditus  sit 
annexus  perpetuis  futuris  temporibus  capellauis  altariuni  illorum,  qui  pro 
tempore  fuerint,  integre  et  fideliter  persoluendus ;  qui  capeilani  semel  onini 
auno  de  siugulis  annuis  redditibus  tam  terrarum  quam  ortorum  illis  altaribus 
quorum  capellani  sunt  aniiexis  abbati  et  priori  qui  pro  tempore  fuerint  ac 
eciam  aliis  de  couuentu  discretioribus  ad  lioc  eligendis  in  vigilia  omuium  sauc- 
torum  fidele  compotum  reddere  teneantur  :  In  primis  dederuut,  confirmaueruiit 
et  imperpetuum  auuexueruut  altari  Sancti  Andree  apostoli  annuos  decem  solidos 
de  illo  orto  quem  bone  memorie  dominus  Dauid  Qubite  quondam  abljas  dicti 
nionasterii  et  domiiius  ^Villelmus  Armstrang  construxeruiit :  item  altari 
sanctorum  Joliannis  Ewangeliste  et  Baptiste  anmios  viginti  solidos  percipieu- 
dos  post  obitum  domini  Johaunis  de  Greuelaw  de  orto  quem  ipse  et  doiuinus 
Thomas  de  Sanctoandrea  coustruxerunt :  item  altari  sancti  Laurencii  aimuos 
sex  solidos  et  oeto  denarios  percipieiidos  post  obitum  domini  Willelmi  de 
Melros  de  orto  quem  ipse  et  domiiius  Joliauues  de  Maistertoun  coustruxerunt : 
item  altari  beati  Nicliolai  aunuos  decem  solidos  de  orto  illo  qui  vocatur 
Paradisus  :  item  altari  beati  Niuiani  annuos  sex  solidos  et  octo  denarios  de 
orto  quoudam  domiiii  Patricii  de  Lorne  :  item  altari  beate  Katherine  auuuos 
sex  solidos  et  octo  denarios  de  orto  quondam  domiiii  Alani  Scot :  item  altari 
omnium  sauctorum  aunuos  quiiique  solidos  de  paruo  orto  quem  dominus 
Joliannes  de  Grenlaw  construxit  ex  parte  boreali  cimiterii  monasterii  eiusdem  : 
Preter  premissa  eciam  ordinauerunt  quod  ille  annuus  redditus  duodecim 
deuariorum  per  quondam  dominum  Johannem  de  Benyn  emptus  de  terra 
quam  uuuc  habet  Johannes  filius  quondam  Pioberti  Flescheware  et  altari  beati 
Johaunis  datus  eidem  altari  maneat  confirmatus  et  in  signum  manifestum 
huiusmodi  coneessionis  sic  vt  premittitur  facte  et  solempniter  decreuerunt 
dicti  abbas  et  couuentus  quod  vuiuersi   supradicti  gardini  ab  illis  sanctis 


DE  CAMBUSKEXNETII. 


311 


quorum  altaribus  prefati  annni  redditns  inde  persolui  debeant  suas  deinceps 
denominationes  et  nomiua  sortiantur,  nec  in  premissis  abbatis  qui  pro  tempore 
fuerit  auctoritati  vel  potestati  volunt  iu  aliquo  derogare  quin  quilibet  abbas 
pro  tempore  possit  regimen  et  custodiam  singiilorum  ortorum  illis  fratribus 
quibus  sua  discretio  facienda  viderit  iuxta  seu  voluntatis  beneplacitum  assig- 
nare ;  reseruata  tamen  semiier  illesa  et  inuiolabiliter  inconcussa  dictorum 
annuoram  reddituum  solutione  plenaria  facienda,  ac  etiam  illa  ijensione  annua 
cellerario  qui  pro  tempore  fuerit  de  certis  ortis  persolui  solita  et  cousueta  :  In 
quorum  omnium  robur,  fidem  et  testimonium  sigillum  reuerendi  in  Christo 
patris  et  domini  nostri  domini  Jacobi  dicti  et  apostolice  sedis  gracia  .Sancti- 
andree  episcopi  ad  premissorum  confirmationem  cum  instancia  procuratum, 
vnacum  communi  sigillo  capituli  nostri,  ac  etiam  cum  sigillo  abbatiali  monas- 
terii  supradicti  preseuti  scripto  est  appensum  :  Et  tam  dictus  abbas  quam 
ceteri  fratres  de  conuentu  ad  premissorum  euidenciam  hic  se  manilius  propriis 
subscripserunt :  Datum  in  domo  capitulari  monasterii  eiusdem  iu  vigilia 
Epiphanie  sub  anuo  Domini  supradicto. 


STRIUELING. 


Ego   Dauid    Abbas,   licet    indignus, 
subscripsi. 
Et  ego  W.  Broun  prior  ad  idem. 
Ego  WiLLELMUS  IMelkoss  ad  idem. 
Ego  JoHANXES  DE  Grenlaw  ad  idem. 
Ego  Jacobus  de  Pentland  ad  idem. 
Ego  W.  M.USTERTOUN  ad  idem. 
Ego  Akciiibaldus  Story  ad  idem. 
Ego  Joiiannes  Gamill  ad  idem. 
Ego  Alexander  de  Cliddisdale  ad  idem 
Effo  Edw.vrdus  ad  idem. 


predicta   omnia   approbans   hic  me 

Ego  Joh.\:n-nes  Cellerat  ad  idem. 
Ego  Thomas  de  Allerdes  ad  idem. 
Ego  Thomas  Yhaliluk  ad  idem. 
Ego  Johannes  de  Fyff  ad  idem. 
Ego  JoHANNESDEGiLSTOUNad  idem. 
Ego  Thomas  de  IMORTON  ad  idem. 
Ego  Dauid  Yhaliluk  ad  idem. 
.  Ego  DAUin  Gray  ad  idem. 
Et  ego  Dauid  Mason  ad  idem. 


312 


UEGISTBUM  MONASTEEII 


STRlUELrXG. 


215.  Carta  regis  Dauid  de  tholoxeo  xon"  dando. 
Dauid  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotovum,  iusticiis,  barouibus,  vicecomitibus,  prepositis 
et  omnibus  probis  hominibus  suis  tam  futuris  quam  presentibus  totius  terre 
sue,  salutem  :  Precipio  quod  cauouici  de  Striueling  et  eorum  dominii  homines 
sint  quieti  de  tholoneo  et  de  onmibus  rectitudiuibus  et  consuetudinibus  vbi  - 
cunque  venerint  in  tota  terra  mea :  Volo  eciam  et  firmiter  precipio  quatenus 
iuste  habeant  meam  firmam  pacem  vbicunque  inter  vos  fuerint  vel  venerint : 
Testibus  Herberto  Camerario  et  Eandulfo  de  Sulis  apud  Chinross. 


216.    DOXATIO  ECCLESIE  DE  TuiLIBODY. 

SiMOX  fiUus  Rlakbeth,  omnibus  homiuibus  suis  et  amicis,  et  omnibus  sancte 
matris  ecclesie  filiis,  salutem :  Sciant  presentes  et  futuri  me  dedisse  et  con- 
cessisse  et  hac  carta  mea  confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  sancte  Marie  de  Cam- 
huskynneth  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus,  post  decessum  Hugonis 
de  Eokesburg  clerici  cancellarii  ecclesiam  de  Tulibody  in  liberam  et  perpetuam 
elemosinam,  pro  salute  anime  mee  et  antecessorum  et  successorum  meorum  : 
Tenendam  ita  libere  et  quiete,  plenarie  et  honorifice,  cum  terris  et  decimis  et 
omnibus  rectitudinibus  ad  eam  pertinentibus  sicut  alias  elemosinas  suas 
liberius,  quietius,  plenarius  et  honorificentius  tenent :  Testibus  Eichardo  epis- 
copo  Sanctiandree,  Nicholao  cancellario,  Comite  Waldeuo,  Matheo  archidiacono 
Sanctiandree,  Eicardo  capelhxno  regis,  Nessio  filio  Willelmi,  magistro  Herberto 
clerico  episcopi,  Eoberto  filio  Seulfi,  magistro  Abraham,  apud  Striueling. 


217-    CONFIRMATIO  ECCLESIE  DE  TULIBODY. 

loNATHAS  Dei  gracia  ejjiscopus  Duublanensis,  vniuersis  sancte  matris  ecclesie 
filiis,  salutem :  Sciant  presentes  et  futuri  nos  concessisse  et  liac  carta  nostra 
coufirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  saucte  IMarie  de  Cambiiskynneth  et  canonicis 


DE  CAMBUSKEXXETH. 


313 


ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  ecclesiam  de  Tulibody  et  ecclesiam  de  Tulicultry  et 
ecclesiam  de  Kincardin,  cum  capellis  et  decimis  et  oblationibus  et  omnimodis 
obuencionibus  earum,  et  omnibus  aliis  iustis  pertinentiis  earundem  ecclesi- 
arum :  Tenendas  sibi  in  liberam  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  ita  libere,  quiete, 
plenarie  et  honorifice  sicut  carte  patronorum  ipsarum  ecclesiarum  et  confirma- 
tiones  predecessorum  nostrorum  testantur  et  confirmant,  et  sicut  alias  ecclesias 
suas  prefati  canonici  liberius,  quietius,  plenius  et  honorificentius  tenent  et 
possident,  sahio  jure  nostro  episcopali :  Testibus  hiis,  priore  Malgegill  Meothill, 
priore  Maliis  de  insula  Effreu,  Moricio  capellano  nostro,  Gillecrist  capellano 
nostro,  Patricio  filio  Gillemanthach  capellano  nostro,  Gillemichell  persona  de 
Moethel,  magistro  Henrico  clerico  domini  episcopi  I.  Dunkeldensis,  Gilleheshoc 
filio  Johannis  de  Cleclienes,  Willelmo  de  Beunyn,  Henrico  Piunun. 

218.  De  quatuoe  solidis  Tulibody. 
Hec  est  conuencio  inter  L[aurencium]  episcopum  Dunblauensem  et  abbatem  et 
conuentum  de  Cambuskynneth  de  ecclesia  de  Tulibody,  reddere  annuatim 
quatuor  solidos  propter  omnia  episcopalia  jura  que  ad  ipsum  episcopum  per- 
tinent  et  propter  debitum  ecclesie :  Hec  est  conuencio  inter  episcopum 
Dunblanensem  et  abbatem  et  conuentum  de  Cambuskynneth  de  ecclesia  de 
Tulibody,  reddere  annuatim  quatuor  solidos  j^ropter  omnia  debita  que  per- 
tinent  ad  episcopum  predictum  de  ecclesia  predicta :  Testibus,  Patricio 
persona  de  ilothel  et  J.  de  Dunblane  et  omni  capitulo. 


219.    TULIBODY  PEK  EPISCOrUM  DUNBLAXENSEM  CONFIRMATIO. 

L[aurencius]  Dei  gracia  Dunblanensis  episcopus,  uniuersis  sancte  matris 
ecclesie  filiis  presentibus  et  futuris,  salutem :  Sciatis  me  concessisse  et  hac 
carta  mea  confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  sancte  Marie  de  Cambuskynneth,  et 
canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus,  ecclesiam  de  Tullibody  j)ost  decessum 

40 


314 


REGISTRUM  MONASTERII 


Hugonis  clerici  cancellarii :  Tenendam  in  liberam  et  perpetuam  elemosinam, 
cum  terris  et  decimis  et  omnibus  rectitudinibus  ad  eam  pertinentibus,  ita  libere 
et  quiete,  plenarie  et  honorifice  sicut  alias  elemosinas  suas  liberius,  quietius, 
plenius  et  honorificentius  teneut,  sahiis  omnibus  rectitudiuibus  que  ad  epi- 
scopura  pertinent :  Testibus,  Eichardo  episcopo  Sanctiandree,  Sams  episcopo 
de  Brechene,  Andrea  episeopo  Kateuensi,  Mcholao  cancellario,  JMatheo  archi- 
diacono  Sanctiandree,  Willelmo  priore  Sanctiandree,  Hugone  clerico  Eegis, 
Andrea  archidiacono  de  Modhel,  apud  Sanctumancbeam. 

220.   DONATIO  WlLELMI  KEGIS  DE  ECCLESIA  TULLICULTRE. 

TULLicuLTRE.  WiLELMUS  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotorum,  omnibus  probis  hominibus  totius  terre 

sue,  clericis  et  laicis,  salutem  :  Sciant  presentes  et  futuri  me  dedisse  et  con- 
cessisse  et  hac  carta  mea  confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  sancte  Marie  de  Cam- 
buskynneth,  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus,  ecclesiam  de  Tullicultre 
cum  terris  et  decimis  et  obhitionibus  omnimodis  et  omnibus  iustis  pertinentiis 
suis :  Tenendam  in  liberam  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  ita  libere,  quiete, 
plenarie  et  honorifice  sicut  alias  ecclesias  suas  liberius,  quietius,  plenius  et 
honorificentius  tenent  et  possident :  Testibus,  Hugone  caucellario  nostro,  A. 
abbate  de  Dunfermeling,  Eoberto  capellano  meo,  comite  Culberto  (Gilberto), 
Willelmo  de  Moruille  constabulario  nostro,  Wilelmo  de  Lindesay,  Alexandro 
vicecomite  de  Striueling,  apud  Striueling. 


221.  TULLECULTRY  ECCLESIE  ET  TERR.VRUJI  REGIE  DOXATIOXIS  COXFIRMATIO. 

S[imon]  Dei  gracia  episcopus  Dunblanensis,  vniuersis  sancte  matris  ecclesie 
filiis,  salutem  :  Sciant  presentes  et  futuri  nos  concessisse  et  hac  nostra  carta 
confirmasse  Deo  et  ecclesie  sancte  Marie  de  Cambuskynneth,  et  cauonicis 
ibidem  Deo  seruientibus,  ecclesiam  de  Tullecultry,  cum  terris  et  decimis  et 
omnimodis  oblationibus   et   omnibus  iustis  pertinentiis  suis  :  Tenendam  in 


DE  CAMBUSKENXETII. 


315 


liberam  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  ita  libere,  quiete,  plenarie  et  honorifice 
sicut  alias  ecclesias  suas  liberius,  quietius,  pleniiis  et  lionorificentius  tenent  et 
possident,  saluo  jure  episcopali  sicut  carta  domiui  Wilelmi  regis  testatur  : 
Testibus  hiis,  Jonatha  archidiacono,  Cormac  sacerdote,  Makbeth  sacerdote, 
jMoritio  capellano  de  Strubieth,  Johanne  persona  de  Keremure,  Eoberto  filio 
persone  de  Tuthedell,  I\Iartino  dapifero  nostro,  Garuath  nepote  nostro, 
Mauricio  capellano  de  Kerimure,  Gilcristino. 


TULLICULTRE. 


222.  Carta  decem  acrarum  terre  de  Tullicultri. 
SciANT  presentes  et  futuri  quod  ego  Colinus  Cambell  dominus  de  Tullicultrj^, 
filius  et  heres  cjuondam  Nigelli  Cambell,  dedi  et  concessi  et  hac  presenti  carta 
mea  confirmaui,  pro  me  et  heredibus  meis  et  assignatis  et  pro  remedio  anime  mee 
et  animarum  predecessorum  et  successorum  meorum,  in  puram  et  perpetuam 
elemosinam  Deo  et  beate  Marie  monasterii  de  Cambuskynneth,  et  canonicis  ibi- 
dem  Deo  seruientibus  et  imperpetuum  seruituris,  ac  sancto  Seruano  ecclesie  de 
Tullicultry,  decem  acras  terre  arabilis  jacentes  iufra  territorium  de  Tullicultre, 
videlicet,  sicut  dicta  terra  se  extendit  de  dicta  ecclesia  per  semitam  in  aquilone 
procedentem  versus  occidentem  vsque  ad  viam  regiam,  et  de  dicta  ecclesia  sicut 
riuus  se  extendit  et  currit  in  parte  orientali  vsque  ad  eandem  viam  regiam 
versus  merediem,  cum  omnibus  libertatibus  et  asiamentis  ad  dictam  terram 
pertinentibus  vel  pertinere  valentibus,  absque  omni  exactione,  seruicio  vel  de- 
manda  seculari :  Tenendas  et  habendas  supradictis  canonicis  de  Cambuskyn- 
neth  vt  supradictum  est  ita  libere,  quiete  et  honorifice  sicut  aliqua  terra  elemo- 
sinata  in  regno  Scotie  liberius,  cpiiecius  et  lionorificentius  tenetur  et  possidetur  : 
Do  eciam  et  concedo  dictis  canonicis  de  Cambuskynneth  pro  tempore  vite  mee, 
in  augmentum  et  succursum  culture  sue,  duos  boues  ita,  videlicet,  cj^uod  cum  de- 
ficerint  vel  mortui  fuerint  vel  alter  eorum  deficerit  vel  mortuus  fuerit,  alios  vel 
aUum  in  loco  ipsorum  substituam  et  inueniam,  ita  quod  vnum  jugum  bouum  in 


316 


EEGISTRUM  MOXJSTERII 


TULLICULTRK. 


TULLYMURTHAC. 


tota  vita  mea  ad  dictam  culturam  integre  seruetur.  In  ciiius  rei  testimonium  pre- 
sentibus  sigillum  meum  est  ajipeusum;  liiis  testibus,  magistro  Mcholao  de  Lac- 
maban  clerico,  domino  Tlioma  de  TuUicuItry  vicario  de  Hucterardor,  Jobanue 
Larduar  burgensi  de  Striueling,  Forsytli  de  Alweth,  de  Tullicultri  et  aliis. 

223.  TULLECULTEY  DECEM  ACKAEUM  PER  EOBERTUM  EEGEM. 

EoBEETUS  Dei  gracia  re.x:  Scotorum,  omnibus  probis  hominibus  totius  terre 
sue,  tam  clericis  quam  laicis,  salutem :  Sciatis  nos  pro  salute  anime  nostre,  et 
pro  salute  auimarum  omnium  antecessorum  et  successorum  nostrorum  regum 
Scotie,  dedisse,  concessisse  et  hac  presenti  carta  nostra  confirmasse  Deo  et 
beate  ]\Iarie  de  Cambuskyuneth,  abbati  et  cauonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus 
et  imperpetuum  seruituris,  ac  sancto  Seruano  de  Tullecultry  decem  acras  terre 
arabilis  infra  territorium  de  Tullicultry,  videlicet,  sicut  dicta  terra  se  ex- 
tendit  de  ecclesia  de  Tullicultry  per  semitam  in  aquilone  procedentem 
versus  occidentem  vsque  ad  ^iam  regiam,  de  dicta  ecclesia,  sicut  riuulus  se 
exteudit  et  currit  in  parte  orientali  vsque  ad  eandem  viam  regiam  versus 
merediem :  Tenendas  et  habendas  predictis  abbati  et  canonicis  et  eorum 
successoriljus  imperpetuum  in  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam  adeo  libere, 
quiete,  pleuarie  et  honorifice,  cum  omnibus  libertatibus,  commoditatibus, 
asiamentis  et  iustis  pertinentiis  suis  sicut  aliqua  elemosina  in  regno  nostro 
Scotie  liberius,  quietius,  plenius  et  honorificentius  tenetur  et  possidetur.  lu 
cuius  rei  testimonium  presenti  carte  nostre  sigillum  nostrum  precipimus 
appoui ;  testibus,  Barnardo  abbate  de  Abirbrothok  cancellario  nostro,  Jacobo 
de  Douglas,  Alexandro  Senescallo,  Gilberto  de  Haya  et  Eoberto  de  Keith, 
militibus,  apud  Edinburgh,  quarto  die  Marcii  anno  regni  nostri  decimo. 

224.  DOXATIO  CEXTUM  rETEAEU.M  CASEI  DE  TULLYMUETHAC. 

ALEX.ANDEE  Dei  gracia  rex  Scotorum,  omnibus  probis  hominibus  totius  terre 
sue,  clericis  et  laicis,  salutem  :  Sciant  presentes  et  futuri  nos  dedisse,  conces- 


DE  CAMBUSKENNETII. 


ZVi 


sisse  et  liac  carta  ndstra  confirmasse  Deo  et  beate  JMarie  de  Cambuskynnetli, 
et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  seruientibus  et  imperpetuum  seruituris,  vigiuti, 
cowgall  casei  percipiendas  siugulis  annis  de  firma  terre  nostre  de  Tulymur- 
thac,  per  manus  eius  qui  pro  tempore  fuerit  vicecomes  noster  de  Striueliug, 
pro  viginti  cuddrinis  casei  quas  percipere  consueuerunt  de  ballia  de  Striue- 
\m"  ex  donatione  regis  Dauid  et  ab  antecessoribus  nostris  eisdem  cauouicis 
confirmatas,  sicut  plenius  continebatur  in  magna  carta  eis  super  hoc  confecta : 
Tenendas  et  babendas  dictis  canouicis  in  puram  et  perpetuam  elemosinam 
adeo  libere,  quiete,  plenarie  et  bouorifice  sicut  aliqua  elemosiua  ab  aliquibus 
religiosis  viris  in  tota  terra  uostra  liberius,  quietius,  pleuius  et  honorificeutius 
tenetur  vel  possidetur  :  Quare  volumus  vt  ille  qui  pro  tempore  fuerit  vice 
comes  noster  de  Striueling  dictis  canonicis  singulis  annis  habere  faciat 
viginti  cougall  casei  de  firma  predicta  de  Tullymurthac  :  Testibus,  A.  epis- 
copo  Morauiensi,  G.  episcopo  Dunkeldensi,  W.  de  Bond(ington)  cancellario, 
Wilelmo  (Waltero  ?)  filio  Alani  Senescalli  iusticiario  Scotie,  W.  Olifard 
iusticiario  Laudonie,  PhHippo  de  Moubray,  Eogero  Auenell,  apud  Striueling, 
quiuto  decimo  die  Januarii,  anno  regui  Domiui  nostri  regis  nonodecimo. 


TULLYMURTH.\C. 


225.    TeSTIMONIALE  REGIUM  PKO  ABBATE  CONTEA  EPISCOPUM  DuXIvELDENSEM. 

RoBERTUS  Dei  gratia  rex  Scotorum,  vniuersis  et  singulis  ad  quorum  noticias 
preseutes  litere  perueneriut,  salutem  :  Quia  pium  est  et  meritorium  testi- 
mouium  perhibere  veritati,  et  maxime  in  casu  quo  occultatio  veritatis  pre- 
iudicium  seu  grauameu  j)oterit  generare  innocenti,  hiuc  est  quod  vobis  notum 
facimus  per  presentes  quod  nec  venerabilis  pater  abljas  monasterii  de  Cam- 
buskynneth  fecit  vel  ordiuauit  reuerendum  iii  Christo  patrem  episcopum 
Dunkeldensem  causa  aliquali  coram  nobis  trahi  in  judicium,  nec  tractus  fuit 
idem  dominus  episcopus  coram  uobis  causa  sui  judicialiter,  nec  vudecimo  die 
mensis  Februarii  vltimo  elapso  quando  ambe  partes  episcopus  Dunkeldensis 


TESTIMONL\LE. 


.318 


REGISTIWM  MONASTERII  DE  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


TESTiMONiALE.  et  abbas  de  Camliuskyimetli  coram  nobis  accesserunt  in  vestiario  fratrum 

predicatorura  de  Perth  eorura  causa  vel  occasione  judicialiter  sedebamus  :  et 
hoc  omniljus  quorura  interest  vel  interesse  poterit  notum  facimus  per  pre- 
sentes.  Datura  sub  sigillo  nostro  secreto  apud  Duudonnald,  vigesimo  octauo 
die  iiiensis  Marcii  anno  regni  nostri  (|uinto. 


QUAKUMQUIDEM  cartarum  et  euidenciarum  transumpto  in  forma  libri  vt 
superius  iu  exordio  continetur  redacto,  et  subscriptione  manuali  dilecti  con- 
siliarii  nostri  magistri  Jacobi  Fuidis  de  Colintoune  Eostroruin  registri  consilii 
et  rotulorum  clerici  singillatira  subscripto,  vohxmus,  precipimus  et  mandamus 
r[uod  tanta  et  similis  fides  imposterum  adhibeatur  ac  si  in  acto  et  libris  dicti 
nostri  consilii  singule  insererentur  :  In  quorum  omniimi  et  singulorum  fidem  et 
testimonium  premissorum  huic  presenti  transumpto,  in  formam  libri  vt  dictum 
est  redacto  et  subscriptione  manuali  prefati  clerici  nostri  vt  premittitur  sub- 
scripto,  magnum  sigilhira  nostrura  precepimus  apponi ;  testibus,  reuerendis- 
simo  reuereiidisque  in  Christo  patribus  Gawino  Glasguensi  arcliiepiscopo  can- 
cellario  nostro,  Wilelmo  episcopo  Abirdonensi  thesaurario  nostro,  Jacobo 
episcopo  Eossensi,  dilectis  consangiuneis  nostris  Jacobo  comite  AiTanie  domino 
Hamiltoune,  Archibaldo  comite  de  Ergile  doinino  Campbell  et  Lorne,  magistro 
liospicii  nostri,  Hugone  coraite  de  Eghntoune  domino  Montgomery,  venerabili- 
bus  in  Christo  patribus,  Patricio  priore  ecclesie  metropolitane  Sanctiandree, 
Dauid  abbate  monasterii  nostri  de  Abirbrotholc  nostri  secreti  sigilli  custode, 
dilectis  familiaribus  nostris  Tlioma  Erskin  de  Breichin  secretario  nostro,  Jacobo 
Cohiile  de  Estwemys  nostrorura  compotorura  rotulatore  et  nostre  cancellarie 
directore,  militibus,  et  magistro  Jacobo  Foulis  de  Colintoune  nostrorum  rotu- 
lorum  registri  ac  consihi  clerico,  apud  Edinburgh,  vicesimo  quarto  die  mensis 
JuUi  anno  Doraini  millesimo  quingentesimo  trigesimo  quinto  et  regui  nostri 
vicesimo  secundo,  etc. 


311) 


ABSTRACT   OF  THE   REGISTER 
OF  CAMBUSKEI^KETH. 


Letters  by  King  James  the  Fifth  of  Scotland,  setting  forth  that  a  petitiou  had 
been  presented  to  the  Lords  of  Council  on  behalf  of  Alexander,  Abbot 
of  Cambuskenneth,  President  of  the  Sessiou,  and  of  the  convent  of  the 
said  abbey,  statiiig  that  the  charters  and  evidents  belonging  to  them, 
hitherto  kept  in  the  abbey,  which  stood  in  a  damp  situation,  liad  ah'eady 
suffered  much  from  damp  and  mildew  ;  that  the  seals,  writing,  aud  parch- 
ments  were  perishing,  and  that  unlcss  some  remedy  was  at  once  applied  tliey 
would  soon  be  entirely  destroyed,  to  tlie  great  and  irreparable  loss  of  the 
convent  ;  and  craving  that,  iu  these  circumstances,  the  said  charters  and 
evidents  miglit  be  copied  on  parchment  in  the  form  of  a  book,  and  autheu- 
ticated  by  the  signatures  of  the  Council  and  Clerk  Eegister,  and  by  the 
King's  seal :  That  the  Lords  of  Council,  after  due  intimation  of  the  said 
petition,  and  citation  of  all  liaving  interest  to  compear  before  them  ou  the 
24th  July  (1535),  on  that  day,  after  further  calliug  of  parties  at  the  door 
of  the  Court  in  a  loud  voice,  ordained  that  a  copy  should  be  niade  in 
terms  of  the  petition,  and  that  this  copy  should  be  of  the  same  force  in 
all  time  comiug  as  the  original  writs,  and  as  if  each  of  them  was 
separately  inserted  in  an  Act  of  His  Majesty's  Council  made  thereanent. 
Among  tbe  Lords  of  Council  present  were  Gavin  Duubar,  Arclibishop 
of  Glasgow,  ChanceUor  of  Scotland,  and  James  Hay,  Bishop  of  Eoss,  . . . 
The  evidents  above  referred  to  are  225  in  number,  aud  consist  of — 

1.  Confirmation  by  William  (Fraser),  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  of  the  grant  by 
Gilbert  Lord  of  Fourgy  to  the  church  of  St.  Mary  of  Oambuskenneth, 
and  canons  thereof,  in  pure  and  perpetual  alms,  of  that  piece  of  laud 
in  Arringrosk  which  formerly  belonged  to  Ledereth,  lying  near  the  house 


ARRIXGEOSK. 


320 


ABSTRACT  OF  TIIE  REGISTER 


vrhich  tlien  belonged  to  the  priest,  with  the  patronage  of  the  ehureh 
of  Arringrosk  ;  and,  out  of  compassion  for  the  poverty  of  the  Monastery, 
granting  the  whole  fruits  and  incume  of  the  said  church,  after  the  death 
or  resignation  of  the  rector  then  in  possession,  to  the  said  canons  for 
their  own  proper  uses  for  ever.  Dated  at  Wedall,  AVednesday  next  after 
the  Feast  of  the  Exaltation  of  the  Holy  Cross,  (17th  September)  1281, 

2.  Eesignation  by  Ealph  Lord  of  Synmerdsburn,   rector  of  the  church   of 

Arriugrosli,  of  all  his  right  in  tlie  said  churcli,  in  whicli  he  liad  been  canoni- 
cally  instituted  on  the  legal  presentation  of  the  deceased  Duncan  Lord  of 
Fourgy.  Sealed  with  the  granter's  seal,  and  dated  at  St.  Andrews,  Tues- 
day  before  the  Feast  of  St.  Luke  the  Evangelist,  (13th  October)  1282, 

3.  Warrant  by  Boldred,  official  of  the  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  to  the  Dean  of 

Fife  and  Fothrick,  proceeding  on  the  foregoing  confirmation  and  resigna- 
tion,  charging  the  Dean  to  repair  to  the  church  of  Arringrosk,  accom- 
panied  by  two  or  three  of  the  neighbouring  chaplains,  and  to  give  the 
Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth  institution  and  corporal  possession  thereof,  iu 
name  of  his  church.  Dated  at  St.  Andrews,  Monday  next  after  the 
Feastof  St.  Dionisius,  Martyr,  (12th  October)  1282, 

4.  Confirmation  by  John,  Prior  of  the  cathedral  church  and  convent  of  St. 

Andrews,  of  tlie  foregoing  grant  by  Gilbert  Lord  of  Fourgy,  to  the  Abbey 
of  Cambuskenneth,  of  that  portion  of  land  which  formerly  belonged  to 
Ledereth,  with  the  patronage  of  the  church  of  Arringrosk.  Dated  at  St. 
Andrews,  Slonday  next  after  the  Translation  of  St.  Augustine,  Bishop, 
(7th  September)  1282,  

6.  Gift  by  Henry  of  Freslay,  lord  of  Fourgy,  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of 
Cambuskenneth,  in  return  for  the  benefits  and  honours  conferred  by  them 
on  himself  and  his  predecessors,  and  for  the  salvation  of  his  soul,  of  the 
mill  of  Arringrosk,  and  two  acres  of  land  adjacent  to  it,  in  pure,  free 
and  perpetual  alms,  under  reservation  of  an  annual  pension  of  four 
shillings  sterling,  assigned  to  the  Abbey  of  Culueros  (Culross)  by  his 
predecessors  :  The  granter  binding  himself  and  his  heirs  not  to  erect  any 
new  mill,  or  set  up  any  building  or  other  work  disadvantageous  to  the 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


321 


Abbot  aud  convent ;  and  likewise  to  compel  his  tenants  of  Arringrosk, 
Conlony,  and  Newtoun  to  come  to  tlie  mill,  and  pay  for  multure  tlie 
sixteenth  sack  of  grain,  dry  and  wet ;  the  tenants  of  Petillocis  to  pay  the 
twenty-fourth  sack  for  multure  ;  those  of  Beyn  and  Cathehill  to  satisfy 
as  they  were  bound  ;  and  those  of  Baleward  (Balvaird),  unless  they  or 
their  master  could  show  that  they  were  not  bound  to  come  to  the  miU  : 
The  granter  and  his  heirs  were  to  pay  a  sixty-fourth  sack  for  multiu:e  of 
grain  from  land  cultivated  at  their  own  expense  ;  but  in  the  event  of  their 
letting  this  land,  the  tenant  was  to  pay  a  sixteenth  sack  for  multure  : 
The  granter  further  bound  himself  and  his  heirs  to  compel  those 
who  owed  suit  to  the  mill  to  repair  or  reconstruct  the  same,  and  the 
dam  aud  stream  thereof,  when  it  should  be  necessary  to  do  so,  under 
the  pain  of  suspension  or  excommunication  by  the  Archdeacons  of  St. 
Andrews  and  Dunblane  for  the  time  being,  if  they  should  fail  in  the 
observance  of  aU  and  sundry  the  premises.  Sealed  with  the  seals  of 
the  Archdeacons  of  St.  Andrews  and  Dunblane,  and  dated  at  Cambus- 
kenneth,  the  sixth  day  before  the  caleuds  of  August  (27th  July)  1295, 

6.  Confirmation  by  King  Robert  the  Bruce  of  the  grant  by  Sir  WiUiam  of  Fres- 

lay,  knight,  lord  of  Fourgy,  to  the  Abbot  and  couvent  of  Cambuskenneth,  of 
the  mill  of  Arringrosk,  with  two  acres  of  land  adjacent :  To  be  held 
by  them  and  their  successors  for  ever,  in  free,  piire  and  perpetual  alms, 
as  freely  as  the  charter  of  the  said  William  made  to  them  thereupon  bore. 
Sealed  with  the  Kings  seal,  and  dated  at  Glasgow,  1  Oth  June,  in  the  1 9th 
year  of  the  Kings  reign  (1321).  Among  the  witnesses  were  Barnard, 
Abbot  of  Arbroath,  ChanceUor,  and  Walter  the  Steward  of  Scotland,    . . . 

7.  Memorandum  of  the  Sasiue  given  by  Henry  of  Freslay,  lord  of  Arringrosk 

and  of  Fourgy,  in  presence  of  the  Archdeacon,  the  Inrd  of  GuthUgurdy,  and 
others,  to  Patrick,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  in  his  own  name  and  that  of 
his  convent,  of  the  miU  of  Arryngrosk,  with  two  acres  of  land  adjoin- 
ing  it,  which  the  said  Henry  granted  to  them  in  pure  and  perpetual 
alms.  Dated  at  Arringrosk,  Simday  next  after  the  Feast  of  St.  Michael 
the  Archangel,  (2d  October)  1295, 

8.  Charter  by  WiUiam  of  Freslay,  lord  of  Fourgy,  knight,  to  the  Abbot  and 

convent  of  Cambuskenneth,  confirming  the  charter  No.  5,  and  in  nearly 
41 


ARRINGRO.SK. 


322 


ARRINGROSK. 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  REGISTER 


the  same  terms,  except  that  the  tenants  of  Arringrosk  and  Condolan  are 
freed  from  the  burden  of  repairing  and  rebuilding  the  mill,  mill-dam 
and  stream.  Dated  at  Cambuslcenneth  Friday  next  after  the  Feast  of 
the  Purification  of  St.  Mary  the  Virgin,  (4th  February)  1323, 10 


Letters  by  Gavin  Dunbar,  Archdeacon  of  St.  Andrews,  principal  judge  in 
that  part  under  the  submLssion  and  appointment  of  the  deceased  Henry 
of  Freslay,  lord  of  Arringrosk  and  of  Fourgy,  for  himself  and  his  lieirs, 
directed  to  the  clerks,  presbyters,  and  notaries  public  within  the  diocese 
of  St.  Andrews,  setting  forth  tliat  the  tenants  of  Arringrosk,  Conlony  or 
Condland,  Newtoun,  Pettilloch,  Cathcochill,  Beyn,  Balward  aud  Fourgy, 
and  of  Letliame  and  Hethame,  newly-erected  pendicles  formed  out  of  the 
old  lands  of  Fourgy,  liad  been  warned  by  the  granter's  letters-patent, 
under  the  pain  of  excommunieation,  to  pay  to  the  mill  of  Arringrosk, 
and  to  Eichard  Hay,  tenant  thereof,  the  multures  due  by  them  respec- 
tively,  and  to  bring  to  the  mill  their  crops  and  grain,  wet  and  dry,  unless 
they  could  allege  some  reason  why  they  should  not  be  compelled  to  do 
so  ;  aud  that  the  said  tenants,  and  also  Blargaret  Barclay,  spouse  of  Sir 
Andrew  Murray,  knight,  dwelling  on  the  lands  of  Balward,  for  her 
interest,  as  heir  of  Henry  Freslay  and  lady  of  the  lands  of  Arriugrosk 
and  Fourgy,  had  been  cited  to  a  certain  day  and  place  respecting  the 
unjust  erection  of  the  miU  of  Balward  (Balvaird)  within  the  bounds  of 
the  lordship  of  Fourgy,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  Abbot  and  convent  of 
Cambuskenneth  with  respect  to  the  said  multures  ;  that  the  said  Sir 
Andrew  Murray,  knight,  had  compeared  before  the  Archdeacon,  and 
produced  an  older  charter,  in  which  no  mention  was  made  of  the 
said  midtirre ;  and  that  because  from  the  charter  of  the  said  Henry 
Freslay,  produced  on  behalf  of  the.  Abbot  and  convent,  it  appeared 
that  the  tenants  of  the  lands  were  bound  to  come  to  the  mill  of 
Arringrosk  to  pay  their  respective  multures,  as  expressed  in  the 
charter,  that  Sir  Andrew  and  Margaret,  his  spoiise,  had  no  right  to  erect 
the  mill  of  Balward  ;  the  judge  decerned  that  the  case  set  up  by  them 
was  null,  unreasonable,  and  irrelevant,  and  that  they  and  the  tenants  of 
the  lands  foresaid  had  incurred  the  penalty  of  excommunication ;  never- 
theless,  being  desirous  to  act  with  mildness  towards  them,  he  commanded 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


the  said  clerks,  presbyters,  and  notaries  public,  to  warn  again  Sir  Andrew 
and  Jlargaret,  three  tiraes  and  peremptorily,  that  witliin  the  space  of 
nine  days  they  shouhl,  at  their  own  expenses  and  charges,  demolish 
the  mill  of  Balward,  and  simihxrly  to  warn  the  tenants  of  the  said 
lands  forthwith  to  bring  their  grain  to  the  mOl  of  Arringrosk,  and  pay 
the  multures  due  thereto  for  past  and  future  terms,  on  pain  of  the 
greater  excommunication.     Dated  at  Perth,  2d  December  1513, 


323 


ARRINGROSK. 


10.  Letters  by  Hugh  Spens,  Professor  of  Theology,  Provost  of  the  Col- 
legiate  Cluirch  of  St.  Salvator,  judge  constituted  by  the  Apostolic  See, 
setting  forth  that  letters  by  Pope  Leo  the  Tenth  had  been  directed  to 
him  and  to  David  Spens,  Canon  of  Moray,  in  which  it  was  stated  that 
a  petition  had  been  presented  to  his  Holiness  by  Andrew  Murray  of 
Balvaird,  and  the  tenants  of  the  lands  specified  in  the  preceding  letters 
(No.  9),  stating  that  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth  had 
falsely  asserted  that  the  petitioners  were  bound  to  pay  multure  to  the 
mill  of  Arringrosk,  and  that  the  Archdeacou  of  St.  Andrews,  who  acted 
as  judge  in  the  cause  without  apostolic  delegation,  had  at  least  tacitly 
repelled  the  petitioners'  pleas  and  defences,  which  were  relevaut  and 
admissible  in  law,  and  had  pronounced  an  unjust  sentence  against  them, 
whereupon  the  cause  had  been  appealed  to  the  Apostolic  See,  and  that 
therefore  his  Holiness  directed  the  said  Hugh  aud  David  Spens  to  sum- 
mon  witnesses,  hear  the  parties  and  decern  ;  that  after  various  pro- 
ceedings  had  taken  place,  a  compromise  had  been  eflected  between  the 
parties  with  the  sanction  of  the  judge,  whereby,  inter  alia,  the  defenders 
ratified  the  grants  by  Henry  of  Freslaw  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of 
the  mill  of  AiTingro.sk,  with  two  acres  of  land  adjoining,  reserving  an 
annual  rent  of  four  shillings  from  the  mill  to  the  Abbey  of  Culross  ; 
and  firnily  agreed  not  to  erect  of  new  a  mill  or  other  building  disadvan- 
tageous  to  the  pursuers,  aud  to  compel  the  tenants  of  Arringrosk,  Coud- 
land,  Petilloch,  Forgy,  Heithame,  Lethame,  and  Fosterseyt  to  pay  to  the 
mill  the  twenty-fourth  sack  for  dry  multure,  and  to  contribute  to  the  re- 
pairing  of  the  mill,  stream,  dam,  etc.  ;  aud  further,  that  they  would  not 
in  future  receive  the  grain  of  the  lands  of  Newtoun  to  be  ground  at  their 
mill  of  Balward  ;  and  would  assist  the  Abbot  and  convent  in  collecting 


324 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  REGISTEB 


Page 

the  predial  and  jiersonal  teinds  of  tlie  cliurcli  of  Arringrosk  ;  while  the 
pursuers  on  their  part  agreed  that  the  mill  of  Balward  should  be  allowed 
to  stand  as  it  then  was,  and  tbat  tlie  multure  of  the  lands  of  Balward, 
Beyn,  and  Cathochill  should  belong  to  it.  Dated  at  St.  Andrews,  21st 
November  1521,  15 

11.  BuII  by  Pope  John  (the  Tweuty-fir.st)  directed  to  the  Abbot  and  convent 

of  the  Abbey  of  Cambu.skenneth,  confirming  the  grant  made  to  them  by 
William  of  Freslaw,  lord  of  Fourgy,  in  the  diocese  of  St.  Andrews,  for 
the  welfare  of  the  souls  of  himself  and  his  parents,  of  the  mill  of 
Arringi-osk  with  two  acres  of  land  adjoining  it,  with  aU  the  rights 
of  the  same,  as  more  fully  contained  in  the  letters-patent  made  thereupon. 
The  bull  threatens  those  who  shall  dare  to  infringe  its  provisions  with 
the  indignation  of  Almighty  God,  and  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  his 
apostles,  and  is  dated  at  Avignon,  .  .  .  before  the  calends  of  November, 
in  the  1 .3th  year  of  the  Pope's  Pontificate  (October  1328,) 23 

1 2.  Charter  by  Richard  (Inverkeithing,)  Bishop  of  Dunkeld,  granting  to  the 

church  of  St.  Mary  of  Cambuskenneth,  and  to  the  canons  serving  God 
there,  the  church  of  Alveth  (Alva)  with  all  its  just  pertinents  in  perpetual 
alms  :  To  be  hekl  as  freely,  peaceably,  and  honourably  as  any  church  was 
held  iu  his  diocese,  saving  the  right  of  the  bishop.  One  of  the  witnesses 
was  Brice,  Prior  of  the  isle  of  St.  Colme.     \circa  12G0,]     23 

13.  Permission  granted  by  Pdchard  (Inverkeithing,)  Bishop  of  Dunkeld,  with 

consent  of  his  Dean  and  chapter,  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambus- 
kynneth,  on  account  of  the  poverty  of  the  convent  and  the  smallness  of 
the  church  of  Alveth  to  serve  it  by  a  chaplain,  to  be  presented  to  the 
Bishop  and  his  successors,  instead  of  appointing  a  vicar  ;  reserving  to 
the  Bishop  and  his  successors  their  ancient  rights.  Dated  at  Dunkeld, 
Friday  next  after  the  Fea.st  of  All  Saints,  (5th  November)  1260,    24 

14.  Grant  by  Alexander  Lord  of  Striueling,  knight,  for  the  salvation  of  the 

souls  of  himself  and  his  predecessors  and  successors,  to  God  and  St. 
Mary  and  St.  Servan,  and  to  the  church  of  St.  Servan  of  Alveth,  for  ever, 
of  an  acre  of  land  in  the  town  of  Alveth,  near  the  spring  of  St.  Servan, 
and  between  the  spring  and  the  ehurch,  with  free  ish  and  entry  :  To  be 
held  in  free,  pure,  and  perpetual  alms  by  the  rectors  of  the  church. 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETU. 


325 


as  an  endowment  thereof,  as  freely  as  tlie  enclowmeut  of  any  cliurcli 
could  be  held.  Aniongst  the  witnesses  to  this  graut  was  Kobert,  (de 
Prebenda,)  Bishop  of  Dunblaue,  who  consecrated  tlie  church  on  the 
Suuday  next  after  the  Feast  of  St.  Scolastica,  Virgin,  (14th  Februarj') 
1272,  when  the  granter  in  person  eudowed  the  churcli, 24 

15.  Grant  by  Hugh,  (de  Sigillo,)  Bishop  of  Dunkeld,  to  the  church  of  St.  Mary 
of  Stirling,  and  the  cauous  serviug  God  there,  professing  the  rule  of  St. 
Augustiue,  confirmiug  the  grant  of  the  church  of  Alveth  made  to  them 
by  Richard  and  Johu,  his  predecessors,  aud  extending  that  grant  so 
as  to  enable  the  canons  to  apply  the  fruits  of  the  said  church  to  their 
own  private  use,  as  they  should  deem  most  expedient ;  aud  empowering 
them  to  present  to  the  bishops  of  Dunkeld  and  their  successors  chap- 
laius  who  should  serve  the  said  church  for  the  time,  aud  be  answerable 
to  the  bishop  for  the  care  of  the  people,  but  should  accouut  for  the  tem- 
poralities  of  the  church  to  the  canons  if  they  preferred  it.      \circa  1 180,1        '25 

IC.  Charter  by  Kiug  William  (the  Liou,)  granting  and  confirmiug  to  the 
church  of  St.  Mary  of  Stirliug,  aud  to  the  cauons  serviug  God  there, 
the  church  of  Alveth,  with  the  teinds  of  every  kind  and  all  the  just 
pertineuts  of  the  said  church  :  To  be  held  as  freely  aud  peaceably,  in  free 
and  perpetual  alms,  as  their  other  churches  were  held.  Giveu  at  Stirliug, 
[circa  1180,] 2(j 

17.  Notarial  Instrumcut  narratiug  an  appeal  to  tlie  Apostolic  see  by  William 
of  Blackburn,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  for  himself  aud  his  Abbey,  crav- 
ing  dimissory  letters  on  the  ground  that  Robert,  Bishop  of  Dunkeld,  had 
persouaUy  visited  the  churches  of  Lecro  (Lecropt)  aud  Alveth  ou  the 
17th  aud  18th  January  precediug,  with  a  large  train,  the  expense  of 
the  visitation  being  defrayed  by  the  appeUant  and  his  abbey  on  account 
of  procuration,  and  that,  uotwithstanding,  the  bishop  by  his  letters-patent 
ordered  the  whole  fruits  of  the  said  churches  to  be  sequestrated  in  the 
hands  of  laymen,  and  on  the  9th  Febmary  then  current  had  warned  John 
of  Couynghame  and  John  of  Zare,  the  receivers  of  said  fruits,  to  collect 
them  in  future  and  keep  them  in  their  own  hands,  accouuting  to  uo  one  for 
them,  except  for  the  necessary  expeuses  for  the  service  of  the  said  churches, 
and  to  answer  faithfully  to  the  Bishop  himself  for  the  rest,  upon  paiu  of 


326 


ABSTBAGT  OF  THE  REGISTER 


excommimication  ;  and  had  also  wanied  tlie  parocliial  clnaplains  of  the  said 
churches  not  to  perform  divine  service  within  the  same  beyond  flfteeu 
days  from  that  date  ;  and  likewise  that  they  should  reside  near  their 
churches,  and  have  manses  or  lodgings  to  reside  in  before  the  Feast  of 
Easter  next  thereafter,  although  the  church  of  Lecro  never  had  a 
manse  attached  thereto,  and  the  appellant  had  no  ground  on  which  to 
erect  one  :  in  consequence  of  all  which  proceedings  the  appellant  felt 
that  himself  and  his  abbey,  chaplains,  and  receivers  of  fruits  foresaid, 
■were  unduly  oppressed  by  the  Bishop.  Done  in  the  parish  church  of 
Perth,  13th  February  1394, 


2G 


1 8.  Charter  by  King  William  (the  Lion)  to  the  church  of  St.  Mary  of  Stirling, 

and  to  the  canons  serviug  God  there,  of  a  fuU  toft  in  the  King's  burgh 
above  Harth  (Airth)  :  To  be  held  in  free  and  pure  and  perpetual  alms  as 
freely  as  any  religious  house  held  any  toft  in  the  King's  foresaid  burgh 
above  Harth.     Dated  at  Stirling,  29th  September,  \circa  1214,]    29 

19.  Letters  by  Henry  (Wardlaw,)  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  to  the  parish  chaplain 

of  the  cliurch  of  Claekmannan,  wherein,  after  narrating  that  the  parish- 
ioners  of  that  church  had,  notwithstanding  repeated  applications  from 
the  Bishop,  refused  to  contriliuto  towards  the  repairs  of  the  ehurch, 
alleging  as  their  reason  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  lordship  of  Alway 
(AUoa)  would  not  contribute  along  with  them,  he  states  that,  after 
full  discussion  of  the  niatter  with  persons  of  skill,  he  had  found  that 
those  dwelHng  on  the  lord.ship  of  Alway  were  bound  to  contribute  along 
with  the  rest  of  the  parishioners  for  the  repairs  of  the  church  of  Clack- 
manuan,  and  therefore  charges  the  chaplain  to  warn  the  parishioners,  and 
especially  those  residing  on  the  lands  of  Alway,  to  begin  the  repairs  of 
the  said  church  within  thirty  days,  and  to  continue  until  they  vvere  fully 
executed,  on  pain  of  excommunication ;  and  directs  that,  in  the  event  of 
the  recusants  lying  luider  excoraraunication  for  niue  days,  with  hardened 
miuds,  the  church  of  Clackmannan,  and  the  chapels  and  oratories  within 
the  parish  should  be  placed  under  ecclesiastical  interdict,  and  that  no 
divine  service  should  be  performed  or  sacraments  administered  within  the 
same,  excepting  the  absolution  of  the  dying  and  the  baptism  of  infauts. 
Datedat  St.  Andrews,  20th  May  1409, 29 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETn. 


20.  Letters  of  Acquittance  by  Kiug  James  (the  Foiirth,)  under  the  Great  Seal,  to 
Henry,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  for  all  sums  of  money,  compositions, 
■wards,  reliefs,  marriages,  extracts  of  Justiciary  and  Exchequer,  fines  of 
slieriff  and  bailie  courts,  and  for  all  his  other  intromissions  while  he  held 
tlie  office  of  Treasurer  to  his  Majesty,  of  all  which  intromissions  he  had 
rendered  a  good,  full  and  faitbful  account  :  The  King  also  acknowledges 
the  receipt  of  all  jewels,  precious  stones,  golJ  and  silver,  coined  and 
uncoined,  and  of  all  goods  whatsoever  committed  to  the  Abbofs  custody 
as  treasurer  foresaid.     Dated  at  Stirling,  IGth  August  1495, 


.327 


31 


Notarial  Instrument,  narrating  that  Patrick,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth, 
in  his  own  uame,  and  on  behalf  of  his  Abbey  and  convent,  appeared 
in  presence  of  a  notary  and  witnesses,  and  gave  in  to  be  received  by  the 
notary  a  decreet-arbitral,  dated  6th  April  1401,  by  David  Flemyng,  lord 
of  Bigar,  John  of  Levingstoun,  lord  of  Calentar,  kniglits,  and  others,  as 
arbiters  chosen  in  a  cause  moved  between  the  said  Abbot  and  convent, 
on  the  one  part,  and  Sir  Thomas  of  Erskin,  knight,  lord  of  that  Ilk,  on 
the  other  part,  rcspeeting  the  service  of  the  chapel  of  Alway,  which 
Sir  Thomas  declared  should  be  performed  for  the  said  chapel  by  the  Abbot, 
as  perpetual  vicar  of  Clackmannan,  whereby  the  arbiters  ordained  that 
the  Abbot  and  convent  should  consent  that  the  canon  or  priest  serving 
in  the  vicarage  of  Clackmaiman  should  serve  in  the  chapel  ou  Lord's 
days  and  festival  days,  in  the  manner  hitherto  in  use,  if  the  license  of 
the  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews  was  procured  by  Sir  Thomas  and  the  inha- 
bitants  of  his  lordship,  and  others  frequenting  the  cbapel.  Done  at 
Cambuskenneth,  in  the  chapter  house  thereof,  ISthMay  1-tOl,   


32 


Charter  by  Margaret  Berclay,  lady  of  the  frank  tenement  of  the  lands  and 
barouy  of  Arringrosk,  Andrew  Murray,  knight,  her  spouse,  and  David 
Miu-ray,  knight,  their  son,  lord  of  the  fee  of  the  said  barony,  for  the  praise, 
glory,  and  honour  of  tiie  indivisible  Trinity,  the  most  glorious  Virgin,  and 
St.  Columba  the  Abbot,  patron  of  the  parish  church  of  Arringrosk,  grant- 
ing  and  confirming  to  God,  the  Virgin  Mary  and  St.  Columba,  and  to  Sir 
William  Mailuile,  priest,  and  his  successors  performing  masses  at  the  said 
church,  an  annualrent  of  fourteen  merks  from  the  said  lands  and  barony 


ARHINGROSK. 


328 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  REGISTER 


ARRINGROSK. 


of  Amngrosk,  and  from  any  part  tliereof,  for  the  support  of  tlie  said  Sir 
William  and  bis  suocessors,  chaplains  there  ;  also  two  acres  of  land  adjoin- 
ing  the  cemetery  of  the  said  church,  on  the  south  side  of  the  road  leading 
from  the  cemetery  to  the  town  of  Arringrosk,  for  the  manse,  gardens  and 
buildings  of  the  said  Sir  William  and  his  foresaids,  for  performing  masses 
for  the  souls  of  King  James  the  Fouvth,  aud  of  his  most  noble  progeni- 
tors  and  successors,  and  for  the  souls  of  tlie  granters  and  of  their  parents, 
their  ancestors,  and  their  heirs  and  suocessors,  and  of  all  the  faithful 
dead  :  To  be  held  by  the  said  Sir  William  Mailuile,  aud  his  foresaids,  in 
pure  and  perpetual  ahns  and  in  property  for  ever,  as  freely  as  any  annual- 
rent  or  any  land  was  or  could  be  held  by  any  one  for  pious  uses  within 
the  realm  of  Scotlaud,  on  condition  of  perforraing  masses,  etc,  at  the 
high  altar  of  the  said  parish  churoh :  Provided  that  if  in  course  of  time 
divine  worship  should  be  celebrated  in  the  church  with  greater  pomp,  and 
the  servioes  should  bc  performed  with  the  Gregorian  chant  or  in  coUegiate 
form,  the  said  Sir  William  and  his  sucoessors  should  be  prepared  to  sing 
•with  the  others,  and  to  live  in  oollege  with  them ;  provided  also  that  the 
chaplains  should  be  oonstantly  resident,  the  granters  reserving  power  to 
themselves  and  their  heirs,  if  a  chaplain  should  be  absent  for  one  month 
in  the  whole  year,  even  at  different  times,  to  appoint  another  chaplain 
of  suitable  qualiiioations  in  literature  and  Gregorian  singing, — the  Abbot 
of  Cambuskenneth  having  power  to  appoint,  in  case  the  chapLainry 
remained  vacant  for  forty  days.  Dated  at  Cambuskenneth,  and  at  Bal- 
ward,  Ist  October  1527, 34 


23.  Bull  by  Pope  Eugene  (the  Third),  directed  to  William,  Abbot  of  the  churoh 
of  St.  Mary  of  Stirling,  and  the  friars  regular  thereof,  iu  which  his 
Holiness,  moved  by  the  petition  of  Piobert,  Prior  of  St.  Andrews,  takes 
the  said  church  under  his  own  protection  and  that  of  St.  Peter,  and 
ordains  that  the  oanonical  order  of  Arrosia,  instituted  there  by  the  said 
Abbot,  with  the  counsel  and  assistance  of  Kobert,  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews, 
Bhould  be  inviolably  preserved  for  ever,  and  confirms  to  the  Abbot  and 
convent  all  the  possessions  and  goods  whioh  they  have  or  may  acquire 
by  the  permission  of  puntiffs,  by  the  liberality  of  kings  and  prinoes,  or 
by  the  oflferings  of  the  faithful ;  namiug  partioularly  the  land  of  Dum- 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


329 


bodelin,  witli  the  waters,  and  the  land  of  Cambuakenneth,  with  the  fish- 
ing  and  net  in  the  water,  and  the  land  of  Collyn,  with  the  wood  and 
the  teind  of  the  King's  lordships  of  Stirling,  and  forty  shillings  of  the 
Kiug's  rents  and  the  cane  of  one  ship  :  forbidding  all  disturbance  of  the 
said  church  or  abstraetion  of  its  possessions,  aud  threatening  those  who 
contravene  the  bull  with  everlasting  perdition.  Dated  at  Altisiodore,  the 
third  day  before  the  calends  of  September  (30th  August),  1147, 38 


•2i.  Bidl  by  Pope  Alesander  (the  Third),  directed  to  Alfred,  Abbot  of  the 
church  of  Stirling,  and  the  friars  regular  thereof,  taking  the  said  church 
under  his  own  protection  and  that  of  St.  Peter,  and  confirming  to  the 
Abbot  and  friars  and  their  successors  all  the  possessions  and  goods 
which  theu  belonged  to  the  said  church,  or  which  it  might  in  future 
acquire  by  the  permission  of  pontifis,  by  the  liberality  of  kings  or 
princes,  or  by  the  oS^erings  of  tlie  faithfid  ;  naming  in  particular  the 
church  of  Clackmannan  with  forty  acres  of  land  ;  the  priesfs  toft 
in  the  said  town  ;  the  church  of  Egglyge,  by  the  gift  of  the  King  of 
Scots  ;  the  town  of  Ketilstoim,  with  its  pertinents,  and  the  teinds  of  aU 
the  King's  pleas  and  gains  of  Stirling  and  of  Stirlingshire,  and  of  Calentare 
(Callander)  ;  one  toft  ia  the  King's  burgh  of  Stirling,  another  toft  in 
Linlithgow,  and  the  liberties  and  customs  granted  to  them  and  their 
people  by  tlie  said  Kiug  ;  fifty  shiUings  of  the  cane  of  Perth  ;  the  mill 
of  Clackmannan,  except  the  multure  of  the  King's  table  as  often 
as  he  came  to  that  town,  and  the  multure  of  the  private  table  of  the 
provost  of  that  town  ;  the  land  of  Carabuskenneth  ;  the  fishing  between 
the  said  land  and  Polmase,  and  one  net  in  the  water  ;  also  the  land  of 
CoUyu,  with  the  wood  and  pertinents ;  the  land  of  Tulybethwyn,  which 
is  between  the  water  of  the  said  land  and  the  land  of  Logyn ;  forty 
shilliugs  of  the  King's  rent  of  Stirling  and  the  cane  of  one  ship ;  one 
saltpit,  and  as  much  land  as  pertains  to  one  of  the  Kings  salt- 
pits ;  the  teind  of  his  lordships  of  Stirling ;  the  island  between 
Polmase  and  TiUibody  ;  one  fuU  toft  in  the  Kings  burgh  of  Inverketh- 
ing  ;  also  the  free  right  of  burial  in  that  place  to  those  who  desired  to 
be  interred  there,  unless  they  were  excommunicated  or  interdicted  per- 
sons, — reserving  the  right  of  parish  churches  :  Debarring  any  one  from 
42 


330 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  RE&ISTER 


presuming  to  exact  teinds  from  the  Abbot  and  friars,  in  respect  of  fallow 
lands  in  their  own  liands,  or  of  food  for  theii-  beasts;  and  providing  that 
on  the  death  of  an  abbot  no  one  should  be  appointed  by  craft  or  violence, 
but  that  one  should  be  chosen  by  the  friars,  or  the  more  prudent  part 
of  them,  according  to  the  nde  of  St.  Augustine ;  forbidding  all  disturb- 
ance  of  the  said  church,  or  abstraction  of  its  possessions,  and  threatening 
with  excommuuication  and  the  Divine  wrath  any  one  who  should  con- 
travene  the  bull.     Dated  at  Siena,  the  nones  (5th)  of  December  11 04, 


Bull  by  Pope  Celestine  (the  Third),  directed  to  Nicholas,  Abbot  of  the  chiu^ch 
of  St.  Mary  of  Stirling,  and  the  friars  regular  thereof,  declaring  that  he 
toolf  the  said  church  under  his  own  proteetion  and  that  of  St.  Peter,  and 
confirming  to  them  and  their  successors  all  the  possessions  theu  belong- 
ing  to  the  said  church,  or  which  it  might  in  future  acquire,  naming  in 
particular  the  site  of  the  chiuvh  ;  the  town  of  Cambuskenneth,  the  land 
of  Collyn,  the  land  of  Carsyn  and  Badyndeth,  with  the  wood  assigned  to 
them  ;  Tulibotheuyn  ;  the  island  called  Rcdinche,  between  Tulybotheuyn 
andPoImase;  the  town  of  Ketilstoune,  witb  the  mill;  the  landwhich  lies 
on  the  bank  of  the  Forth  between  Pulmille  and  the  road  leading  down 
from  Stirling  to  the  ships ;  a  full  toft  in  the  burgh  of  Stirling,  and 
another  toft  in  the  burgh  of  Linlithgow ;  the  cane  of  one  ship  at  Stir- 
ling  ;  one  net  in  the  water  of  Forth  ;  twenty  "  cudrumis  "  of  cheese  from 
the  King's  rent  at  Stirling  ;  forty  shillings  from  his  Blajesty^s  rents  in 
that  town ;  one  saltpit,  and  as  much  land  as  pertains  to  one  of  the 
King's  saltpits  ;  the  church  of  Clackmannan,  with  forty  acres  of  land, 
and  with  its  chapels  and  the  chaplain's  toft  in  the  town  of  Clack- 
mannan  ;  the  fishiugs  of  Carsyn  and  of  Tulybotheuyn  ;  certain  privileges 
with  respect  to  tolls  and  customs ;  the  fishing  between  Cambuskenneth 
and  Polmase;  the  half  of  the  hides,  fat  and  taUow  of  the  animals 
slaughtered  for  the  Iving  at  Stirling — the  gifts  of  King  David  :  the 
mUI  of  Clackmannan,  excepting  the  multure  of  the  King's  table,  as  often 
as  he  should  come  to  the  said  town,  and  excepting  the  multure  of  the 
table  of  the  King's  provost  in  the  said  town  ;  and  fifty  shiUings  of  the 
cane  of  Perth — the  gifts  of  King  Malcolm  :  one  fuU  toft  in  the  town  of 
Perth  ;  the  church  of  Kynclethuyne  (Kinclaven),  with  its  lands  and  other 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


331 


pertinents  ;  tbe  church  of  Tulycultri ;  the  church  of  Kincardin,  with  the 
land  assigned  thereto  ;  tlie  church  of  Glennylefe  (Glenisla) — tlie  gifts  of 
King  William  :  one  full  toft  in  the  burgh  of  Carraill,  aud  a  half  caru- 
cate  of  land,  with  common  pasturage,  in  Petcorthyn,  and  one  merk  of 
silver  of  her  rent  of  Carel ;  and  one  fuU  toft  in  the  burgh  of  Had- 
ingtoun — the  gifts  of  the  Countess  Ada  :  the  church  of  Egglis,  with 
the  chapels  of  Dunypas  (Dunipace)  and  of  Lethberth  (Larbert),  and 
its  other  chapels  and  oratories — the  gift  of  Robert,  Bishop  of  St. 
Andrews  :  the  churoh  of  Alweth — the  gift  of  Richard,  Bisbop  of  Dun- 
keld  :  one  full  toft  in  the  burgh  of  Renfrew,  aud  one  fishing  in  the  water 
of  the  saiJ  town — the  gift  of  Alan,  son  of  Walter  :  a  half  carucate  of 
land,  with  the  meadow  belouging  to  the  same,  in  Balcormok,  and  pas- 
turage  of  five  hundred  sheep,  and  twenty  cows,  and  one  yoke  of  oxen — 
the  gift  of  Philip  of  Lundyn  and  his  son  Walter  :  one  carucate  of  land 
in  the  town  of  Bynnyn — the  gift  of  William  of  Lindesay  :  the  church 
of  Kirkintulach,  with  a  half  carucate  of  land  granted  and  confirmed  by 
Jocelin,  Bishop  of  Glasgow,  and  William,  son  of  Thorold,  and  confirmed 
by  the  King  :  and  two  oxgates  of  the  land  of  Donypas  —  the  gift  of 
Gilbert  of  Umfraville  :  This  bull  also  forbids  any  one  to  exact  teinds 
from  the  Abbot  and  friars  in  respect  of  fallow  lands  in  their  own  hands 
or  of  food  for  their  beasts,  and  grants  them  the  privilege  of  oSVring 
an  asylum  to  those  fleeing  from  the  world  ;  aud  it  prohibits  the  brethren 
leaving  the  abbey  after  profession,  without  permission  of  the  Abbot, 
except  for  the  purpose  of  entering  a  convent  of  stricter  rules.  It  grants 
to  the  Abbot  and  friars  the  right  of  choosing  priests  for  their  parish 
churches,  and  presenting  them  to  the  bisbop  of  the  diocese  for  induction, 
if  found  qualified,  and  to  tbe  friars  the  right  of  choosing  their  abbots  ; 
also  the  right  of  free  burial  in  that  place  to  such  as,  from  feelings 
of  devotion,  should  desire  to  be  interred  there.  Dated  at  the  Lateran, 
the  third  day  before  the  ides  (13tb)  of  May  1195, 42 


26.  BuU  by  Pope  Innocent  (the  Tbird),  directed  to  the  Abbot  and  canons  of  St. 
Mary  of  Cambuskenneth,  declaring  that  he  took  the  said  church  under  his 
own  protection  and  tbat  of  St.  Peter,  and  confirming  to  the  said  Abbot 
and  canons  aU  the  goods  then  belonging  to  them,  or  which  they  might  in 


332 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  REGISTER 


future  acquire  ;  and,  particularly,  the  church  of  Kirketoun  and  the  church 
of  Clackmanan,  with  the  chapels,  teinds,  lauds,  and  all  their  pertiuents  ; 
also  the  church  of  Kincletheuin,  the  church  of  Tulycultrane,  the  church 
of  Kincardin,  the  cliurch  of  Bhxire,  the  church  of  Glenilef,  the  church  of 
Alueth,  the  church  of  Kirkintulach,  the  church  of  Crelyn,  the  church  of 
Tulebotheuin,  with  all  the  possessions  and  pertinents  thereof ;  the  town  of 
Cambuskenneth  and  the  town  of  Ketellestun,  with  the  mill  thereof :  the 
land  of  Collin,  tho  land  of  Carsin  and  of  Badendath,  with  the  wood 
thereof ;  Tulybotheuin,  and  the  island  which  is  called  Redinche,  situated 
between  Tulybotheuin  and  Polmase  ;  the  land  near  the  bank  of  the  Forth 
between  PulmOna  and  the  road  leading  down  from  Stirling  to  the 
ships ;  one  full  toft  in  the  burgh  of  Stirling,  and  another  toft  in 
Linlithgow ;  the  cane  of  one  ship  at  Stirling  ;  one  net  in  the  water 
of  Forth  ;  twenty  "  cudermis  "  of  cheese  of  the  King's  rent  at  Stirling  ; 
one  saltpit  and  as  much  land  as  pertains  to  one  of  the  Kings  saltpits  ; 
the  fishings  of  Carsin  and  of  Tulebotheuin  ;  the  immunities  in  regard  to 
tolls  and  customs  which  King  David  and  his  successors  granted  to  the 
monks  and  the  people  of  their  lordships  ;  forty  shillings  of  the  King's 
rent  iu  Stirling;  the  fishing  between  Cambuskeuneth  and  Polmase;  the 
half  of  the  hides,  fat  aud  tallow  of  auimals  slaughtered  for  the  King 
at  Stirling ;  the  mill  of  Clackmannan  ;  fifty  shillings  of  the  King's  cane 
at  Perth,  one  full  toft  iu  the  same  town,  and  one  full  toft  in  the  burgh 
of  Karel ;  a  half  carucate  of  land  with  common  pasturage  in  Petcorthin  ; 
one  full  toft  in  Haddington;  one  merk  of  silver  in  Karel;  the  teinds  of  all 
the  King's  pleas  and  proflts  of  Stirling  and  Stirlingshire  and  of  Kalentar ; 
the  teinds  of  the  farm  (or  rent)  of  the  King's  lordships  of  Stirlingshire  ; 
one  full  toft  in  Pieufrew,  and  one  fishing  in  the  water  of  the  said  town  ; 
the  whole  land  of  Duueglin  ;  one  carucate  of  land  in  Byning  ;  four  oxgates 
of  the  land  of  Lundin,  with  the  meadow  and  easements  thereof ;  one  toft 
in  the  burgh  of  Ayr  ;  two  oxgates  of  land  in  Donypas,  and  two  oxgates 
of  land  in  the  town  of  Innermethiu.  Given  at  the  Lateran,  the  day 
before  the  nones  (Cth)  of  May,  iu  the  teuth  year  of  the  Pope's  Pontificate, 
[1207,]     


•27.  Bull  by  Pope  Innocent  (the  Third),  dii-ected  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


333 


Cambuskeimeth,  confimiing  all  the  liberties  and  privileges  granted  to 
them  by  his  predecessors,  Romau  Pontiffs  ;  and  also  the  liberties  and 
exemptions  from  secular  exactions  reasouably  granted  to  them  by  kiugs 
and  larinces,  and  other  faithful  persons.  Dated  at  Lyous,  the  sixth 
day  before  the  calends  of  Augiist  (27th  July),  in  the  fourtli  year  of  tlie 
Pope's  Pontificate,  [1201,] 48 

28.  Bull  by  Pope  Clemeut  (thc  Fourth),  directed  to  the  Abbot  and  couvent  of 

the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth,  grantiug  to  them  the  privilege  of  claiming, 
receiving,  and  freely  retainiug,  saviug  the  rights  of  third  parties,  the 
possessions  and  other  goods,  moveable  and  immoveable,  of  the  brethren  of 
the  convent,  accruing  to  them  by  succession,  or  any  other  just  title  by 
which  such  persons  themselves  could  have  possessed  them  had  they 
remaiued  in  the  world.  Dated  at  Poictiers,  the  fifteenth  day  before 
the  calends  of  February  (18th  Jauuary),  in  the  third  year  of  the  Pope's 
Pontificate,  [1268,]    49 

29.  BuII  by  Pope  Clement  (the  Fourth),  directed  to  the  Abbot  and  couvent  of 

the  Abbey  of  Cambuskeuneth,  taking  under  his  protection  and  that  of 
St.  Peter  their  persons  and  the  place  of  which  they  were  in  possession, 
with  all  the  goods  which  belonged,  or  which  should  iu  future  belong, 
to  them ;  and,  especially,  oonfirmed  to  them  by  his  apostolic  authority 
the  lands,  possessions,  houses,  meadows,  pastures,  woods,  fishings,  farms, 
and  other  property  belonging  to  them.  Dated  at  Poictiers,  the  noues 
(Sth)  of  January,  in  the  third  year  of  the  Pope's  Pontificate,  [1268,]  ...       50 

■jO.  BuU  by  Pope  Clement  (the  Fourth),  directed  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  the 
Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth,  by  which,  in  consequence  of  a  statement  made 
to  him  on  their  behalf,  to  the  efiect  thatsome  clergymen  and  ecclesiastics, 
both  regidar  and  secular,  and  lajiuen,  alleging  ground  of  questiou  against 
the  said  Abbot,  presumed,  uuder  pretext  of  eustom,  to  seize,  keep  in 
pledge  and  detain,  sometimes  the  canons,  sometimes  the  converts,  and 
the  animals  and  other  goods  of  the  said  abbey  until  such  questions  were 
settled  to  their  satisfaction,  his  Holiness  debarred  all  persons  from  molest- 
ing  those  connected  with  the  said  abbey  in  their  persons  or  property, 
except  by  order  of  law.     Dated  at  Poictiers,  the  fifteenth  day  before  the 


334 


ABSTBAGT  OF  THE  BEGISTER 


calends  of  February  (18th  January),  in  the  third  year  of  the  Pope's 
Pontificate,  [12G8,]  50 

31.  Bull  by  Pope  lunocent  (the  Third),  directed  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cam- 

buskenneth,  by  which,  at  the  request  of  the  beloved  son  of  William  of 
Liudesay,  and  of  other  messengers  of  his  dearest  son  in  Christ,  the  illustrious 
King  of  Scots,  his  Holiness,  anxious  to  provide  for  the  future  peace  of  the 
Abbot  and  convent,  and  of  their  church,  granted  tliat  they  should  not  be 
compelled  to  receive  or  to  provide  in  pensions  or  other  ecclesiastical 
benefices  any  one,  even  by  the  authority  of  the  apostolic  see,  without 
a  special  mandate  of  the  said  see  making  mention  of  this  indulgenee. 
Dated  at  Lyonc,  the  sixth  day  before  the  calends  of  August  (27th  July), 
in  the  fourth  year  of  the  Pope's  Pontificate,  [1201,]    51 

32.  Bull  by  Pope  Benedict  (the  Thirteenth),  directed  to  Patrick  the  Abbot  and 

to  tlie  convent  of  the  Abbey  of  Caml)uskenneth,  granting  to  the  Abbot 
and  his  successors  the  right  freely  to  use  the  mitre,  seal-ring,  and  other 
pontifical  insignia,  and  likewise  to  bestow  the  solemn  benediction  after 
mass  and  after  vespers  and  matins  in  the  abbey  and  the  priories  sub- 
ject  thereto,  and  in  parochial  and  other  churches,  though  not  fuUy  subject 
to  them,  when  there  was  no  bishop  or  legate  of  the  apostolic  see  pre- 
sent.  Dated  at  Saone,  the  eleventh  day  before  the  calends  of  April 
(22d  March),  in  the  twelfth  year  of  the  Pope's  Pontificate,  [1406,] 52 

33.  BuU  by  Pope  Clement  (the  Seventh),  directed  to  the  Bishop  of  Glasgow, 

setting  forth  that  it  had  come  to  the  hearing  of  his  Holiness  that  the 
Abbot  and  convent  of  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth  and  their  predecessors 
had  granted  teinds,  rents,  lands,  houses,  granges,  fishings,  meadows, 
pastures,  mills,  pensions,  and  other  property  belonging  to  the  Abbey,  to 
sundry  clergymen  and  laymen,  to  some  in  liferent,  to  others  on  long 
lease,  and  to  some  for  ever,  to  the  great  injury  of  the  Abbey,  and 
charging  the  Bishop  to  revoke,  by  apostolic  authority,  all  such  grants 
as  he  should  find  to  have  been  illegally  made.  Dated  at  Avignon,  the 
third  day  before  the  calends  of  March  (27th  February),  in  the  second 
year  of  the  Pope's  Pontificate  [1380,] 53 

34.  Bull  by  Pope  Clement  (the  Seventh),  direoted  to  the  Abbot  of  the  Monastery  of 

Cambuskenneth,  in  consequence  of  a  petition  by  the  latter  setting  forth 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


335 


that  some  canons  and  converts  of  the  said  abbey  for  violent  laying  of 
hands  on  themselves,  and  some  for  the  detention  of  property,  others  for 
refusiug  obedience  to  the  Abbot  aud  his  predecessors,  or  for  conspiracy, 
had  been  excommunicated,  giving  power  to  the  Abbot  to  absolve  such 
persons  from  the  sentence  of  excommunication,  with  the  exceptiou  of  tlie 
said  layers  on  of  hands,  •who  were  to  be  sent  to  the  apostolic  see  for 
absolution.  Dated  at  Poictiers,  the  nones  (Sth)  of  January,  in  the  third 
j-ear  of  thePope's  Pontificate,  [1381,] 5-i 

35.  Bull  by  Pope  Eugene  (the  Fourth),  directed  to  the  Bishop  of  Dunblane,  setting 

forth  that  it  bad  come  to  the  hearing  of  his  Holiness  that  Patrick,  Abbot 
of  Cambuskenneth,  and  his  predecessors  had  granted  teinds,  lands,  houses, 
privileges,  farms,  fishings,  castles,  towns,  cottages,  meadows,  woods,  mills, 
rents,  and  other  property  belongiug  to  tbe  abbey,  to  certain  clergy  and 
laymen,  to  some  in  liferent,  to  some  on  long  lease,  and  to  others  for  ever, 
in  farra  or  for  an  annual  payment,  to  the  great  injury  of  the  abbey,  and 
charging  the  Bishop  to  revoke  all  such  grants  as  he  should  find  to  have 
been  illegally  made.  Dated  at  St.  Peter's,  at  Rome,  the  day  before  the 
nones  (-Ith)  of  June,  1433,    oo 

36.  Charter  by  Walter,  son  of  Philip  of  Lundin,  granting  to  the  Abbot  aud  canons 

of  the  church  of  St.  Mary  of  Stirling,  four  osgates  of  land,  with  a  fidl 
toft  in  the  town  of  Balcormok,  and  common  pasturage  of  the  granters 
whole  land,  whoever  might  hold  it,  wherever  his  own  animals  or  those 
of  his  servants  grazed,  namely,  for  500  sheep  and  20  cows  and  one 
yoke  of  oxen,  and  horses  and  others  belongiug  thereto,  aud  the  proper 
multure  of  the  lordship,  and  three  acres  of  meadow,  as  the  granter  had 
perambulated  them,  for  the  welfare  of  his  soul  aud  the  souls  of  his  father 
and  his  ancestors  :  To  be  held  of  the  granter  and  his  heirs  in  perpetual 
alms  as  free  from  all  secular  service  as  auy  alms  in  the  whole  laud. 
[circa  1178,]    56 

37.  Charter  by  Thomas,  son  of  Walter  of  Lundiu,  confirmiug  to  the  Abbot  aud 

canons  of  the  church  of  St.  Mary  of  Stirling  the  four  oxgates  of  land, 
with  the  toft  in  the  towu  of  Balcormok,  and  others  meutioued  iu  the 
immediately  preceding  charter.     [1195-1214,]  oQ 


B.\LCORMOK. 


33G 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  EEGISTER 


BALCORMOKi  38.  Charter  of  Confirmation  by  King  William  (the  Lion)  of  the  charter  No. 
36,  siipra,  by  Walter,  son  of  Philip  of  Luntlin,  to  the  canons  of  the 
church  of  St.  Mary  of  Stirling,  of  four  oxgates  of  land  with  the  toft  in 
Balcormok,  etc.     Dated  at  Stirling,  [1180-1214,] 57 

39.  Charter  in  the  form  of  Indenture  by  Jolm  of  LonJon,  Mayor  of  Berwii'k-on- 
Tweed,  settiug  fortli  that  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth  had 
received  annually  in  times  of  peace,  and  were  entitled  to  receive,  from  a 
certain  piece  of  land  in  St.  Mary's  Street  in  the  town  of  Berwick,  lying 
between  the  land  of  the  deceased  Thomas  Stremiston  on  the  west  part,  and 
the  land  of  the  deceased  William  Caldronar  on  the  east  part,  twenty  shil- 
lings  sterling,  anciently  granted  to  them  in  pure,  free,  and  perpetual  alms  ; 
that  a  dispute  had  arisen  between  the  monks  and  James  of  Colonia,  their 
tenant  of  the  said  land,  respecting  this  payment,  which  had  not  been 
made  for  some  years  on  account  of  the  disturbance  occasioned  by  the  war 
between  England  and  Scotland,  through  which  the  value  of  the  land  had 
been  so  greatly  diminished  that  it  yielded  not  more  than  26s.  8d.  yearly  ; 
and  that  this  dispute  had  been  settled  by  the  Abbot  and  convent  agree- 
ing,  in  consequence  of  this  diminution,  to  remit  to  James  of  Colonia  the 
whole  of  the  arrears  of  rent,  and  to  accept  from  him  aud  Thomas  Walker, 
his  tenant,  and  tlieir  heirs,  13s.  4d.  in  name  of  the  said  20s.  annually ; 
ProviJed  that,  in  the  event  of  the  rents  and  emoluments  of  the  said 
land  increasing  in  future  beyond  26s.  8d.  annually,  the  Abbot  and  con- 
vent  should  have  the  entire  half  of  such  increase  for  ever,  and  should 
have  a  share  of  whatever  possession,  lordship,  or  other  right  should 
accme  to  James,  his  heirs,  successors,  or  assignees  from  the  said  land, 
and  be  joint  lords  or  superiors  with  him  and  his  foresaids  thereof 
Dated  at  Berwick-upon-Tweed,  (20tb  October)  1324, 57 

40.  Duplicate  of  the  preccding  Indenture.  Dated  at  Berwick-on-TweeJ,  20th 
October  1324,  59 


BUTHKEXSER,  41.   Preccpt  by  King  Eobert  (the  Bruce),  directed  to  the  SherifF  and  hisbailies  of 

Stirling,  charging  them  to  cause  payment  to  be  maJe  to  the  Abbot  and 
convent  of  Cambuskenneth  of  the  teinJs  of  the  King's  fiirms  of  Buthken- 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


337 


ner  and  Athray,  both  in  grain  and  money,  by  the  hands  of  the  farmers  buthkenneb. 

thereof,  as  they  ■were  wont  to  receive  them  in  the  time  of  King  Alexander 

the  Third,  in  excambion  for  the  teinds  of  the  lordships  of  Stirling,  which 

were  originally  grantcd  to  the  Abbey  by  the  Kings  of  Scotland.     Dated 

at  Edinburgh,  17th  September,  in  the  twelfth  year  of  the  King's  reign. 

[1317,]     01 

42.  Precept  by  King  David  (the  Second),  directed  to  the  Sheriff'  and  his  bailies 

of  Stirling,  ratifying  and  confirming  a  precept  by  Kiug  Robert  the  First, 
dated  at  Perth,  19th  August,  in  the  tenth  year  of  the  King's  reign 
[1315],  for  the  annual  payment  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambus- 
kenneth  of  eight  pounds  of  silver  and  five  pence,  six  chalders  of  grain  from 
Bothkenner,  and  the  teinds  ofthe  farm  of  Atheray,  which  they  were  wont 
to  receive  in  the  time  of  Kiug  Alexander  tlie  Third,  in  excambion  for  the 
teinds  of  the  King's  lordships  of  Stirling,  and  charging  the  Sheriff  and  his 
bailies  to  cause  payment  to  be  made  in  terms  of  the  precept.  Dated 
at  Stirling  20th  November,  in  the  sixteenth  year  of  the  said  Kiug  David's 
reign,  [1341,]  (jl 

43.  Charter  by  William  More,  lord  of  Abercorne,  confirming  to  the  Abbot  and 

convent  of  St.  Mary  of  Cambuskenneth  the  charters  granted  to  them 
by  various  kings  of  Scotland  of  an  annual  rent  of  six  chalders  of  grain 
from  the  land  of  Bothkenner,  now  belonging  to  the  said  lord  heritably, 
and  granting  to  them  an  additional  chalder  of  annual  pension  in  augmen- 
tation  of  the  said  annual  rent  :  To  be  held  and  received  the  said  seven 
chalders  of  grain  by  the  Abbot  and  convent  from  the  granter  and  his 
heirs  and  assignees  as  freely  as  any  pure,  free,  and  perpetual  alms  is 
held,  and  to  be  of  as  good  winnowed  grain  as  grows  witliin  the  territory 
of  Bothkenner,  of  good  and  legal  measure,  to  be  carried  at  the  gTanter's 
expense,  and  delivered  to  the  servants  of  the  abbey  at  the  plaee  called 
the  Mouth  of  Caroun,  between  Easter  and  Whitsunday,  within  fifteen 
days  from  the  time  they  give  notice  that  they  wish  to  receive  the  same. 
Dated  at  Abercorn,  4th  October  1363, 62 

44.  Precept  by  King  James  (the  First),  directed  to  the  Sheriff  of  Stirling,  charging 

him  to  compel  the  inhabitants  of  the  lands  of  Bothkenner  duly  to  pay 

to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth  their  anuual  pension  of  seven 

43 


338 


JBSrRACT  OF  THE  REGISTER 


chalders  of  grain  from  thc  farms  of  the  said  lands.  Given  under  the 
Privy  Seal,  at  Edinburgh,  2d  Septeraber,  in  the  nineteenth  year  of  the 
King's  reign,  [1424,] 04 

45.  Charter  by  King  James  (the  First),  granting  to  tlie  Abbot  and  convent  of 
Cambuskenneth,  in  full  for  the  annual  pension  of  seven  chalders  of 
grain  which  they  claimed  from  the  King's  lands  of  Bothlcenner,  an 
annual  pension  of  five  chalders  of  grain  from  the  said  lands  :  To  be  held 
in  lieu  of  the  seven  chalders  anciently  claimed  by  them  and  their  suc- 
cessors,  in  pure  and  perpetual  alms,  and  in  feu  and  heritage  for  ever,  for 
ofl'ering  up  prayers  yearly  for  the  King  and  his  successors  :  This  charter 
concludes  with  a  precept  to  the  Sheriflf  of  Stirling  and  his  deputies  to 
c^use  payment  of  the  five  chalders  to  be  made  to  the  grantees  and  their 
.snccessors,  and  is  given  under  the  Great  Seal,  at  Stirliug,  23d  September 
1459,  04 

4  G.  Chartcr  by  William  (Jlalvoisine),  Bishop  of  St.  Andrev^s,  for  charity  and  for 
the  soul  of  King  William  (the  Liou),  granting  to  the  Abbot  and  canons  of 
Cambuskenneth  a  hundred  shillings  in  the  church  of  Blare  in  pure  and 
perpetual  alms,  to  be  paid  by  the  parson  of  tbe  said  church  of  Blare  as 
a  free  gift,  50  shillings  at  Whitsunday,  and  50  shillings  at  Martinmas. 
This  charter  ordaius  that  each  parson  of  the  church  of  Blare  should  be 
made  to  swear,  touching  the  sacred  emblems,  faitlifnlly  to  pay  tlie  abnve 
sum  yearly  to  the  canons.     [ctrca  1215,]    Go 

47.  Cluirter  of  Confirmation  by  the  Prior  of  St.  Andrews  of  the  preceding  charter 

by  William  (Malvoisine),  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  to  the  canons  of  Stirling, 
of  100  shillings  in  the  church  of  Blare,  to  be  paid  ycarly  by  the  parson 
of  the  church  of  Blair,  in  terms  thereof.     [cirea  1215,]  66 

48.  Bull  by  Pope  Innocent  the  Third  confirming  to  the  canonsof  Cambuskenneth 

the  preceding  grant  niade  to  tliem  by  William,  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews, 
of  an  annualrent  of  100  shillings  yearly  in  the  church  of  Blare. 
Dated  at  Viterbo,  9th  May,  in  the  nineteenth  year  of  the  Pope's  Ponti- 
ficate,  [1216,]  66 

49.  Charter  by  Williani  of  Kynmonde,  son  and  heir  of  Agnes,  daughter  of  the 

Jecease<I  Williani,  styled  of  Ketilistoune,  whereby,  of  his  mere  good-will. 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETII. 


and  for  the  welfare  of  the  souls  of  himself  aiifl  his  aneestors  aud  suc- 
cessors,  he  granted  and  resigned  the  wliule  land  of  Badindath,  with  all 
the  rights,  freedoms,  and  pertineuts  thereof,  and  all  right  and  claim  whicli 
he  or  his  heirs  or  suecessors  whomsoever  had  or  could  have  tliereto  to 
the  Abbot  aml  convent  of  Cambuskenneth,  the  true  lords  thereof ;  and 
all  right  which  he  had  to  the  eight  merks  which  he  used  to  reccive 
from  the  Abbot  aud  convent  ;  which  land  tbe  foresaid  Williani,  styled 
of  Ketilistoune,  the  granter's  graudf;ither,  held  of  the  Abbot  and 
convent  for  himself  and  one  heir  only,  the  eight  merks  being  held  for 
his  own  time  only  ;  and  likewise  the  granter  quitclaimed  for  himself 
and  his  heirs  and  successors,  in  favour  of  the  Abbot  and  convent, 
all  right  competent  to  them  in  the  lands  of  Ketilistoime,  Duglin 
and  Bynyne,  all  whieh  he  resigned  by  staft'  and  baton  on  the  eve  of 
St.  Luke  the  Evangelist,  in  the  tenement  of  Badindath,  in  a  full 
court  of  the  Abbot  and  convent  in  presence  of  many  barons,  to- 
gether  with  all  charters  and  instmments  made  to  him  and  his  ancestors 
thereupon,  so  that  the  Abbot  and  convent  might  hold  these  lands, 
and  be  free  from  the  paymeut  of  the  eight  merks  or  any  pension  or 
aunual  rent  for  ever  ;  granting  also,  that  if,  in  time  to  come,  any  instru- 
ment  should  be  found  or  exhibited  seeming  to  give  to  him  or  his  heirs  any 
right  to  the  said  lands  or  pension,  suoh  instrument  should  be  null 
and  void  ;  and  binding  himself  and  his  heirs  to  warrant  the  Abbot 
and  convent  against  the  act  of  any  person  who  should  in  future  make 
any  claim  to  the  lauds  or  pension  through  any  instrument  made  liefore 
the  date  of  this  resignation,  and  not  to  make  any  such  claim  themselves, 
under  a  penalty  of  £200  sterling,  to  be  paid  to  the  church  of  St. 
Andi-ews.  Done  in  the  tenement  of  Badindath,  on  the  eve  of  St.  Luke 
the  Evangelist,  [17th  October]  1282, 


BADINDATH 


50.  Charter  by  Malcolm  (the  Fourth),  King  of  Scots,  confirming  to  the  church  of 
St.  Mary  of  Stirling,  and  the  canons  thereof,  the  grants  made  to  the  said 
church  by  King  David  (the  First),  his  graudfather,  iu  free  alms  ;  namely, 
the  land  of  Cambuskenneth  and  the  fishing  between  the  said  land  and 
PoUemase,  and  oue  net  in  the  water  ;  the  land  of  CoUin,  with  the  wood 
belonging  thereto  ;  the  land  of  Tulibodeviu,  which  is  between  the  water 


CAMBUSKBNNETH, 


340 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  REGISTEB 


CAMBUSKENNETH.  of  the  said  land  and  the  land  of  Login  ;  forty  sbillings  of  the  King's  rent 
of  Stirling,  and  the  caue  of  oue  ship,  oue  saltpit,  aud  as  much  land  as 
belongs  to  one  of  the  Kiug's  saltpits  ;  the  teind  of  the  farm  of  his 
lordships  of  Stirling,  aud  the  offerings  made  ia  the  said  church  ;  the 
island  ■which  is  between  Polmase  and  Tulibodevin  ;  twenty  "  cudrinis"  of 
cheese  of  the  Kiug's  reut  of  Stirling,  and  the  same  liberty  and  custom 
which  he  had  granted  and  confirmed  to  the  other  churches  of  his  land  : 
To  be  possessed  by  the  preseut  and  future  incumbents  of  the  foresaid 
church  as  freely  and  peaceably  as  any  church  possessed  any  alms  or  pos 
session  in  his  whole  kingdom.      ^circa  1163,] 

•51.  Charter  by  King  David  (the  First),  with  consent  of  his  son  Henrj',  and  the 
conflrmation  of  the  bishops,  earls  and  barons  of  his  kingdom,  granting 
and  confirming  to  the  church  of  St.  Mary  of  Stirliug,  and  the  canons  regular 
thereof,  the  land  of  Cambuskenneth  aud  the  fishing  between  the  said  land 
and  PoIIemase  and  one  net  in  the  water  ;  also  the  lands  of  CoIIing  and 
Duubodevin  (Tulibodevin),  forty  shilliugs  of  the  Kiug's  rent  of  Stirling,  and 
others  specifiedin  the  preoeding  charter  by  KingMalcoIm.    [circa  1147,1 

.52.  Charter  by  King  William  (the  Lion),  confirming  to  the  chureh  of  St.  Mary 
of  Stirling  and  the  canons  thereof  the  grants  made  to  them  by  King 
David,  his  grandfather,  uamely,  the  land  of  Cambuskeuneth  and  fishing, 
and  whole  other  lands,  etc,  specified  in  Nos.  50  and  51,  supra,  also  the 
church  of  Clackmannan,  with  forty  acres  of  land,  and  the  priest's  toft 
in  the  same  town  and  the  easements  in  bush  and  plain  ;  the  teinds  of  the 
King's  pleas  and  profits  of  Stirling  and  of  Stirlingshire  and  CaUander,  and 
exemption  to  the  people  of  their  lordships  from  tolls  and  aU  rights  and 
customs,  and  the  enjoyment  of  firm  poace  wherever  they  came  iu  the  King'3 
whole  land  ;  confii-ming  also  the  grants  made  to  the  church  of  St.  Mary  by 
King  Malcolm,  his  brother,  namely,  the  whole  miU  of  Clackmannan,  except 
the  multure  of  the  King"s  royal  table,  as  often  as  there  was  a  grinding  for 
him  against  his  coming  to  that  town,  the  midture  of  the  private  table  of 
the  provost  of  the  said  town,  also  the  multure  and  suit  of  the  province 
of  Clackmannan,  with  the  other  rights  which  they  had  when  the  miU 
was  in  the  King's  own  hand  ;  a  full  toft  in  the  King's  burgh  of  Inver- 
keithing,  and  sixty  shillings  yearly  of  his  cane  of  Perth,  and  common 


Page 


71 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


341 


pasturage  for  the  cattle  of  the  abbaey  wherever  they  had  it  in  the 
tiine  of  King  David :  To  be  possessed  as  freely  aud  peaceably  as  any 
church  in  the  ■«•hole  lcingdora  possessed  any  alms  or  possession,  and  as 
the  charters  of  King  David  and  King  Malcolm  bore.     [circa  1168,]     ... 


CAMBUSKENNETH. 


72 


•53.  Charter  by  King  Alexander  (the  Seeond),  narrating  aud  confirming  the  pre- 
ceding  charter  by  King  William  (the  Lion),  his  father,  to  the  canons  uf 
Cambuskenneth,  of  the  land  of  Cambuslcenneth,  the  fishing  between  it 
and  Pollemase,  and  the  others  specified  in  No.  52.  Dated  at  Stirling, 
12th  February,  in  the  thirty-fifth  year  of  the  King's  reign,  [12-18,] 73 

54.  Precept  by  King  David  (the  Second),  to  the  Sherifi"  and  his  bailies  of  Stirling, 

narrating  that,  by  a  decree  of  his  Majesty"s  Council,  in  a  full  Parliament, 
held  at  Scone,  certain  burgesses  of  Stirling  were  found  to  have  violently 
attacked  and  broken  the  cruives  and  fishings  of  the  Abbot  and  convent  of 
Cambuskenneth,  to  the  offence  of  his  Majesty  and  the  loss  and  serious 
daraage  of  the  abbey,  and  charging  the  Sheriff  in  his  Jilajesty's  uame  to 
warn  and  compel  the  said  burgesses  within  forty  days,  to  replace  the 
cruives  and  fishings  as  they  were  before,  and  fuUy  satisfy  the  abbey  for 
the  damage,  expense  and  loss  which  they  had  caused  by  their  mis- 
chievous  conduct,  in  terms  uf  the  decree  of  Council.  Dated  at  Scone, 
27th  July,  in  the  thirty-.seventh  year  of  the  King's  reign,  [1365,]   75 

55.  List  of  the  Names  of  those  Burgesses  of  Stirling  who  attaoked  the  cruives 

and  fishings  belonging  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth. 
\circa  1 3G5,] 76 

56.  Letter  by  Brice,  Dean  of   Fife  and  of  Fothriff,    to    Sir  Patrick  Picard, 

rector  of  Torry,  stating  that,  being  occupied  with  many  and  divers 
aftairs  of  his  Bishop,  he  was  unable  to  give  to  Adam,  Abbot  of  Cambus- 
kenneth,  institution  into  the  vicarage  of  Clackmannan,  in  terms  of  the 
Bishop's  precept,  and  entreating  the  rector  to  go  personaUy  to  the 
vicarage  with  the  Abbot,  and  give  him  institution,  in  terms  of  the 
Bishop's  letter,  and  append  his  own  seal  to  the  precept,  in  testimony  of 
the  institution.  Written  under  the  Dean's  seal  of  oflice,  at  Cupar  FLfe, 
22dAugust  1350 77 


CLACKMANNAN. 


34S 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  REGISTER 


CLACKMANNAN. 


57.  Charter  by  King  David  (the  First),  confirming  to  the  Ahbot  of  Stirling  and 

canons  thereof  the  chureh  of  Clackmannan,  with  forty  acres  of  land 
and  the  priest's  toft  in  the  town,  the  teinds  of  all  the  King's  pleas  and 
profits  of  Stirling  and  of  Stirliugshire  and  Kalenter,  a  toft  in  the  burgh 
of  Stirling,  aud  another  toft  in  Linlitligow,  in  perpetual  alms,  as  free 
from  all  secular  service  as  any  ;dms  was  held  in  the  liingdom.  Dated 
at  Stirling,  [<inte  1153,] 77 

58.  Cliarter  by  William  of  Landale,   Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,   by  wliich,  con- 

sidering  the  depressed  condition  of  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth  caused 
by  the  dreadful  wars  which  had  raged  so  long  in  those  parts,  and  that 
the  abbey  had  been  so  plundered  that  the  canons  would  very  soon  be 
unable  to  exercise  hospitality  and  be  forced  to  beg  unless  assistance  were 
giveu  them,  the  Bishop  wishing,  so  far  as  he  was  able,  to  relieve  the 
abbey,  granted  and  coufirmed  to  the  Abbot  and  canous  thereof,  and  their 
suocessors,  the  entire  vicarage  of  Clackinaniian,  with  all  its  possessions, 
Iand.s,  fruits,  rents,  off^erings,  revenues,  and  other  rights  and  pertinents, 
to  be  converted  to  their  own  proper  use  ;  and  ordained  the  Abbot 
and  conveut  to  appoint  a  suitable  chaplain  to  perform  divine  worship 
in  the  same  ;  reserviug  to  himself  and  his  successors  and  to  the  Arch- 
deaeon  of  St.  Andrews  their  episcopal  and  other  rights,  and  canonical 
obedience  and  subjection.     Dated  at  St.  Andrews,  4th  June  1350 78 

51).  Cliarter  by  Roger  (of  Beaumout),  Bishop  of  tlie  Scots,  granting  to  the  church 
of  St.  Mary  of  Stirling  and  canons  thereof  the  churches  of  Egles 
aud  Clackmannan,  with  all  their  just  pertinents,  both  in  chapels, 
teiuds,  revenues,  and  in  other  ecclesiastical  benefices,  in  free,  pure 
and  perpetual  alms  :  To  be  held  aud  posscssed  as  freely,  peaceably, 
and  houourably  as  they  beld  them  iu  the  time  of  King  David,  and  of 
the  Bishops  Robert,  Arnald  and  Richard  of  pious  memory,  his  prede- 
cessors,  reserving  episcopal  rights.  Dated  at  Tynninghani,  Ist  July, 
in  the  third  year  of  the  bishop's  pontificate,  \circa  1200,]   79 

00.  Cliarter  by  Malcolm  (the  Fourth),  King  of  Scots,  confirming  to  the  Abbot  of 
Stirling  and  canons  thereof  the  church  of  Clackmannan,  with  forty  acres  of 
land  and  the  priest's  toft  in  the  same  town,  the  teinds  of  all  the  King's 
pleas  and  profits  of  Stirling,  Stirlingshire,  and  Kalentyr,  one  toft  in  the 


OF  CAMBUBKENNETH. 


343 


63. 


burgli  of  Stirling,  auil  oiie   in  Linlitligow,  iu  pcrpetual  alms,  as  freely 
as  they  possessed  tliem  in  tlie  times  uf  his  grandfatlier  King  David. 

DateJ  at  Seleschirche  (Sellvirk),  \_circa  1160,]     79 

Precept  by  William  (Landale),  Bishop  of  St.  Andrevvs,  to  the  Dean  of 
Fife  and  Fothriff,  setting  forth  tliat,  with  a  view  to  relieve  as  far  as 
he  was  able  the  loss  and  damage  sustained  by  the  Abbey  of  St.  Mary 
of  Cambuskenneth  through  wicked  men,  he  had  granted  to  Adam,  Abbot 
thereuf,  iu  name  of  tlie  Abbey  and  canons,  the  vicarage  of  Clackmannan, 
and  all  fruits,  rents,  profits,  revenues,  hmds,  and  possessions  and  other 
emoluments  belongiug  thereto,  and  charging  the  Dean  to  give  the  Abbot 
institution  and  corporal  possession  of  the  same  and  dcfend  him  tlierein. 
Dated  at  Lochleven,  '2iA  August  1350, 80 

BuU  liy  Pope  Clement  the  Fifth,  ou  the  petition  of  the  Abbot  and  convent 
of  Cambuskenneth,  couferring  on  tliem  the  perpetual  vicarage  of  the  parish 
cluu'ch  of  Clackmannan,  vacant  by  the  appoiritment  of  Maurice  of  Strath- 
earn,  vicar  thereof,  to  the  archdeaconry  of  the  churcli  of  Dunblane,  on 
account  of  the  losses  they  had  suffered  by  the  vvars  wliich  had  for  a 
very  long  time  raged  iu  tliose  parts,  and  by  the  conduct  of  ccrtain  sons 
of  iuiquity,  who  had  seized  and  carried  off  the  chalices,  books,  and  tlie  rest 
of  the  ornaments  of  the  altar  and  other  goods  belonging  to  the  abbey,  and 
through  the  destruction  of  the  bell-tower  by  lightning,  wbich  had  so  reduced 
their  circumstauces  that  they  were  totallj'  unable  to  repair  the  choir  of  the 
abbey,  which  was  going  to  ruin.  The  BuII  annexes  the  vicarage,  which 
was  stated  in  the  petition  not  to  exceed  the  value  of  ten  merks  yearly,  ti) 
the  abbey,  the  fruits,  rents  and  profits  thereof  to  be  enjoyed  by  the 
Abbot  and  convent,  they  being  bound  to  maintain  diviue  worship  therein 
by  a  qualified  chaplain  of  their  own  selection.  Dated  at  Avignon,  the 
17th  day  before  the  calends  of  October  (15th  September),  in  the  finst 
year  of  the  Pope's  pontificate,  [1306,] 81 

BuII  by  Pope  Clement  the  Fifth,  directed  to  tlie  Abbot  and  convent  of 
Cambuskenneth,  whereby,  on  the  ground  that  the  value  of  the  vicarage  of 
Clackmannan  had  been  understated  in  the  petition  on  which  the  foregoing 
BuU  (No.  62),  had  been  granted,  his  Holiness  conflrmed  anew  to  thera 
the  fruits,  reuts,  and  profits  of  the  said  vicarage,  to  the  extent  of  15  merks 


CLACKMANNAN. 


344 


ABSTRAGT  OF  THE  REGISTER 


CLACKMANNAN.  of  annual  value.  Dated  at  Avignon,  the  5th  day  before  the  calends  of 
February  (28th  January),  in  the  second  year  of  the  Pope's  pontificate, 
[1307,] 

64.  Notarial  Instnimcnt  on  the  peranibulation,  division  and  cognition  made  by  the 
assessors  chosen  between  David,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth  and  the  convent 
thereof,  and  David  Bruce  of  Clackmaunan,  of  forty  acres  of  the  hmds  of 
Clackmannan,  as  contained  in  the  charter  to  the  Abbey  (No.  52),  that 
the  same  might  be  separated  from  the  lands  of  tlie  lordship  of  Clack- 
mannan.     Done  on  the  said  Lands,  6th  March  1505,   

65.  Extract  from  the  Book  of  the  Acts  of  the  OfEcial  of  St.  Andrews,  narrating 
that  it  had  been  agreed  between  the  procurators  of  the  farmer  of  Clack- 
maniian  with  reference  to  the  vicarage  thereof,  and  James  Shaw,  knight, 
that  the  latter  should  pay  the  teind  of  coals,  as  he  was  wont  in  times 
past,  until  Easter  next,  and  thereafter  leave  it  to  the  farmer  to  dispose 
of  his  teind  coals  according  to  common  right,  without  hindrance; 
and  that  Gilbert  Brady  and  David  Bruce  of  Kennet  had  been  warned  to 
satisfy  for  their  coal  teind  in  future,  under  pain  of  excommunication. 
Dated  at  St.  Andrews,  4th  February  1510, 

06.  Charter  by  King  William  (the  Lion),  granting  to  the  church  of  St.  Mary  of 
Cambuskenneth  and  the  eanous  thereof,  in  free  and  perpetual  alms,  a 
merk  of  silver  in  the  burgh  of  Carel  (Crail)  from  the  farm  thereof, 
which  the  Countess  Ada,  his  mother,  gave  to  theni  for  the  lighting  of 
that  church  :  To  be  held  as  freely,  peaceably,  and  honourably,  as  his 
mother's  charter  bore.     Dated  at  Linlithgow  \circa  1178,] 

67.  Letters  by  William  (of  Deyn),  Bishop  of  Aberdeen,  narrating  that,  during  a 
visitation  recently  made  by  him  of  his  diocese,  he  had  found  the  fruits  of 
the  parish  church  of  Creythy  iu  Mar,  which  belouged  by  right  to  the  Abbey 
of  Cambuskenneth,  so  trifling  and  small,  that,  after  deducting  the  burdens 
little  remained  to  relieve  the  abbey,  which  was  suffering  from  many 
calamities,  and,  although  every  parish  church  ought  to  be  superiu- 
tended  by  a  perpetual  curate,  granting,  in  consideration  of  the  poverty 
of  the  abbey,  permission  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  thereof  to  appro- 
priate  the  fruits  of  the  said  church  to  their  own  use,  and  serve  it  by  a 


84 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


345 


qualified  chaplain,  removeable  at  their  pleasure  ;  reserving  to  tlie  bishop 
and  his  successors  the  episcopal  right  in  the  said  church  which  they  had 
in  the  neighbouring  churches.     Dated  at  Fetternear,  llth  January  1347,        88 

08.  Letters  of  Confirmation  by  Malcolm  of  Dromond,  lord  of  Marr,  confirming  the 
charters  granted  by  his  predecessors,  Richard,  the  son  of  Lugven,  and 
Joachim  of  Kynbute,  Icnights,  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambus- 
kenneth,  of  a  house  and  six  acres  of  arable  land,  with  pasturage  for 
twelve  cows,  one  mare,  and  twenty-four  sheep,  with  their  young,  within 
the  granter's  town  of  Causchini  (Cushnie),  in  pure  and  perpetual  alms, 
for  the  welfare  of  the  souls  of  himself  and  his  predeces.sors  and  suc- 
cessors.     Dated  at  Cambuskenneth,  Gth  March  1395,     


09.  Letters  by  David  Bruce,  lord  of  Clackmannan, knight,  whereby,  on  the  narrative 
that  the  teinds  of  his  mills  of  Clackmanuan  were  knowu  to  beloug  by  per- 
petual  right  to  the  canons  regular  of  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenueth,  and 
that  some  of  his  predecessors,  lords  of  Clackmannan,  had  unjustly  with- 
held  them  from  the  canons  for  several  years,  he,  for  himself  and  his 
heirs,  and  for  the  welfare  of  the  soids  of  himself  and  his  predecessors 
and  successors,  renounced,  quitclaimed  and  restored  and  resigned,  and  on 
account  of  the  special  zeal  by  which  he  was  bound  to  the  said  canons,  gave, 
granted  and  confirmed  to  them  the  teinds  of  his  mOIs  for  ever  :  To 
be  held  and  received  from  him  and  his  heirs  every  year,  as  freely  as  any 
teinds  in  the  realm  of  Scotland,  and  to  the  exclusion  of  all  claim  by  the 
granter  or  his  heirs  for  ever.    Dated  at  Clackmannan,  Gth  October  1406, 


89 


90 


i"  0.  Charter  by  Seher  de  Quinci,  Earl  of  Winton,  with  the  consent  of  his  son  Kobert, 
granting  to  the  church  of  St.  Mary  of  Stirling,  and  the  canons  thereof, 
for  the  welfare  of  the  souls  of  William  King  of  Scots,  and  of  his  an- 
cestors  and  successors,  and  the  welfare  of  the  souls  of  tbe  granter  and 
of  his  ancestors  and  successors,  the  whole  land  of  Duglyn,  by  the  same 
marches  by  which  Nesus,  the  son  of  WDIiam,  his  grandfather,  pos.5essed 
it  :  To  be  held  of  the  said  Seher  and  his  heirs  in  free,  pure  aud  per- 
petual  alms,  as  freely  as  any  alms  was  held  by  any  religious  persons  in 
the  realm  of  Scotland, — the  granter  warranting  the  said  land  against 

Duncan,  the  son  of  Hamelin,  and  against  all  men.      \circa  1200,] 91 

44 


346 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  REGISTER 


7  1 .  Charter  by  Seher  de  Quinci,  granting  to  the  chnrch  of  St.  Mary  and  the 
canons  of  Cambuskenneth  the  land  of  Duglyn  :  To  be  held  as  freely  as 
any  alms  was  held  of  any  baron  in  Scotland.  This  charter  does  not 
contain  any  clause  of  warrandice.     [circa  1200,]     92 

72.  Charter  liy  AVilliam  (the  Lion),  King  of  Scots,  confirming  to  the  chureh  of  St. 
Mary  of  Cambuskenneth  and  the  canons  thereof  the  grant  which  Seher 
de  Quinci  made  to  them  of  his  whole  land  of  Duglyn  :  To  be  held  in  free, 
pure  and  perpctual  alms,  with  all  the  pertinents  thereof,  as  freely  as 
the  charter  of  Seher  bore ;  reserving  the  King's  whole  foreign  service 
due  from  the  said  land.      Dated  at  Ediuburgh,  7th  July  [circa  1200,1  92 

7  •'?.  Charter  by  Seher  de  Quinci,  Earl  of  Winton,  setting  forth  that  Duncan,  the  son 
of  Hamelin,  and  Adam  his  heir,  had  resigned,  for  himself  and  his  heirs, 
to  the  Earl  and  his  heirs,  in  his  fidl  court  at  Locres  (Leuchars),  all  right 
which  they  had  or  could  have  in  the  land  of  Duglyn,  and  delivered  up  to 
him  all  the  charters  which  he  had  thereof,  and  that  the  Earl,  with  the 
consent  of  his  son  Robert,  in  presence  aud  with  consent  of  the  said  Duncan, 
had  granted  the  said  whole  land  to  the  church  and  canous  of  St.  JLiry 
of  Cambuskenneth,  to  be  held  of  the  said  Earl  and  his  heirs  in  free,  pure 
and  perpetual  alms,  by  the  marches  by  which  Nesus,  the  son  of  William, 
held  it,  as  freely  as  any  religious  men  held  any  alins  by  gift  of  any  earl 
or  baron  in  Scotland.     [circa  1200,] 9.3 

74.  Agreement,  with  consent  of  the  chapter  of  the  church  of  Dunkeld,  between 
Galfrid  (Liverance),  Bishop  of  Dunkeld,who,  in  name  of  his  church  of  For- 
gound  (Forgan),  claimed  the  teinds  of  theland  of  Duglyu,  andthe  Abbot 
and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth,  who  held  the  whole  land  of  Duglyn  in 
pure  and  perpetual  alms,  that  the  said  Abbot  and  convent,  whether  they 
eultivated  the  said  land  of  Dugl^m  themselves  or  let  it  out  in  farm  to 
others,  should  pay  yearly  for  ever,  for  all  the  teinds  thereof  of  every  sort, 
escepting  oSerings  and  the  dues  of  burial  of  the  dead,  100  shillings  of 
silver  to  the  table  of  the  Lord  Bishop,  .50  shillings  at  Martinmas  and 
50  shillings  at  Whitsunday,  commencing  at  Martinmas  first  following. 
Sealed  with  the  seal  of  the  Bishop  of  Dnnkeld,  and  the  seal  of  tlie  chap- 
ter  thereof     Dated  1247, 94 


OF  CAMBUSKEXXETIL 


347 


Letters  of  Citation  by  Jolm  of  Eglyntoun,  Prioi-  of  Blantyrc,  cominissary  and  excommunication. 

judge  deijuted  by  Walter  (Trail),  Bisliop  of  St.  Andrews,  directed  to  abbots, 
priors  and  other  ecclesiastics,  narrating  (l.)  a  bidl  of  Pope  Clement  VII., 
dated  at  Avignon,  15th  day  before  the  calends  of  March  (lOth  Feb- 
ruary),  in  the  eighth  year  of  the  Pojje^s  pontificate  [1386],  conferring 
on  the  Bishop  the  power  to  dispose  of  all  first  appeals  from  the  decisions 
of  the  Scottish  bishops,  and  of  other  ordinary  judges  and  their  deputies 
in  the  kingdom  ;  which  power  was  granted  on  a  petition  from  the 
bishop  to  the  Pope,  representing  that,  in  consequence  of  the  gi'eat 
distance  of  Scotlaiid  from  Kome,  and  the  dangers,  toils  and  expenses 
inseparable  from  tbe  prosecutiou  of  appeals  to  the  apostolic  see,  persons 
very  fret|uently  gave  up  their  rights  undefeuded,  and  soraetimes  sought 
redress  from  the  secular  power,  to  the  prejudice  of  ecclesiastical  liberty  ; 
(2.)  a  commi^ion  by  the  Bishop,  dated  at  Inchomeyoth,  8th  January 
1398  [should  be  1388],  delegatiug  to  the  Prior  of  Blautyre  the 
powers  contained  in  the  buU  :  after  tbe  presentation  and  reception  of 
which  letters,  WiJIiam  of  Blackburn,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  in  name 
of  his  abbey,  humbly  begged  another  lawful  citation  to  be  issued  by 
the  said  Prior,  by  virtue  of  the  said  commission  against  Robert, 
Bishop  of  Dunkeld,  who  had  brought  many  troubles,  injuries  and 
losses  upon  the  petitioner  and  his  abbey :  and  the  said  Prior  consider- 
ing  the  request  reasonable,  eujouied  those  to  whom  his  letters  should  be 
presented  to  warn  the  said  Bishop  within  six  days  thereafter,  either  per 
sonally  or  at  his  dwelling-house,  or  in  the  church  of  the  friars  of  Tuly- 
lum,  during  the  celebration  of  mass,  to  compear  either  personaUy  or  by 
his  procurator  before  the  said  Prior  in  the  parish  church  of  St.  Andrews, 
on  tbe  25th  of  February  foUowing,  to  receive  the  Ubel  in  the  case  of  the 
said  appeal,  with  certification  that  whether  he  appeared  or  not  the  Prior 
would  proceed  to  deal  with  the  case  at  the  instance  of  the  said  Abbot  ; 
and  directed  that  a  copy  of  the  letters  should  be  granted  to  the  Bishop  of 
Dunkeld,  if  he  desired  it,  but  that  it  should  be  made  at  his  own  expense. 
Dated  at  St.  Andrews,  28th  January  1392,    95 


"G.   Letters  of  Excommunication  by  John  of  Egliutoun,  Prior  of  Blantyre,  iu 
virtue  of  the  commission  from  Walter  (Trail),  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews, 


348 


ABSTRACT  OF  TIIE  EEGISTER 


ExcoMMUNiCATiON.  referred  to  in  the  preceding  letters  of  citation,  wliereby  tlie  said  Prior 
pronounced  sentence  of  suspension,  interdict  and  excomraunication  against 
Robert  Sinclair,  Bishop  of  Dunlceld,  in  the  case  of  appeal  before  him  at  the 
instance  of  William  uf  Blackbura,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  in  respect  of 
the  said  Bishop  having  unjustly  removed  some  animals,  and  refused  to  re- 
store  them  when  commanded  by  the  letters  revocatory  of  the  Prior  ; — 
charging  those  to  whom  the  letters  were  directed,  on  pain  of  being  them- 
selves  excommunicated,  to  announee,  during  the  celebration  of  mass,  or 
where  the  greater  number  of  tlie  people  were  assembled,  that  the 
said  Bishop  was  excommunicated.  Done  in  the  parish  church  of  St. 
Andrews,  25th  February  1392, 99 

77.  Letters  by  John  of  Eglyntoun,  Prior  of  Blantyre,  directed  to  the  abbots, 
priors,  provosts,  deans  and  otlier  ecclesiastics  and  notaries  public  through- 
out  the  cities  and  dioceses  of  Danblane,  St.  Andrews,  and  Dunkeld,  etc, 
narrating  letters  from  Walter  (Trail),  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  containing 
the  bull  and  commission  set  forth  in  No.  75,  and  stating  that  in 
consequence  of  an  appeal  by  William  of  Blackbum,  Abbot  of  Cambus- 
kenneth,  with  reference  to  certain  troubles,  injuries  and  losses  brought 
upon  him  and  his  abbey  by  Eobert  (Sinclair),  Bl.shop  of  Dunkeld,  the 
Prior  had  issued  letters  of  citation  for  the  Bishop  to  compear  on  a 
certain  day  in  the  parish  church  of  St.  Andrews,  to  receive  the  libels  in 
the  cases,  but  that  the  latter  had  failed  to  do,  and  had  contumaciously 
absented  himself,  that  therefore  the  Prior,  on  the  petition  of  the  Abbot, 
had  laid  sentence  of  excommunication  upon  the  said  Robert,  Bishop 
of  Dunkeld,  and  charged  those  to  whom  his  letters  were  directed, 
on  pain  of  being  themselves  excommunicated,  to  cite  the  Bishop,  either 
personally  or  at  his  dwelling  house,  or  in  the  church  of  the  friars  at  Tidy- 
lum  during  the  celebration  of  mass,  to  compear  before  tlie  said  Prior  on  a 
specified  day  in  the  church  of  St.  Andrews,  to  receive  the  libels  in  the  case 
of  the  said  appeals,  and  to  proceed  with  it  until  final  judginent  shoiUd 
be  pronounced,  with  certification  that,  whether  he  compeared  or  not, 
the  Prior  would  proceed  in  the  cause.  Done  at  St.  Andrews,  25th 
February  1392,  101 


78.  Notarial  lustrument,  narrating  that,  on  the  25th  day  of  Blarch  1393,  in  the 


OF  CAMBUSKEXXETH. 


340 


conventual  chuTch  of  the  Carmelite  friars  of  Tulj^lum,  in  the  diocese  of  excommunication. 

DunkelJ,  compeared  Jlr.  Malcolm,  rector  of  the  iiarish  church  of  For- 

teviot,  and  there,  during  the  celebratiou  of  mass,  caused  to  be  publicly 

read  letters  patent  under  the  seal  of  Sir  Johu  of  Eglintoun,  Prior  of 

Khmtyre,  depute  of  the  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  and  by  virtue  thereof,  and 

for  the  causes  therein  expressed,  excommunicated  Kobert  Sinclare,  Bishop 

of  Dunkeld,   and  cited  him  to  compear  before  the  Prior,  either  per- 

sonally  or  by  his  procurator,  in  the  parish  church  of  St.  Andrews,  on 

the  IGth  of  April  following,  to  receive  the  libels  in  the  case  of  sundry 

appeals  taken  by  'William  of  Blackburn,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  to 

the  Apostolic  see  against  him,  and  to  proceed  with  the  case  until  a  final 

judgment  should  be  pronounced.     Done  in  the  said  conveutual  church 

of  Tulylum,  the  said  2.5th  March  1393, 106 

79.  Charter  by  Herbert,  the  son  of  Herbert  of  Chalmers,  granting  to  the  churcli 
of  St.  ]\Iary  of  Cambuskenneth  and  the  canons  thereof,  for  the  welfare  of 
the  souls  of  his  iather  and  mother,  of  himself  and  his  spouse,  and  of  his 
ancestors  and  suecessors,  a  half  carucate  of  land  in  Dunipace,  with  a 
toft  and  croft  in  the  said  town  conveniently  situated,  namely,  two  ox- 
gates  of  land  adjoining  the  land  of  the  church  on  tbe  east  side,  and  two 
oxgates  on  the  other  side  of  the  water,  near  Louchbank,  beginning  at 
Flores  and  extending  westwards  :  To  be  held  in  pure  and  perpetual  alms, 
with  common  pasturage,  entry  and  ish,  and  all  easements  pertaining  to 
so  much  land,  as  freely  and  peaceably  as  any  alms  was  held  in  the  rcalm 
of  Scotland.     [circa  1 200,]  107 


80.  Charter  by  Gilbert  of  Umframville,  granting  to  the  church  of  St.  Mary 
of  Cambuskenneth,  and  the  canons  serving  God  there,  two  oxgates  of 
land  in  Dunipace,  besides  that  hauch  which  he  gave  to  them  before, 
namely,  the  land  lyiug  on  the  west  side  of  the  river,  which  descends  by 
the  three  stones  to  the  brow  of  the  hill  of  St.  Alexander,  and  along  the 
summit  of  that  hill  to  the  church  of  St.  Alexander  :  To  be  held  from 
the  granter  and  his  heirs  in  free  and  pure  alms,  in  pastures  and  ease- 
ments  belonging  to  so  nrach  land,  as  freely  as  any  alms  was  held  in  the 
kingdom.     \circa  1190,]   


lOS 


350 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  REGISTEB 


81.  Charter  by   Adam  of   Morham,    knight,   granting    to   the    church    of   St. 

Mary  of  Cambuslienneth,  and  to  the  canons  serving  God  there,  and 
their  successors,  for  the  sake  of  charity  and  for  the  welfare  of  the 
souls  of  himself,  his  ancestors  and  lieirs,  all  those  lands  whieh  Marnin 
Forestar,  and  Patrick  Bercar  and  his  son,  and  WUliam  of  Rowe  held 
within  and  without  the  town  of  Dimipace,  wherever  they  lay,  with  common 
pasturage  and  all  easements  and  freedoms  belonging  thereto,  excepting 
the  granter's  superiorities  :  To  be  held  and  possessed  by  them  and  their 
successors  of  the  grauter  and  his  heirs  by  perpetual  right,  in  pure  and 
perpetual  alms,  free  from  all  secidar  service,  exaction,  and  custom,  with 
the  privilege  of  grinding  their  corn  grown  on  the  said  lands  at  tlie 
granter's  niill  free  of  multure.      \circa  1200,]     108 

82.  Letters  by  Adam  of  Morham,  knight,  appointing  John,  clerk  to   Sir  Hugh 

Giflard,  his  procurator  for  giving  to  Kichard,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth 
and  the  convent  thereof,  sasine  of  the  lands  which  Marnin  Forestar,  and 
Patrick  Bercar  and  his  son,  and  William  of  Piowe  held  withiu  and  without 
the  town  of  Dunipace,  in  pure  and  perpetual  alms,  and  for  delivering 
to  the  Abbot  and  convent  the  charter  made  to  them  by  the  granter 
thereof,  as  if  he  himself  were  personally  present.     \_circa  1200,] 110 

83.  Charter  by  Adam  of  Morhara,  knight,  granting  to  Eichard  of  Bikertouiie, 

and  his  heirs  or  his  assignees,  for  his  homage  and  service,  the  lands 
which  Marnin  Forestar,  and  Patrick  Bercar  and  his  son,  and  William  of 
Rowe  held  within  the  town  of  Dunipace  and  without  it,  with  common 
pasturage,  and  all  easements  and  freedoms  belonging  to  the  said  land, 
exceptiug  the  granter's  superiorities  :  To  be  held  of  the  granter  and  his 
heirs  or  assignees  freely,  on  payment  of  three  shillings,  1 8  pence  at  Whit- 
sunday  and  18  pence  at  Martinmas  yearly,  for  aU  service  and  seciJar 
demand,  with  the  privilege  of  grinding  the  corn  grown  on  the  said  lands 
at  the  granter's  mill  without  payment  of  multure.     \circa  1200,]    1 10 

84.  Letter  of  Resignation  by  Eichard  of  Bikertoune,  knight,  for  himself  and  liis 

heirs,  in  favour  of  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskynneth,  of  all  right 
which  he  had,  or  could  have,  to  the  lands  which  he  held  by  the  gift  of 
Sir  Adam  of  Morham  in  the  town  of  Dunipace,  with  common  pasturage 
and  all  other  easements  belonging  to  the  said  lands,  for  the  excambiou  of 


OF  CAMBUSKEXXETH. 


351 


the  land  of  Byunyne,  wliich  the  said  Abbot  and  convent  held  by  the  gift 

of  the  deceased  William  of  Lindsay.     [c«'rca  1200,]     111 

Letters  by  Gameline,  Bisliop  of  St.  Andrews,  bearing  tliat  he  had  caused 
inquiry  to  be  made  by  Robert,  Dean  of  Linlithgow,  as  to  whether  the 
chureh  of  Donypais  (Dunipace)  was  a  mother  churcli  by  itself,  or  a  cliapel 
of  the  parish  church  of  Kirketoun,  and  had  found  that  it  was  simply  a 
chapel  of  the  latter,  and  that  it  had  never  been  accustomed  to  render 
to  the  Bishops  of  St.  Andrews  entire  or  partial  procuration.  Dated 
at  Incheomath,  the  eighth  day  before  the  ides  of  May,  6th  April 
1267,  112 


86.  Cliarter  by  Gilbert  of  Umframville,  granting  to  the  churcli  of  St.  Blary  of 

Dunipace  the  teind  of  his  mill  of  Dunipace  in  pure  alms,   for  the  wel- 

fare  of  his  soul.     [idrca  1200,] 112 

87.  Notarial  Instrument,  narrating  that  Patrick  (of  Calender),  Abbot  of  Caralni?- 

kenneth,  compeared  personally,  in  presenee  of  a  notary  and  witnesses, 
before  the  members  of  an  assize  recently  held  at  Dunipace,  in  the  barony 
of  Herbertshire  and  shire  of  Stirling,  respecting  six  oxgates  of  land  within 
and  without  the  town  of  Dunipace,  and  with  urgency  required  them  to 
declare  publicly  that  they  would  faithfully  answer  to  the  tmth  respecting 
their  depositions  and  deliverances  thereanent  before  any  competent  judge 
in  time  to  come,  when  they  should  be  required  to  do  so ;  upon  which  the 
whole  of  the  persons  who  were  upon  the  said  assize  deponed  and  asserted 
that  John  Keir,  father  of  John  Keir  then  living,  died  seized  of  two  osgates 
of  the  land  foresaid,  and  unanimously  resolved  that  these  two  oxgates  be 
inserted  in  one  schedule,  to  which  they  caused  seals  to  be  put  ;  and  with 
re.spect  to  the  remaining  four  oxgates  of  land,  they  found  that  the  said 
Jtihn  Keir  elder  was  once  summoned,  but  that,  upwards  of  three  years 
hefore  his  death,  he  had  been  entirely  expelled  from  the  said  lands  by 
the  lord  superior  thereof,  and  found  that  the  said  Abbot  had  possessed 
them  for  twenty-six  years,  and  declared  them  to  belong  to  him  and  his 
abbey  by  heritable  right ;  and  they  ordained  these  four  oxgates  to  be 
inserted  in  one  schedule  by  themselves,  lest  the  writer  should  make  any 
mistake  in  the  premises  ;    Upon  all  which  depositions,  deliverances,  and 


352 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  REGISTER 


assertions  tlie  said  Abbot  craved  instruments.     Done  in  tbe  cemetery  of 

tbe  i^arish  church  of  Duuipace,  21st  January  1426, 112 


88.  Notarial  Iiistrumeut,  narrating  that  Patriclv  (of  Calender),  Abbot  of  Cam- 
biiskenueth,  compeared  personally  iu  presenee  of  a  notary  and  wituesses, 
and,  in  the  hearing  of  mauy  persons,  declared  that  Archibald,  some  time 
Earl  of  Douglas,  father  of  Archibald,  the  Earl  lately  deceased,  at  the 
instigation  of  the  deceased  John  Keir,  father  of  Jolm  Keir  theu  liviug, 
uuduly  molested  and  harassed  him,  and  his  convent  and  abbey,  respecting 
the  possession  of  four  osgates  of  their  lauds  within  and  without  the  town 
of  Dunipace,  in  the  barony  of  Herbertshire  and  shire  of  Stirling,  thirty 
years  previously,  or  thereby  ;  although  afterwards  the  Earl,  having  seen 
and  understood  divers  charters  made  to  the  abbey  iipon  the  gift  and 
confirmation  of  the  lands,  as  lord  superior  of  the  ground,  caused  the 
Abbot  and  convent  to  be  restored  to  the  possession  of  them,  and  to  be 
iufcft  and  vested  therein,  by  David  Flemyng,  lord  of  Bigare,  then  his 
Lordship's  bailie  ;  but  the  Abbot  confessed  that  he  was  unable  to  find 
the  letters  testimonial  of  the  sasine,  because  they  had  been  either  lost  or 
destroyed,  and  as  he  expected  that  a  question  would  now  very  likely  be 
raised  by  tlie  said  John  Keir,  younger,  as  heir  of  his  father,  respecting 
the  lands,  unless  the  sasiue  were  proved  by  witnesses,  although  he  and  his 
convent  had  possessed  them  peaceably  for  upwards  of  twenty-six  years, 
he  inquired  of  the  bystanders  if  any  among  them  were  present  at  the 
giving  of  the  sasine  who  could,  if  necessary,  for  the  sake  of  charity,  bear 
testimony  respecting  it ;  to  which  inquiry  six  persons  named  answered 
that  they  were  preseut  at  the  giving  of  the  sasine,  and  saw  it,  and  knew 
weU  that  the  Abbot  had  been  in  the  peaceable  possession  of  the  lands 
for  twenty-six  years,  and  until  that  time,  and  that  John  Keir,  elder, 
althcugh  he  lived  three  years  after  the  abbey  possessed  them,  was  not 
able  to  obtain  regress  to  them  ;  and  two  of  the  witnesses  declared  that, 
before  the  giving  of  the  sasine,  they  heard  the  Earl  say  that  neither  he 
nor  any  one  else  had  any  right  to  the  lands,  but  that  they  belonged  to 
the  abbey  alone  by  heritable  right :  Upon  all  which  the  Abbot  craved 
instruments.  Done  in  the  cemetery  of  the  parish  church  of  Duuipace, 
21st  January  U2G,  lU 


OF  CAMBUSKEXXETH. 


89.  Notarial  Instrumeut,  narrating  that  Jolin  of  Keir,  of  Et-liuburgh,  conipeared 
personally  in  preseuce  of  David,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  aud  although, 
as  he  deolared,  he  had  several  years  before  renouuced  all  right,  title  and 
interest  which  he  had,  or  could  have,  in  or  to  four  oxgates  of  hxnd  lying 
in  Duuipace  in  the  barony  of  Herbertshire  aud  shire  of  Stirliug,  aud 
had  lately,  on  the  Friday  preceding,  in  the  barony  Court  of  Herbertshire 
held  at  Dunipace  by  the  bailies  of  William  Earl  of  Orkuey  and  Caith- 
ness,  lord  of  the  barony,  eutirely  resigued  them  to  the  Abbot,  yet  for 
greater  verification,  attestation  and  security,  he  appeared  hefore  two 
notaries  and  witnesses,  first  in  the  burgh  of  Stirling,  iu  a  back 
chamber  of  the  lodgiug  of  Mathew  Forstar,  burgess  thereof,  on  the 
30th  day  of  May,  and  again  on  the  following  day,  in  the  refectory  of  the 
Abbey  of  Cambuskeuueth,  in  presence  of  the  Abbot  and  the  convent 
assembled,  and,  on  his  knees,  declared  with  his  own  mouth  that  the 
four  oxgates  of  land,  with  the  pertinents,  belonged  to  the  Abbot  and 
conveut  aud  their  successors,  and  to  the  abbey  itself  iu  property,  aud 
there,  by  stafi"  aud  batou,  which  he  then  carried  in  his  haud,  purely 
aud  simply  resigued,  for  himself  aud  his  heirs  and  successors,  to  the 
Abbot  all  right  thereto,  entirely  and  for  ever,  upon  which  the  Abbot 
craved  instrumeuts.  Done  in  the  places  foresaid,  30th  aud  31st  May 
1462 


117 


90.  Notarial  Instrumeut  on  the  resiguatiou  by  John  of  Keir,  son  aud  heir  of 
Johu  of  Keir  of  Randalstoune,  of  all  right  aud  claim  which  he  asserted 
he  had,  or  which  he  could  have,  to  the  four  oxgates  of  laud  lyiug  in 
the  town  of  Dunipace,  iu  the  shire  of  Stirling,  respecting  which  both 
he  and  his  father  formerly  raised  a  question  agaiust  the  Abbot  and 
conveut  of  the  Abbey  of  Cambu.skenneth,  which  lands  he,  for  the  welfare 
of  the  souls  of  himself  and  his  predecessors,  in  the  presence  of  the 
convent  in  chapter  assembled,  for  himself  and  his  heirs,  by  stafi"  and 
baton,  resigued  iiito  the  hauds  of  the  Abbot ;  firmly  promising  upon 
oath  that  neither  he  nor  his  heirs  would  molest  the  abbey  in  time  to 
come  with  refereuce  to  the  said  lands,  but  would  defend  them  therein 
to  their  power.      Doiie  iu  the  chapter-house  of  Cambuskenneth,    lOth 

November  1429,  119 

45 


354 


ABSTRACT  OF  TIIE  EEGISTER 


9 1 .  Extract  from  the  Roll  of  the  Barony  Court  of  Harbertsliire,  beld  at  Duni- 
pace  on  Friday  28th  May  1462  by  the  bailie  of  Williara,  Earl  of 
Orkney  and  Caitbness,  narrating  that  John  of  Keir,  of  Edinburgh,  com- 
peared  in  eourt  and  requested  that  a  brieve  of  inquest  sbould  be  served, 
by  wbich  he  claimed  four  oxgates  of  land  in  the  town  of  Dunipace 
belonging  to  the  house  of  Cambuskennetb,  and  that  David,  Abbot  of 
Cambuskenneth,  also  compeared  and  requested  tbat  no  inquest  should  pass 
upon  their  lands,  alleging  that  the  said  John  of  Keir  hatl  long  before,  in 
the  days  of  Abbot  Patrick  of  Calender,  given  over  all  right  ■wbich  lie  had  or 
could  have  to  the  lands  for  ever  :  and  that  after  divers  allegatiuns,  John 
withdrew  his  claim,  and  took  up  his  brieve  of  inquest,  and  referred 
him  to  the  said  Abbot,  renouncing,  as  before,  all  riglit  to  the  said  lands 
in  time  to  come,  iipon  which  the  Abbot,  and  Alexander  Bruce  of 
Stenhouse,  bis  "  foirspekar,"  asked  tbese  tbings  to  be  acted  and  enrolled, 
and  a  copy  of  the  rolment  to  be  given  them.    Dated  2Sth  May  1462,... 


121 


DKDiCATiON.  92.  Notarial  Letters  attesting  that  James,  Bishop  of  Dunblane,  by  virtue  of  a 
commission  from  John,  Prior  of  St.  Andrews,  Vicar-General  during  the 
vacancy  of  the  See,  at  the  instance  of  Alexander,  Abbot  of  Cambus- 
kenneth,  dedicated  with  due  solemnities  the  abbey  church  of  Cambus- 
kenneth  and  the  two  cemeteries  tliereof,  at  the  east  and  west  end, 
with  the  chapter-house  and  enclosure,  and  consecrated  the  high  altar, 
assisted  by  his  archdeacon  and  the  prebendaries  of  Kippen  aud  Glen- 
dovan  ;  Jobn  Lord  Erskine,  James  Haldane  of  Gleneagles,  knight,  and 
others  being  present ;  John  Tulydaf,  Warden  of  the  Minorite  Friars  of 
Stirling,  preaching  on  the  efficacy  of  the  dedication,  after  mass.  Done  at 
Cambuskenneth,  llth  July  1521, 122 


93.  Charter  by  King  David  (the  Second),  granting  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of 
Cambuskenneth  an  annual  rent  of  forty  sliillings  due  to  him  out  of  the 
lands  of  Ertb  (Airth),  and  an  annual  rent  of  forty  shillings  due  to  him  out 
of  the  lands  of  Cambusbaroun,  together  with  the  half  of  the  farm  due  to 
him  out  of  tbe  lands  of  Cambusbaroun,  in  the  shire  of  Stirling,  in  place 
of  an  annual  payment  of  £8,  Os.  5d.  anciently  due  to  them  from  the 
King's  shire  of  Stirling  :   To  be  held  by  the  Abbot  and  convent  in  pure 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


355 


and  peiijetual  alms,  until  tlie  King  or  his  successors  should  be  pleased 
to  appoiut  them  a  yearly  pensiou  of  £8,  Os.  5d.,  in  some  suitable  place. 
Dated  at  Edinburgh,  3()th  November  [1305] li 


[U.  Charter  by  John  Quhityne  (Wliitton),  .son  and  heir  of  Robert  Quhitiug, 
burgess  of  Edinburgli,  with  adviue  of  his  friends,  granting  to  Martiu 
Wricht,  burgess  of  Ediubuvgh,  the  whole  fore  part  of  a  teuement  lyiug 
■within  the  burgh,  bounded  as  therein  described  :  To  be  held  by  the 
said  Martin,  his  heirs  and  assignees,  from  the  granter  and  his  heirs,  of 
the  King  and  his  heirs,  in  feu-farm,  for  rendering  to  the  King  and  his 
heirs  the  burgage  farm  due  therefrom,  and  to  the  Abbot  and  conveut  of 
Cambuskenneth  thirteen  shilliugs  and  fourpence  of  silver,  and  to  the 
granter,  and  his  heirs  and  assignees,  thirty  shillings  Scots,  and  to  the 
proprietors  of  the  back  part  of  the  tenemeut  three  shillings  and  fourpeuce 
Scots  yearly.     Dated  at  Edinburgh,  2d  June  Ull,     12-t 

95.  Indenture  between  David,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  and  the  convent  thereof, 
on  the  one  part,  and  Clement  of  Farnile  of  Gogar,  burgess  of  Edinburgh, 
with  consent  of  Sir  John  Forstare,  lord  of  Corstorphyn,  knight,  and 
others,  on  the  other  part,  whereby  Cleraent  granted  to  the  Abbot  and 
convent,  and  their  successors,  license  and  full  freedom  at  their  owu 
expense  to  break,  build  and  again  raise  the  stone  gable  between  their 
fore  house  and  Clemenfs  fore  house,  at  the  west  corner  thereof, — the 
Abbot  making  to  Clement  on  his  side  a  chimney  of  stone  ;  also  to  break 
the  west  wall  of  his  house  that  stretched  southward,  and  to  make  the 
other  changes  and  improvemeiits  therein  specified.  Dated  at  Edinburgh, 
Ist  April  1443,     1:^0 

9  6.  Charter  by  David  Wricht,  burgess  of  Edinburgh,  selling  to  David,  Abbot 
of  Cambuskenneth,  and  the  convent  thereof,  his  whole  land  lying  in  the 
town  of  Edinburgh,  on  the  south  side  thereof,  between  the  tenement  of 
the  Abbot  and  convent  and  the  land  of  Clement  of  Farnile  on  the 
east,  and  the  land  belonging  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  on  the  west 
side,  near  the  street  called  the  Cougait,  for  a  certain  sum  of  money  paid 
by  them  to  the  granter  in  his  great  need  :  To  be  held  by  the  Abbot 
and  convent,  and  their  successors,  of  the  King,  from  the  grauter  and  his 


EDIXBURGH. 


356 


ABSTEACT  OF  TIIE  EEGISTER 


EDINBURGH. 


FORTEVIOT. 


Pagc 

heirs,  executors  and  assignees,  in  feu  and  heritage  for  ever.  This 
charter  contains  no  reddendo  either  to  tlie  granter  or  to  the  Crown. 
Dated  at  Edinburgh,  1.3th  June  14.55,   127 

9  7.  Notarial  Instmment  on  the  resignation  by  David  Wricht,  burgess  of  Edin- 
burgh,  into  the  hauds  of  Richard  Patonson,  then  one  of  the  bailies  of  the 
burgh,  of  certain  land  on  the  east  side  of  the  town  of  Edinburgh  and 
behind  the  house  belonging  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth, 
bounded  as  therein  particularly  described,  and  on  the  sasine  of  the  land 
thereafter  given  by  the  bailie  to  David,  Abbot  of  Cambuslcenneth,  and  to 
tlie  convent  thereof,  in  terms  of  the  charter  granted  to  them.  Done  on 
tlie  said  land,  17th  June  1-4 5 -5, 129 

98.  Letters  by  John  of  Carrall,  Prior  of  the  Abbey  of  Cambuslcenneth,  to  the 

Prior  and  chapter  of  St.  Andrews,  narrating  that  after  the  death  of  John, 
Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  on  15th  March  1335,  the  chapter  had,  on  the 
24th  April  following,  unanimously  elected  as  his  successor,  John  of  Kin- 
cardyn,  one  of  their  canons,  and,  singing  the  Te  Deum,  had,  according 
to  custom,  borne  him  to  the  great  altar  of  their  church  and  there  pro- 
claimed  tlie  election  to  the  clergy  and  laity ;  and  humbly  requesting  that 
the  Prior  of  St.  Andrews,  to  whom  (as  that  see  was  vacant)  the  right 
of  confirmation  belonged,  would  be  pleased  to  confirm  the  election,  and 
grant  to  Juhn  of  Kincardyn  dimissory  letters  for  his  ordination  by  any 
catholic  bishop  in  the  kingdom.  Dated  in  the  chapter-house  of  Cam- 
buskenneth,  25th  April  1336,    130 

99.  Charter  by  Kiug  William  (the  Lion),  granting  in  free  alms  to  Richard  of 

Stirling,  his  chaplain,  the  church  of  Fortheuiet  (Forteviot)  with  the  teinds 
and  offerings  and  all  other  rights  belonging  thereto  :  To  be  held  and 
possessed  as  freely  and  peaceably  as  any  churches  in  his  dominions  of 
Scotland  were  held.     Dated  at  Perth,  [circa  1165,]    132 

1 00.  Charter  by  King  William  (the  Lion),  granting  to  the  church  of  St.  Mary  of 
Stirling,  and  to  the  canons  serving  God  there,  in  free  and  perpetual  alms, 
the  church  of  Forteuiet,  after  the  death  of  Richard  the  priest,  with  the 
chapels,  lands,  teinds  and  pertinents  thereof,  in  excambion  for  the  king's 
teinds,  pleas,  and  profits  of  Stirling  and  of  Stirlingshire  and  Callander, 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


35  i 


for  the  souls  of  King  David  his  grandfatlior,  and  of  Henry  his  fatber, 
and  Malcolm  his  brother  :  To  be  held  as  freely  and  peaceably  as  they 
held  their  other  alms.     Dated  at  Stirliug,  [(.■;><;«  117o,] 132 

101.  Charter  by  King  William  (the  Lion),  grauting  to  the  church  of  St.  Mary  of 

Stirling  and  the  cauons  thereof  four  acres  of  laud  in  Fortheuiet,  and  a 
toft  and  croft  for  the  erection  of  their  buildiugs  thereon  :  To  be  held  iu 
free,  pure  aud  perpetual  alms,  as  freely  and  peaceably,  fully  and  houour- 
ably  as  they  held  any  alius.     Dated  at  Perth,  \circa  1180,]    133 

102.  Obligatiou  by  William,  Abbot  of  Dunfermline,  and  the  couveut  thereof,  to 

the  Abbot  and  conveut  of  Cambuskeuneth,  for  the  paymeut  of  a  chalder 
of  oatmeal  yearly,  on  accouut  of  an  anuual  peusiou  due  to  the  latter ; 
to  be  paid  yearly  withiu  fifteen  days  after  Whitsuuday  at  the  Abbey  of 
Cambuskenneth  or  iu  the  place  called  Kiug's  Polmais,  in  the  parish  of 
Kirktoun,  near  Stirliug.  Sealed  with  the  seal  of  the  chapter  of  Duu- 
fermliue,  1422 134 

103.  Notarial  Instrument,  narrating  that  William,  Abbot  of  Duufermliue,  accom- 

panied  by  the  Prior  and  others  of  his  conveut,  and  Patrick,  Abbot  of 
Cambuskeuneth,  compeared  personally  in  the  presence  of  a  notary  and 
witnesses,  and  that,  after  much  discussiou  respecting  the  arrears  of  four 
chalders  of  oatmeal  by  way  of  auuual  pension  which  the  Abbot  of  Cam- 
buskeuueth  declared  to  be  due  to  him  and  his  convent  by  the  abbot 
aud  eonveut  of  Duufermliug  for  the  four  terms  then  past,  it  was  at 
length  agreed,  on  the  motion  of  the  Abbot  of  Dunfermliug,  that  the  latter 
should  pay  two  chalders  withiu  fifteen  days  after  Whitsunday  1423, 
together  with  the  chalder  of  pension  for  the  year  then  current,  and  the 
other  two  chalders,  along  with  the  chalder  for  the  current  year,  withiu 
fifteeu  days  after  Whit.^unday  uext  thereafter  ;  and  should  moreover  pay, 
within  fifteeu  days  after  tlie  date  of  the  iiistrument,  four  merks  Scots  of 
the  sum  due  for  the  one  chalder  of  oatmeal  payable  at  the  preeediug 
term.     Done  in  the  ehapter-house  of  Dunfermliue,  23d  May  1422, 134 

104.  Cbarter  by  Malcolm,  the  son  of  Malcolm  tbe  son  of  Roger,  with  advice  aud 

conseut  of  bis  parents  and  friends,  confirming  the  graut  which  Roger  his 
grandfather  aud  Malcolm  his  father  made  to  the  church  of  St.   ]\Iary  of 


FORTEVIOT. 


358 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  IlEGISTER 


Catnbuskenneth  anJ  the  canons  tliereof,  of  the  whole  land  adjacent  to  the 
west  side  of  the  Abbot*s  great  carriage  road  leading  to  the  meadows  be- 
longing  to  the  burgesses,  and  so  onwards  to  the  Forth  and  to  the  river 
Fuleche,  which  falls  into  the  Forth,  and  to  a  small  sike  which  falls  into 
the  Fuleche  from  the  east,  and  along  by  certain  rocks  back  to  the  Abbot's 
great  carriage  road :  To  be  held  and  possessed  in  pure  and  perpetual  alms 
as  free  froin  all  exaction  as  any  alms  in  tbe  whole  realm  of  Scotland 
was  held  :  The  perambulation  of  this  land  was  made  and  sasine  thereof 
given  in  presence  of  Henry,  Archdeacon  of  Dunkeld,  and  Henry  of 
Lambertoune,  Constable  of  Stirling,  and  the  grant  was  confirmed  by  the 
oath  of  iMalcolm  made  to  the  Abbot  of  Cambuskennetli,  \circa  1200,]  ... 


130 


105.  Letters  by  Fergus,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  narrating  that  the  right  of 
patronage  of  the  church  of  Glenilef  (Glenisla),  with  the  lands  and  other 
rights  belonging  to  the  church,  was  conferred  by  William  King  of 
Scots  upon  the  abbey  of  Cambuskenneth,  and  the  canons  thereof,  in  pure 
and  perpetual  alms  from  motives  of  charity,  aud  that  thereafter  a  yearly 
peusion  of  £10  sterling  in  that  church  was  assigned  to  the  abbey  by  the 
deoeased  Gregory,  Bishop  of  Brechin,  the  payment  of  which  sum  having 
been  discontinued  for  several  years  to  the  damage  of  the  abbey,  the  Abbot 
had,  by  the  advice  of  eommon  frienJs,  and  with  the  conseut  of  John,  then 
Bishop  of  Breehin,  with  a  view  to  the  quiet  of  his  abbey,  granted  and 
completely  inade  over  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cupar  in  Augus  the 
patronage  of  the  church  of  Glenilef  with  the  lands  and  other  rights 
belouging  to  it,  reserving  to  himself  and  his  abbey  the  pension  of 
£10  in  the  church,  which  was  henceforth  to  be  paid  by  the  Abbot  and 
convent  of  Cupar  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth,  and  to 
be  conveyed  to  them  at  the  expense  and  risk  of  the  former,  within 
eight  days  after  each  term  of  payment,  under  the  penalty  of  half  a 
merk  to  be  paid  to  the  fabric  of  the  church  of  Dunblane  for  each  week 
during  which  payment  was  delayed.  Dated  at  St.  Audrews,  12th 
September  1311,  137 

lOG.  Obligation  by  William,  Abbot  of  Cupar,  with  conseut  of  the  convent  thereof, 
to  pay  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth,  as  loiig  as  he  held 
the  oiEce  of  Abbot  foresaid,  .£10  usual  money  of  Scotlaud  at  two  terms 


OF  CAMBUSKENXETH. 


359 


yearly,  half  at  WhitsuuJay  aud  half  at  Martinmas,  in  the  house  of  the 
Preaching  Friars  at  Perth,  for  the  yearly  pension  from  the  church  of 
Glenileiff  due  hy  the  granters,  whether  the  church  be  unproductive 
or  productive  of  fruits, — the  first  payment  to  be  made  at  the  terni 
of  Martinmas  foUowing  the  date  of  the  obligation,  and  for  greater  security 
giving  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth  power  to  seize  and  sell 
all  his  goods,  moveable  and  immoveable,  secular  or  ecclesiastical,  to  re- 
compense  any  loss  whioh  they  may  sustain  through  non-payment  of  the 
pension.     Dated  at  the  Abbey  of  Cupar,  IGth  September  1405, 139 

107.  Discharge  granted  by  Patrick,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  to  the  Abbot  and 

convent  of  Coupar  in  Angus,  for  the  sum  of  JIO  Scots  paid  on  account 
of  the  yearly  pension  from  the  church  of  Glenileiff  due  at  the  terms  of 
Whitsunday  and  Martinmas  last  bypast.  Dated  at  the  Abbey  of  Cam- 
buskenneth,  12th  February  U13, 141 

108.  Precept  by  King  Robert  (the  Third),  to  the  Sheriff  of  Stirling  and  his  bailies, 

for  infefting  the  canons  of  the  Alibey  of  Cambuskenneth  iu  the  hospital 
of  St.  James,  at  the  end  of  the  roadway  of  the  bridge  of  Stirling,  with 
all  and  sundry  its  lands  and  possessions,  in  terms  of  the  charter  whicli 
they  held  of  the  same  ;  under  reservation  of  the  usufruct  of  the  lands 
of  the  hospital  during  his  life  to  John  Palmer,  who  had  long  upheld  the 
roadway,  in  recompense  of  his  expenses.  Dated  at  the  Castle  of  Kothesay, 
lOth  March,  in  the  thirteenth  year  of  the  King's  reign,  [1402,] 14  1 

10'J.  Letters  by  Roliert,  Prior  of  the  church  of  St.  Andrews,  to  all  tlie 
sons  of  holy  mother  church,  bearing  that  Eobert  Bishop  of  St. 
Andrews  had  granted  to  the  abbacy  of  Stirling,  and  to  William,  first 
Abbot  thereof,  and  his  successors,  the  church  of  Egles  (Kirketon)  :  To  be 
held  of  the  said  Bishop  and  his  successors  in  pure  alms,  on  condition  of 
their  showing  due  reverence  for  the  church  of  St.  Andrews  and  Bishop 
thereof.      [circa  1160,] 142 

1 10.  Charter  by  David,  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  granting  to  the  church  of  St. 
Ninian  of  Kirketoun,  in  name  of  endowment,  that  land  which  lay  near 
the  church,  on  the  north  side,  between  the  great  road  from  Stirling 
to   Kirketoun   and    the  footpath  leading   from   the   said  road  to  the 


KIRKETOS 


360 


ABSTRACT  OF  TEE  REGISTER 


Bishop's  houses  near  the  church  :  To  be  held  as  free  from  all  secular 
exaction  as  any  alms  in  his  whole  diocese  was  held.  Dated  at  Inche- 
mathach,  the  day  of  the  Translation  of  Saint  Thoraas  the  Jlartyr,  (7th 
July)  1242, 142 

111.  Letters  by  the  Dean  of  Linlithgow,  setting  forth  that  he  had  inducted 
Patrick,  Abbot  of  Cambuskynneth,  in  name  of  himself  and  his  convent, 
into  the  vicarage  of  the  cburch  of  Kirkls  (Kirketoun),  vacant  by  the  resig- 
nation  of  Mr.  William  of  Foulis,  perpetual  vicar  of  the  said  church,  with 
all  the  fruits  belonging  thereto.  Dated  at  Carabuskenneth,  the  Sunday 
foUowing  the  Feast  of  Saint  Barnabas  the  Apostle,  (12th  June)  1295,         143 

1 1  2.  Letters  of  Confirmation  by  Richard,  Bishop  of  St.  Andrew.-?,  confirming  to 
the  church  of  St.  Mary  of  Stirling  and  the  canons  thereof  the  church  of 
Eggles  with  its  chapels,  teinds  and  other  ecclesiastical  benefices,  in  per- 
petual  alms  :  To  be  held  as  fi-eely,  peaceably,  and  honourably  as  they 
possessed  that  church  in  the  time  of  good  King  David,  and  of  Bishops 
Robert  and  Arnald,  the  granter's  predecessors.     \circa  1170,1 144 

113.  Chai-ter   by  King  WiUiam  (the  Lion),  confirming  to  the  church  of   St. 

Mary  of  Stirling  and  the  canons  thereof  the  church  of  Egglis,  with  its 
chapels  and  teinds  and  other  ecclesiastical  benefices,  in  perpetual  alms  : 
To  be  held  as  freely  and  honourably  as  the  charter  of  Bishop  Richard 
gave  and  granted  it  to  them,  and  also  the  town  of  Egglis,  with  its  perti- 
nents,  in  terms  of  the  said  Bishop"s  charter.  Dated  at  Kinghorn,  [circa 
1170,] 144 

114.  Letters  by  William  (Fraser),  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  granting  to  the  Abbot 

and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth,  on  accoimt  of  the  impoverished  condition 
of  the  abbey,  and  for  the  improvement  of  divme  worship  there,  aU  the 
fruits,  ofierings  and  profits  belonging  to  the  church  of  Kirketoun,  in 
his  diocese,  of  which  the  rectory  only  belonged  to  the  abbey  before  ; 
empowering  them  to  cause  the  said  church  to  be  served  by  chaplains 
selected  by  themselves ;  and  binding  himself  to  alter  the  terms  of 
his  letters,  or  even  to  issue  other  letters  if  they  should  think  this 
expedient.  Dated  at  Falkland,  the  17th  day  before  the  calends  of  June 
(IGth  May)  1295, 144 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


361 


ll/i.  Mandate  by  William  (Fraser),  Bisliop  of  St.  Anilrews,  to  the  Dean  of 
Linlithgow  to  induct  the  Abbot  of  Cambu.skenneth,  in  name  of  his 
abbey,  into  the  viearage  of  the  church  of  Kirl^is  (Kirketon),  with  the 
fruits,  rents  and  offerings  belonging  to  it,  vacant  by  the  resignation  of 
Mr.  William  of  Foulis,  vicar  thereof  Dated  at  Falkhind,  tlie  17th  day 
before  the  calends  of  June  (16th  May)  1295, 146 


KIRKETON. 


Letters  by  WiUiam  of  Lambertoun,  Bishop  of  St.  Andrevvs,  narrating  letters 
by  Bishop  William  Fraser,  and  confirming  the  grant  made  to  the  Abbacy 
of  Cambuskenneth  of  the  vicarage  of  the  church  of  Kirketoun,  and  the 
collation  thereof  to  tlie  abbey  in  the  manner  prescribed  therein.  Dated  at 
St.  Andrews,  25th  December  1300,   146 


117.  Letters  by  David  (Benham),  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  declaring  that  the  Abbot 

and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth  were  only  bound  to  him  for  one  procuration 
to  be  made  by  the  vicar  of  Kirketoun  for  the  mother  church  of  Kirke- 
toun  and  its  chapels  of  Dunipace  and  Larbert ;  and  that  he  (the  Bishop) 
did  not  -wish  any  prejudice  to  arise  to  tlie  canons  from  liis  having  been 
entertained  at  the  chapel  of  Dunipace,  when  he  visited  the  parish  in  the 
year  1251,  seeing  that  this  had  been  done  not  on  accountof  prociu^ation, 
but  from  kindness,  at  the  request  of  the  Abbot  and  convent.  Dated  at 
luch  Murthach,  the  8th  day  before  the  ides  (6th)  of  August  1251, 148 

1 1 8.  Letters  by  Guido,  Abbot  of  Lundores,  Gilbert,  Abbot  of  Arbroath,  and 

John,  Prior  of  May,  narrating  that,  in  terms  of  letters  by  Pope  Innocent 
the  Third  directed  to  them,  they  had  examined  into  the  grounds  of  a 
complaint  made  to  his  Holiness  by  the  Abbot  aud  convent  of  Dunfermline 
against  the  Abbot  and  canons  of  Cambuskenneth,  for  having  attempted  to 
infringe  the  conditions  of  a  compromise  made  between  them  through  the 
influence  of  the  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews  anent  a  claim  to  certain  teinds  of 
the  lands  of  Siphalne,  Cambusbaroun,  Kirkis,  and  others  mentioned,  made 
by  the  Abbot  and  convenfc  of  Cambuskenneth,  and  a  counter  claim  by  the 
Abbot  and  monks  of  Dunfermline  to  the  chapel  of  Dunipace,  and  to  the 
whole  teinds  of  Carnok,  Plane  and  Bannoch,  on  the  ground  that  aU  the 
teinds  of  the  Kings  lordship  of  the  shire  of  Stirling  belonged  to  them  : 
46 


362 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  REGISTER 


and  that,  after  much  angxy  discussion,  they  had  found  that,  by  consent  of 
parties,  by  authority  of  the  Pope  and  of  the  delegate  judges,  and  through 
the  interposition  of  William,  theu  King  of  Scots,  it  had  been  agreed  that 
the  Abbot  and  monks  of  Dunfermline,  for  the  sake  of  peace,  should  grant 
to  the  Abbot  and  cauons  of  Cambuskenneth  an  annual  rent  of  nine  merks, 
assigned  at  the  judgment  of  men  of  integrity,  from  the  teinds  of  the  lands 
of  Buthcadroeh,  Pulmais  Elwyn,  Pulmais  Weland,  and  others  ;  and  that 
the  monks  in  like  manner,  for  the  sake  of  peace,  should  give  up  to  the 
Abbot  and  canons  of  Cambuskenneth  all  right  that  they  had  to  the 
chapel  of  Dunipace  and  to  the  teinds  above  named  ;  but  that  this  agree- 
ment  had  not  been  reduced  to  writing,  as  it  should  have  been.  That 
to  secure  a  lasting  peace  it  had  been  agreed  between  the  parties,  in  pre- 
sence  of  the  writers  of  tlie  letters,  that  the  foregoing  arrangement  should 
be  observed,  and  in  addition,  on  2-tth  October  1215,  in  the  parish  church 
of  Perth,  that  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Dunfermline  should  give  to 
the  Abbot  and  canons  of  Cambuskenneth  yearly  one  chalder  of  oat- 
meal  out  of  the  teind  of  Polmas-Regis  ;  and  moreover,  that  the  land 
caUed  the  Canon's  Land,  near  the  mOI,  which  King  David  granted  at  the 
founding  of  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth,  should  freely  remain  with 
the  canons  thereof,  on  coudition,  however,  that  they  shoiild  neither  build 
church  nor  chapel  nor  oratory  thercon.  Dated  the  9th  day  before  the 
calends  of  November  (24th  October)  1215, 140 


1 1 9.  Bull  by  Pope  Gregory  (the  Eleventh),  by  which,  on  a  petition  presented 
to  him  by  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth,  and  on  the 
narrative  of  the  grant  to  them  by  William,  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews, 
of  the  vicarage  of  the  church  of  Kirketoun  (No.  116,  sttpra),  and  of  tbe 
union  thereof  with  the  rectory  of  the  said  church  which  befure  belonged 
to  the  said  abbey,  and  had  been  in  the  peaceable  possession  of  the 
Abbot  and  canons  for  forty  years,  his  Holiness  confirmed  by  his  apostolic 
authority  the  said  grant,  which  provided  that  the  Abbot  and  convent  of 
Cambuskenneth  should  hold,  and  for  ever  peaceably  possess,  the  whole 
fruits  and  profits,  and  likewise  the  teinds,  great  and  smaU,  belonging 
to  the  said  church  of  Kirketoun,  and  cause  it  to  be  served  by  two 
qualified  chaplains  of  their  own  selection.     Dated  at  Avignon,  the  8th 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


day  before  the  ides  (Cth)  of  Noverabpr,  iu  the  seeond  }'ear  of  the  Pope's 
Pontificate,  [1372,]   l--)3 

120.  Precept  by  James  (Beatou),  Archliishop  of  St.  Andrews,  directed  to  the 
Dean  of  Linlithgow,  and  to  the  rectors,  perpetual  vicars,  curates  and 
chaplains  in  the  province  of  St.  Andrews,  charging  them  to  institute  and 
induct  Sir  Walter  Stewart  into  a  vioarage  pension  of  20  merks,  with  the 
glebe  of  the  parish  church  of  St.  Ninian  of  Kirketouu,  for  his  lifetime. 
The  precept  prooeeds  on  the  narrative  of  letters  of  presentation  addressed 
to  the  Archbishop  by  Alexander,  Abbot  of  Cambuskennetb,  and  the  con- 
vent  thereof,  in  favour  of  Sir  Walter,  dated  29th  October  1.327  ;  and 
further  narrates  that,  after  presenting  the  letters  to  the  Archbishop,  Sir 
Walter  Stewart  resigned  into  his  hands  all  right  which  he  had  to  the 
pension  and  glebe,  and  reccived  from  him  a  new  grant  of  the  same 
for  his  life,  providing  that  on  his  death  or  resignation  the  pension 
and  glebe  should  revert  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth  and 
their  suocessors.  Dated  at  the  Abbey  of  Dunfermline,  lOth  November 
1527, 155 


121.  Charter  by  King  William  (the  Liun),  granting  to  the  church  of  St.  Mary 

of  Canibuskenneth,  and  the  canons  thereof,  the  church  of  Kyncardyn, 
with  its  chapels  and  lands,  teinds  and  oflerings  of  every  kind,  and  all 
other  just  pertinents  :  To  be  held  in  free  and  perpetual  alms,  as  freely, 
peaoeably  and  honourably  as  they  held  and  possessed  any  churches. 
Dated  at  Stirling,  [arca  1199,] ,      lUO 

122.  Letters  by  William  (de  Boscho),  Bishop  of  Dunblane,  granting  and  confirm- 

iug  to  the  church  of  St.  Mary  of  Cambuskenneth,  and  the  canons  thereof, 
the  church  of  Kincardin  with  its  chapels,  lands,  teinds  and  oflerings 
of  every  kind,  its  profits,  and  all  just  pertinents  :  To  be  held  in  free 
and  perpetual  alms,  as  freely,  peaceahly  and  honourably  as  the  charter 
of  King  William  bore,  and  as  freely  as  they  possessed  other  churches, 
[circa  1210,] 160 

12.3.  Charter  by  Abraham,  Bishop  of  Duublane,  granting  to  the  church  of  St. 
Mary  of  Stirling,  and  the  canous  thereof,  the  churches  of  Tulibody,  Tuli- 


KINCARDINE. 


364 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  BEGISTER 


KINCARDINE. 


cultry  and  Kyncardyn,  with  the  teinds  and  offerings,  and  profits  of  every 
kind,  aud  all  other  just  pertinents  of  the  said  chuvohes  :  To  be  held  hy 
them  in  free  and  perpetual  alms,  as  freely  as  the  charters  of  the  patrons 
of  the  said  churches  and  the  confirmatious  of  the  granter's  predecessors 
bore,  and  as  freely  as  the  said  canons  hehl  any  churches,  savLng  the 
granter's  episcopal  right.    [aVca  1220,]  IGl 


124.  Charter  by  Osbert,  Bishop  of  Dunblane,  'with  the  consent  of  his  Arch- 
deacon  and  chapter,  granting  and  confirmiug  to  the  Abbot  and  canons  of 
Stirling,  the  churches  of  Kincardin,  Tulibody  and  Tulicultry,  with  the 
chapels,  lands  and  all  just  pertiuents  thereof :  To  be  held  by  them  in 
free  and  perpetual  alms  ;  also,  with  consent  of  the  clergy  of  the  diocese 
of  Dunblane,  granting  to  the  canons  in  corapassion  for  their  poverty, 
and  in  consideration  of  the  smaU  value  of  these  churches,  aU  the 
profits  thereof  to  be  freely  converted  to  their  own  private  use,  with  the 
privilege  of  presenting  to  the  bishops  of  Dunblane,  chaplains  or  clerks, 
or  their  own  brethren,  if  they  preferred  it,  to  serve  the  churches,  who 
should  be  responsible  to  the  bishop  in  things  spiritual,  and  account  to 
the  canons  in  regard  to  things  temporal ;  saving  episcopal  right.  \circa 
1230,1 


IGI 


1 25.  Letters  by  WiUiam,  Bishop  of  Glasgow,  and  Galfrid,  Bishop  of  Dunkeld, 
narrating  a  commission  granted  to  them  in  that  part  by  Pope  Gregory  the 
NLnth,  dated  at  Viterbo,  the  3rd  day  before  the  ides  (llth)  of  June,  in 
the  eleventh  year  of  his  poutificate  [1237,]  which  sets  forth  that  in  con- 
sequence  of  a  representatiun  made  to  his  HoUness  in  person  by  the  Bishop 
of  Dunblane  to  the  efiect  that,  the  church  of  Dunblane  having  formerly 
been  vacant  for  upwards  of  100  years,  nearly  all  its  property  had  been 
seized  by  secular  persons,  and  that  although  latterly  several  bishops  had 
been  appointed  to  it,  yet,  through  their  simplicity  and  want  of  care,  not 
only  had  the  property  not  been  recovered,  but  even  that  which  had 
escaped  the  hands  of  the  plunderers  had  almost  entirely  disappeared,  and 
for  nearly  ten  years  no  qualified  person  could  be  induced  to  undertake 
the  chaige  of  the  church,  and  that  it  was  then  destitute  of  the  comfort 
of  a  pastor.      That  his  Holiness,  on  being  made  a\iare  of  this  wretched 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


365 


state  of  matters,  had  appointeJ  the  Bishops  of  St.  Audrews,  Brechiu  aud 
Dunlceld  to  inake  provisiou  for  the  church  ;  and  that  they  had  iutrusted 
it  to  tlie  Bisliop  of  Duublane,  in  the  hope  that  he  might  succeed  iu 
restoring  it  to  its  former  condition  ;  but  that  he  had  found  it  so  desolate 
that  there  was  not  in  the  cathedral  church  where  to  lay  his  head,  there 
was  no  college,  divine  service  beiug  performed  by  a  rural  chaplain  in  the 
roofless  church  ;  the  rents  of  the  bishop  too  were  so  trifling  that  they 
would  scarcely  support  him  for  half  the  year :  That  in  these  circumstances 
his  Holiness,  who  had  the  daily  care  of  all  churches,  charged  tlie  said 
Bishops  of  Glasgow  and  Dunlield  to  proceed  persoually  to  the  said 
church,  and,  if  they  found  that  matters  were  as  they  had  been  repre- 
sented,  to  cause  the  fourth  part  of  the  teinds  of  all  the  parish  churches 
of  the  diocese  of  Dunblane  to  be  assigned  to  the  said  Bishop,  if  this  could 
be  done  without  grievous  scandal,  in  order  tliat  he,  with  their  advice, 
might  allocate  them  for  the  support  of  a  dean  and  canons  to  be  appointed 
there,  reserving  a  suitable  portion  for  himself ;  otherwise,  that  the  fourth 
of  the  teinds  of  all  the  churches  of  the  diocese  which  were  held  by 
secular  persons  should  be  assigned  to  the  Bishop,  and  that  the  Bishops 
of  Glasgow  and  Dunkeld  should  transfer  the  episcopal  seat  to  the 
Abbey  of  the  canons  regular  of  St.  John  in  the  diocese,  power  being 
granted  to  the  canons  themselves  to  elect  a  bishop  when  a  vacaiicy 
occurred  ;  the  letters  further  bear  that  the  Abbot  and  cauons  of  Cam- 
buskenneth  having  opposed  the  claim  advanced  by  Clement,  Bishop  of 
Dunblane,  in  terms  of  the  Pope's  letters,  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  teinds 
of  all  the  parish  churuhes  of  his  diocese,  both  parties  had  at  length  sub- 
mitted  themselves  to  the  decision  of  the  above-mentioned  bishops,  both 
in  respect  to  the  ordering  of  the  church  of  Dunblane,  and  in  re.^pect 
to  the  fourth  of  the  teinds  and  the  ordering  of  their  churches  in  that 
diocese — Dunblane,  Kincardin,  Tulibody  and  Tulicultry — which  were  of 
small  revenue  and  easUy  served  ;  that  these  Bishojjs,  in  order  to  avoid 
scandal  between  the  Bishop  of  Dunblane  and  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth, 
ordained  that  the  said  Abbot  aud  convent  should  find  four  merks  yearly 
for  the  vicar  who  sbould  officiate  for  them  in  the  church  of  Dunblane, 
and  that  the  Abbot  and  his  successors  should  be  canons  in  the 
church  of  Dunblane  ;   and  besides,  that  the  house  of  Cambuskenneth 


KINCARDINE. 


36G 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  IlEGISTEB 


Page 

KixcARDiNE  should  assign  to  the  church  of  Dunblane  four  merks  in  a  flsed  and 
suitable  place,  of  whioh  the  Bishop  aud  his  successors  should  dispose  at 
their  pleasure,— the  last-meutioned  four  merks  to  be  assigned  after  the 
death  of  Mr.  Hugh  de  Boscho  ;  and  that  the  Abbot  anj  his  successors 
should  be  freed  from  payment  of  the  fourth  of  the  teinds  and  the  in- 
stitution  of  vicars  in  the  churches  of  Kiucardin,  Tulybody  and  Tulicultry, 
and  should  present  to  the  bishop  qualified  chaplains  to  ofiiciate  in  them, 
who  shoidd  be  answerable  to  him  in  regard  to  spiritual  matters.  Dated 
at  Dunblane,  the  fourth  day  before  the  calends  of  February  {29th 
January),  1239,    162 

120.  Letters  of  Confirmation  by  the  Dean  and  chapter  of  Dunblane  of  the  letters 
and  instruments  of  coUation  and  confirmation  by  Clement,  Bishop  of 
Dunblane,  and  certain  of  his  predecessors,  to  the  Abbey  of  the  church  of 
St.  Mary  of  Cambuskenneth,  respecting  the  churches  of  Kincardin,  Tuli- 
body  and  Tulicultry,  in  the  diocese  of  Dunblane,  by  which  the  Abbey 
obtained  all  tlie  profits  and  fruits  of  the  said  churches  for  their  own  use 
for  ever  ;  and  likewise  of  the  agreement  made  between  Clement,  Bishop 
of  Dunblane,  and  the  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  set  forth  in  No.  125. 
Dated  at  Duublane,  the  3rd  day  before  the  calends  of  February  (30th 
January),  1239,    165 

127.  Charter  by  King  William  (the  Lion),  granting  to  the  church  of  St.  Mary  of 
Cambuskenneth,  and  the  canons  thereof,  the  church  of  Kincardin,  with  its 
chapels  and  teinds  and  off^erings  of  all  kiuds,  and  thirteen  acres  of  arable 
land  and  a  brewer's  toft,  with  a  garden  and  a  toft  at  the  field  of  St.  Lolan, 
with  a  garden  and  a  toft  at  the  staff  of  St.  Lolan,  with  a  garden,  and  the 
whole  land  lying  between  the  spriug  Faylayat  on  the  east  side,  and  the 
rivulet  descending  from  Garthow  on  the  we.st  side,  with  the  meadow  on 
both  sides  as  far  as  the  moor  of  Lampurry,  and  grazing  for  thirteen  cows 
on  the  King's  land  of  Borland,  and  with  aU  their  just  pertinents  :  To 
be  held  in  pure  and  perpetual  alms  as  freely  as  they  held  their  other 
churches  and  lands.      \circa  1199,] 1G6 

128.  Notarial  Instrument  on  the  institution  by  lAi:  Patrick  Coventre  of  Andrew, 
Abbot  of   Cambuskenneth,    and  Sir   John    Ranaaldson,    canon   of  the 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


367 


Abbey  and  syndic  of  the  convent  thereof,  in  the  rectory  of  the  parish 
church  of  Kippane,  with  all  and  sundry  riglits,  rents,  fruits,  revenues, 
emohiments  and  pertinents  belonging  to  the  said  rectory,  by  exhibition 
and  delivery  into  their  hands  of  book,  chalice,  and  other  ornaments  of 
the  high  altar  of  the  said  church,  in  terms  of  a  bull  from  the  Pope 
and  of  the  King's  charter  of  the  said  rectory,  granted  to  the  Abbot  and 
eonvent.  Done  before  the  high  altar  in  the  choir  of  the  cliureh  of 
Kippane,  21st  July  1510,      Hh 

29.  Charter  by  King  James  (the  Fourth),  narrating  a  grant  made  to  the 
Ahbey  and  canons  of  Cambuskenneth  hy  the  deceased  Walter  Earl 
of  Menteith,  and  Alexander  his  son  and  apparent  heir,  for  the  welfare 
of  the  souls  of  the  granters,  and  of  Jlatilda,  spouse  of  the  said  deceased 
Alexander,  and  for  their  selected  burial-places  in  the  Abbey,  of  the 
parish  church  of  Kippane,  with  the  right  of  patronage  thereof,  in  the 
diocese  of  Dunblane  and  earldom  of  Jlenteith,  in  pure  and  perpetual 
alms ;  and,  forasmuch  as  the  church  and  patronage  had  been  out  of 
the  possession  of  the  Abbey  for  a  long  time  past,  for  the  welfare 
of  the  souls  of  the  King"s  father  and  mother,  James  the  Third  and 
Margaret,  his  spouse,  of  good  memory,  whose  ashes  rested  in  the 
Abhey,  confirming  the  said  grant  for  himself  and  his  successors,  and  of 
new  granting  to  the  Abhey  and  canons  all  right,  claim  and  title  of 
right,  which  they  had  or  could  have  to  the  said  church  and  patronage, 
both  rectory  and  vicarage,  after  the  demission  or  death  of  Mr.  John 
Malyson,  then  rector  thereof :  To  be  held,  the  said  church  and  right 
of  patrouage  of  the  same,  both  rectory  and  vicarage,  with  the  teinds, 
fruits,  oflerings,  and  others,  in  pure  and  perpetual  alms,  for  prayers  to 
be  oflered  up  by  the  canons  for  the  Kings  father  and  mother.  Dated  at 
Stirling,  6th  AprO  1496,  168 


1 30.  Letters  by  James,  Bishop  of  Dunblaiie,  with  consent  of  his  chapter, 
narrating  a  contraet  between  them  and  Andrew  Abbot  of  Cambusken- 
neth,  and  the  convent  thereof,  dated  at  Dunblane,  13th  March  1.510, 
with  respect  to  the  strifes  and  controversies  which  had  arisen,  or  which 
might  in  future  arise,  between  them  respeoting  their  right  to  the  parish 


368 


ABSTEACT  OF  THE  REGISTEB 


cliurch  of  Kippane, — the  Abbot  and  convent  asserting  that  it  belonged  to 
them  by  gift  of  the  patron,  King  James  the  Fourth,  when  it  happened  to 
become  vacant,  and  that  it  was  then  vacant  by  the  resignation  or  demis- 
sion  of  Mr.  Patrick  Coventre,  rector  of  the  said  church  ;  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  Bishop  and  chapter  asserted  tbat  the  church  was  a  prebend  or 
canonry  of  the  cathedral  cliurch  of  Dunblane,  and  in  the  gift  of  the 
Bishop  of  that  diocese,  and  that,  therefore,  the  grant  by  the  King  was 
of  no  avail,  as  he  could  neither  talie  the  right  of  patronage  from  the 
cathedral  church  nor  diminish  the  number  of  its  canons  ;  moreover,  as  the 
Abbot  was  a  canon  of  the  cathedral  church,  on  accuunt  of  the  chiu-ch  of 
Kincardin,  which  belonged  to  his  Abbey,  he  eould  not  lawfully  enjoy  and 
possess  two  canonries  or  prebends  together  in  the  same  church  :  To  end 
tbe  dispute,  it  was  agreed  between  the  parties,  with  consent  of  the  King, 
that  the  vicarage  of  the  church  of  Kippane,  with  all  the  fruits,  rents, 
revenues,  and  others  belonging  thereto,  with  the  sumof^SO  Scots  yearly 
to  be  levied  and  paid  from  the  fruits,  rents,  and  other  profits  of  the 
rectory  of  Kippane,  together  with  the  manse  of  the  prebend,  should  be 
erected  into  a  canonry  and  prebeud  of  the  cathedral  church  of  Duni)lane, 
to  be  called  the  canonry  and  prebend  of  Kippane,  and  to  be  in  the  gift 
of  tlie  Bishop  and  his  successors  ;  and  that  the  Abbot  and  convent,  and 
their  successors,  should  have  all  the  fruits  of  the  rectory  of  Kippane 
granted  in  alms  to  them,  under  burden  of  the  foresaid  sum  of  £20  to 
be  paid  to  the  canon  and  prebendar,  etc.  Dated  at  Dunblane,  Ist  AprO 
1511,    


Page 


170 


1  .'5 1 .  Nutarial  Instrument  on  the  confirmation  by  King  James  (the  Fuurth),  in  a 
Parliament  held  at  Edinburgh,  of  the  grant  which  he  formerly  made  to 
Henry,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  and  to  the  convent  thereof,  by  charter 
under  his  Great  Seal,  of  the  church  of  Kippane,  for  services  to  be  per- 
formed,  and  prayers  to  be  offered  for  the  souls  of  bis  father  and  mother, 
himself  and  his  ancestors  and  successors,  according  to  the  tenor  of  the 
preceding  charter  (No.  129).  The  King's  brother-german,  James  Duke 
of  Ross,  the  Archbishops  of  St.  Andrews  and  Glasgow,  and  many  others, 
are  witnesses.  Done  in  the  Parliament  Huuse,  at  Edinburgb,  23d  June 
HPG,    


174 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


3G9 


132.  Charter  tiy  W.,  son  of  Thorakl,  Sheriff  of  Stirling,  granting  to  the  church 

of  St.  Mary  of  Stirling,  aud  to  the  abbots  anJ  cauons  thereof,  the  chureh 
of  Kirkintulauch,  in  perpetual  alms,  with  half  a  carucate  of  laud,  and 
with  all  tbat  belonged  to  the  church,  for  the  souls  of  himself  aud  of 
his  father  and  mother,  and  of  his  heirs,  etc.  :  To  be  held  as  freely  as 
any  church  was  held  or  possessed  by  auy  one.     \_ante  1195,] 175 

133.  Charter  by  Alexauder  (the  Second),  King  of  Scots,  coufirming  the  resigua- 

tion  which  William  Cumyu,  Earl  of  Buchan,  for  himself  aud  his  heirs, 
made  to  the  church  of  St.  Mary  of  Cambuskenueth  and  the  can»ns 
thereof  of  all  right  which  he  or  his  heirs  had  or  could  have  iu  tbe  church 
of  Kirkiutidach,  in  its  chapels  aud  in  everytliiug  belonging  thereto  :  To 
be  held  in  free,  pure,  and  perpetual  alras,  with  its  chapels,  lauJs,  offerings, 
teinds  and  revenues  of  every  kind,  together  with  an  osgate  of  land 
adjoiuing  the  church  laud  on  the  east  side,  which  the  said  William 
granted  to  the  canous  in  pure  and  perpetual  alms.  Dated  at  Clack- 
mannan,  27th  March,  in  the  twelfth  year  of  the  Kings  reigu,  [122G,]...      17G 

134.  Charter  of  Confirmation    by  Walter,  Bishop  of  Glasgow,    grautiug   and 

coufirmiug  to  the  church  of  St.  Mary  of  Stirling,  anJ  to  the  canons 
serving  GoJ  there,  the  church  of  Kirldntulach,  with  its  chapels, 
lauds,  teiuds  anJ  revenues  of  every  kinJ,  with  all  their  pertiuents, 
to  be  converted  to  their  own  proper  use ;  with  the  privilege  also  to 
the  canons  of  presentiug  to  the  grauter  anJ  his  successors  chaplains, 
or  qualifieJ  clergymen,  to  receive  the  vicarage  of  eight  merks  from 
the  altarage  of  the  church,  who  shouIJ  serve  it  for  the  time,  anJ  be 
auswerable  regardiug  episcopal  matters  and  every  other  duty  pertaining 
to  the  fore.said  church.    [ciVccr  1230,]     17G 

135.  Letters    by   Robert    (Blacader),  Archbishop  of  Glasgow,  directed  to  the 

Dean  of  the  Lennox,  narrating  that  Mr.  John  Stirliug,  who  had  been  pre- 
seuted  by  the  Abbot  and  couvent  of  Cambuskenneth  for  coUatiou  to  the 
perpetual  vicarage  of  the  parish  church  of  Kirkintidach,  vacant  by  the 
preferment  of  Mr.  Eobert  Forman  to  the  precentory  of  Glasgow,  haj 
been  investeJ  in  the  cure  by  the  Archbishop  personally ;  auj  charging  the 
Jean  to  give  Mr.  John,  or  his  procurator  for  him,  actual  and  corporal 
■17 


KIRKINTULAUCH. 


370 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  BEGISTER 


KiRKiNTULADCH.  possession  of  tlie  vicarage,  and  to  defend  liim  in  the  same.     Dated  at 

Stirling,  31st  May  1500,  177 

13G.  Letter  by  the  Ofiicial  Genei'al  of  Glasgow  to  the  curates  of  the  parish 
churches  of  Lenze  and  Monyabrun,  or  to  any  other  chaplain  or  notary 
public  willing  to  undertake  the  execution  thereof,  narrating  tliat  in  con- 
sequence  of  a  complaint  niade  to  him  by  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cam- 
buskenneth,  the  OfBcial  General  had  summoned  before  him  John  Lord 
Flemyng,  Great  Chamberlain  of  Sootland,  and  the  wliole  parishioners  of 
Leuze  or  Kiutulacli,  and  ou  their  failure  to  compear,  had  excommuni- 
cated  them,  and  directed  the  letters  of  excommunication  to  the  curate  of 
Lenze,  who  received  and  read  them,  but  refused  to  cause  them  to  be  put 
to  due  execution ;  aud  that  one  Thomas  Flemyng  laid  violent  hands  on 
the  messenger  and  bearer,  beat  him,  and  forcibly  seized  and  carried  oflf 
the  letters,  thus  incurring  the  sentence  of  the  greater  excommunica- 
tion  ;  and  furthcr,  that  the  curate  of  Lenze,  Sir  John  Reid,  and  other 
clergymen  named,  continued  to  perform  divine  service  when  the  said 
Thomas  Flemyng  and  other  excommunicated  persons  were  present,  in 
contempt  of  ecclesiastical  censures  ;  and  therefore  charging  the  receivers 
of  his  letter  to  summon  the  said  Thomas  Flemyng,  Sir  John  Reid,  curate 
of  Lenze,  Alexander  Crestesone,  and  three  other  presbyters  therein 
named,  to  compear  before  the  Official  General  or  his  commissaries  in 
the  consistory  of  the  Metropolitau  Church  of  Glasgow,  to  hear  seutence 
of  excommunication  passed  agaiiist  themselves,  or  to  show  reasonable 
cause  why  the  sentence  should  not  be  pronounced.  Dated  at  Glasgow, 
20th  March  1522,     179 

137.  Letters  by  King  James  (the  Fifth),  under  the  Great  Seal,  narratiiig  a  decree 
of  the  Lords  of  Council,  in  the  action  and  cause  raised  by  Alexander, 
Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  and  the  convent  thereof,  against  John  Lord 
Fleming,  for  the  wrongous  and  masterful  spoliation  and  withholding  from 
them  of  the  teind-sheaves  of  the  whole  parish  of  the  church  of  Lenze, 
in  the  shire  of  Dumbarton,  belonging  to  them  as  parsons  of  the  said 
church,  for  seven  years  past,  extending  to  thirty-three  chalders  of  meal 
and  three  chalders  of  bear  :  whereanent,  both  the  parties  being  present, 
and  their  rights  being  considered,  the  said  Lords  of  Council  found  and 


OF  GAMBUSKENNETH. 


371 


(lecreed  that  the  said  John  Lord  Fleming  had  done  wrong  in  so  -with- 
holding  the  teiad-sheaves,  and  ordained  him  to  cease  therefrom,  and  also 
to  pay  to  the  convent  the  thirty-three  chalders  of  meal  and  three  chaklers 
ofbear.     Dated  at  Ediuburgh,  llth  March  1523, 181 

138.  Notarial  Instrument,  narratiug  tliat  Alexander,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenueth, 

ou  the  one  part,  and  Malcolm  Lord  Flemiug  on  the  other  part,  com- 
peared  iu  the  presence  of  a  notary  and  witnesses,  desiring  an  accouut 
of  the  teind-sheaves  of  the  parish  church  of  Lenze,  belouging  to  the 
said  Abbot  and  his  convent,  which  teind-sheaves  and  fruits  the 
said  Malcolm,  and  the  deceased  John  Lord  Fleming,  his  father,  had 
intromitted  with,  as  Malcolm  confessed,  for  eight  years  and  oue  term 
precediug,  and  applied  to  their  own  use  without  accounting  ,  and  ac- 
cordingly  Malcolm  rendered  to  certain  auditors  thereiu  mentioned  his 
accouut,  in  which  he  charged  himself  with  certain  sums  of  money 
and  quantities  of  victual  for  the  said  teinds  of  the  kirk  of  Lenze 
duriug  the  eight  years  and  one  term  foresaid,  amouuting  in  all  to 
£2528,  5s.  3d.,  certain  payments  being  aUowed  which  reduced  the 
amount  due  to  the  Abbey  to  £2148,  5s.  4d.  Dated  at  Edinburgh, 
30th  March  1527,    182 

139.  Act  respectiug  the  payment  to  be  made  by  the  Lord  Flemyng  to  the  Abbot 

of  Cambuskeuueth,  under  pain  of  excommunication,  of  the  sum  of  500 
merks  Scots,  for  the  grassum  and  farm  duty  of  the  teind-sheaves  of  the 
parish  church  of  Kirkintulach  for  three  years,  for  which  period  the  said 
teinds  had  been  set  in  tack  by  the  Abbot  to  the  said  lord,  namely,  eighty- 
three  merks  at  each  term  of  Martinmas  and  Whitsunday,  till  the  whole 
was  paid.     Dated  lOth  October  1507,  18G 

1 40.  Precept  directed  by  Gaviu  (Dunbar),  Archbishop  of  Glasgow,  to  the  Dean  of 

the  Lennox,  narratiug  that  Sir  John  Clerk,  canon  of  Cambuskenneth,  in 
name  and  behalf  of  Mr.  James  Lyn,  canon  of  Dunkeld,  who  had  been 
presented  by  Alexander,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenueth,  had  received  investi- 
ture  in  the  perpetual  vicarage  of  the  parish  church  of  St.  Ninian  of  Lenze, 
by  tbe  Archbishop  placing  his  ring  on  the  finger  of  the  said  Sir  Johu, 
aud  charging  the  receiver  of  the  precept  to  give  Mr.  James  or  liis  pro- 


K1RKIN"TUL.\UCH. 


372 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  BEGISTER 


KiRKiNTULAUCH.  curator  corporal  possession  of  the  vicara;,'e.     Dated  at  EdinTjurgh,  Ist 

Mareh  1.525, 187 

141.  Notarial  In.strument,  narrating  that  Sir  William  Paterson,  canon  of  Cam- 
buslienneth,  compeared  in  presence  of  Sir  WiUiam  Erskine,  curate  of  the 
parish  church  of  Lenze,  and  requested  the  curate  to  induct  him,  in 
name  and  behalf  of  Mr.  James  Lyn,  into  the  actual  possession  of  the 
perpetual  vicarage  of  Lenze,  which  the  curate  did  by  giving  bim  the  key 
of  the  door  of  the  cburch,  and  delivering  to  him  the  chalice  and 
paten,  and  the  missal  of  the  high  altar  of  the  same.  Done  in  the 
choir  of  the  churcb  of  Lenze,  bcfore  the  celebration  of  high  mass,  lOth 
Jirne  1.526,  189 

142.  Notarial  Instmment  on  the  institution  given  by  Sir  AVilliam  Erskine, 
curate  of  the  parish  cburcb  of  St.  Ninian  of  Lenze,  in  terms  of  letters 
by  Gavin,  Archbishop  of  Glasgow,  directed  to  Duncan  Burnet,  presbyter 
of  the  diocese  of  Aberdeen,  and  Master  in  Arts,  coUating  the  latter  to 
the  perpetual  vicarage  of  the  said  cburch,  which  Mr.  James  Lyn  had 
resigned  on  obtaining  the  perpetual  vicarage  of  the  parish  church  of 
Auchterhouse,  in  the  diocese  of  Dunkeld,  in  excbange,  and  cbarging 
the  Dean  of  the  Lennox,  or  any  curate  to  wbom  the  letters  should  be 
presented,  to  institute  him  therein.  The  Archbishop's  letters  were 
dated  in  the  Chapel  Royal,  near  the  Abbey  of  Holyrood,  in  the  diocese 
of  St.  Andrews,  31st  March,  and  the  institution  was  given  at  the  high 
altar  of  tbe  parisb  church  of  Lenze,  on  7th  April  1.527, 190 

1 4  3.  Letters  by  Gavin  (Dunbar),  Archbishop  of  Glasgow,  directed  to  Mr.  Alex- 
ander  Annand,  cullating  him  to  the  perpetual  vicarage  of  the  parish  church 
of  St.  Ninian  of  Lenze,  vacant  through  tbe  resignation  thereof  by  Mr. 
Duncan  Burnet  in  exchange  for  the  pensionary  ^icarage  of  the  parish 
church  of  Fern,  held  by  Mr.  Alexander,  and  charging  the  Dean  of  the 
Lennox  to  induct  him.  Dated  in  the  archieijiscopal  palace  at  Glasgow, 
22d  September  1530,    195 

144.  Notarial  Instrument  on  the  institution,  in  terms  of  the  immediately  pre- 
ceding  letters  of  the  Archbishop  of  Glasgow,  by  Sir  Andrew  Simson, 


OF  GAMBUSKENNETH. 


373 


KILMARONOCK. 


curate  of  Lenze,  of  Slr.  Alexander  Annand,  into  the  perpetiial  vicarage  of  kirkintulacch. 

the  parish  church  of  St.  Ninian  of  Lenze  :  'which  institution  ■svas  given  by 

the  delivery  to  him  of  the  chalicc  and  paten,  the  missal,  the  ornameuts  of 

the  altar,  and  the  key  of  the  door.     Done  at  the  high  altar  of  the  said 

parish  church,  at  the  time  of  high  luass,  when  the  pavishiouers  were 

assembled,  25th  September  1530, 197 

145.  Charter  by  Kiug  Robert  (the  Bruce),  granting  and  confirmiug  to  the  Abbot 

aud  canons  of  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth,  for  the  welfare  of  the  souls 
of  himself  and  of  his  ancestors  and  successors,  Kings  of  Scotland,  the 
patronage  of  the  church  of  Kilmaronock  :  To  be  held  by  them  aud  their 
successors  in  free,  pure  and  perpetual  alms,  as  freely  as  the  right  of 
patronage  of  any  church  could  be  granted  by  his  JLajesty  or  his  prede- 
cessors  to  any  abbey.  Dated  at  Scone,  IGth  January,  in  the  twentieth 
year  of  the  King"s  reign,  [1325,]  199 

146.  Letters  by  John  (Lindsay),  Bishop  of  Glasgow,  granting  to  the  Abbot  and 

convent  of  Cambuskenneth,  in  consideration  of  their  hospitality,  the 
church  or  chapel  of  Kilmaronock,  the  right  of  patronage  whereof  had  been 
bestowed  on  them  by  the  King,  together  with  the  lands,  teinds,  offerings, 
and  whole  just  pertineuts  thereof,  uuder  reservation  of  the  right  of  the 
rector  of  the  said  church  until  his  resignation  or  death,  or  his  removal 
in  any  other  lawful  way  ;  and  reserving  also  to  the  granter  tlie  appuint- 
nient  to  the  vicarage  of  the  church  when  it  happened  to  become 
vacant.     Dated  at  Cambuskeuneth,  22d  November  1325,   200 

117.  Letters  of  Confii-mation  by  the  dean  and  chapter  of  Glasgow,  narrating  the 
foregoing  charter  (No.  145),  and  the  immediately  preceding  Letters  (NTo. 
146,)  and  confirming  the  grants  made  therein.  Dated  at  Glasgow,  Friday 
next  after  the  Feast  of  the  Translation  of  Saint  Thomas  the  Martyr 
(lOthJidy)  1327,     201 

148.  Letters  of  Collation  by  John  (Lindsay),  Bishop  of  Glasgow,  directed  to  the 
Dean  of  the  Lennos,  for  instituting  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambus- 
kenneth  in  the  ehurch  of  Kilmaronock,  vaeant  by  the  resignation  of  Sir 
John  of  Lindesay,  last  rector  thereof, — the  Bishop  reserving  to  himself  the 


374 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  REGISTER 


KiLMARONOCK                          ordering  of  the  vicarage  of  tlie  said  church,  upon  the  presentation  of  the 
Abbot  and  convent,  when  a  vacancy  occurred.     Dated  at  Glasgow,  Wed- 
nesday  next  before  the  Feast  of  Saint  Barnabas  the  Apostle,  (8th  June) 
.     1328,  203 

149.  Letters  by  the  OfEcial  of  tlie  Court  of  Glasgow,  bearing  that  the  cause 
which  had  long  been  discussed  before  him  in  the  Consistorial  Court  of 
Glasgow  between  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenueth,  rectors  of  the 
the  parish  church  of  Kilmarouock,  on  the  one  part,  and  Sir  Maurice, 
perpetual  vicar  of  the  same,  on  the  other  part,  regarding  the  payment 
of  the  procurations  of  the  said  church,  which  the  Abbot  and  convent 
asserted  to  be  due  by  the  vicar,  was  at  length  amicably  settled  before 
him  in  judgment  in  the  following  manner ;  namely,  that  Sir  Maurice 
as  vicar  should  in  time  to  come  pay  the  procurations  of  the  said  church 
when  due  on  account  of  canonical  visitation,  and  that  the  Abbot  and 
convent  should  remit  and  quitclaim  to  him  all  expenses  connected  with 
the  litigation  between  them.  Done  in  the  consistory  of  the  High  Church 
of  Glasgow,  31st  January  1351, 204 

150.  Confirmation  by  Pope  John  (the  Twenty-first)  of  the  charter  (No.  145) 
by  King  Robert  Bruce,  granting  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambus- 
kenneth  the  right  of  patronage  of  the  parish  church  of  Kilmaronock,  in 
the  diocese  of  Glasgow,  and  forbidding  any  one  to  infringe  the  letters  of 
confirmation  on  paiu  of  incurring  the  iudignation  of  the  Almighty,  and 
of  Peter  and  Paul,  his  apostles.  Dated  at  Avignira,  the  lOth  day 
before  the  calends  of  July,  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  the  Pope's  pontificate 
(22d  Junel334), 205 

151.  Letters  by  Pope  Cleraent  (the  Sixth),  directed  to  the  Bishop  of  Glasgow, 
narrating  that  a  petition  had  been  presented  to  his  Holiness  on  behalf  of 
William,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  and  the  convent  thereof,  bearing  that 
John,  Bishop  of  Glasgow,  his  predecessor,  had  confirmed  to  them  tbe 
charter  by  King  Robert  (the  Bruce),  granting  to  them  the  right  of 
patronage  of  the  parish  churcli  of  Kilmaronock,  in  his  diocese,  and  hari, 
in  compassion  for  the  poverty  of  the  abbey,  granted  to  them  the 
church  itself,  theu  vacant  by  the  resignation  of  the  deceased  Mr.  John 


OF  CAMBUSKENXETH. 


375 


Lindsay,  formerly  rector  there,  under  reservation  to  the  Bishop  of  tlie 
ordering  of  the  perpetual  vicarage  of  the  same  for  a  vicar  to  be  iusti- 
tuted  by  him  'when  a  vacancy  occurred,  on  the  presentation  of  tlie 
Abbot  and  convent ;  and  charging  the  Bishop  of  Glasgow  to  inquire 
into  the  various  points  embraced  in  the  petition,  and  if  he  found  them 
to  be  truly  stated  to  confirm  by  his  apostolic  authority  the  grant  and 
confirmation  thereof,  and  to  assign,  if  necessary,  a  suitable  portion  out 
of  the  reuts  and  profits  of  the  ehurch  for  the  maintenance  of  a  perpetual 
vicar.  Dated  at  Avignon,  the  6th  day  before  the  uones  of  (2dj  Ootober, 
in  the  first  year  of  the  Pope's  puutificate  [1342,]    


KILMARONOCK. 


■20  0 


152.  Letters  of  Collation  by  Robert  (Blacader),  Archbishop  of  Glasgow,  directed 

to  the  Dean  of  the  Lennox,  fur  instituting  and  collatiug  Sir  John  Naper, 
presented  by  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth  to  the  per- 
petual  vicarage  of  the  parish  chui'ch  of  KUmarouock,  vacant  by  the 
resignation  or  demission  of  Sir  Andrew  Whitehead,  last  vicar  thereof,  iu 
exchange  for  the  rectory  of  Auldkrathy  (Auldcathy),  in  tlie  diocese  of 
St.  Andrews.     Dated  at  Glasgow,  3d  September  1507, 207 

153.  Letters  of  CuUatiou  by  James  (Bethune),  Archbishop  of  Glasgow,  directed 

to  the  Deau  of  the  Lenuox,  for  coUating  Sir  Richard  Stirling,  presbyter, 
presented  by  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth,  to  the  perpetual 
vicarage  of  the  parish  church  of  Kilmaronock,  vacant  by  the  death  of 
Sir  John  Napier,  last  vicar  thereof,  Sir  Richard  haviug  already  beeu 
personally  invested  in  the  cure  by  the  Archbishop  placing  his  ring  ou 
his  flnger.     Dated  at  Edinburgh,  13thMay  1522, 209 

15-1.  Notarial  Instrument,  narrating  the  compearance  of  Sir  Eichard  Stirliug,  in 
presence  of  Sir  Alexauder  Libburn,  curate  of  Kilmaronock,  requiriug 
the  latter  to  iuduct  him  into  the  actual  possession  of  the  perpetual 
vicarage  of  Kilmaronock,  in  terms  of  the  preceding  letters  of  coUatiou 
by  the  Archbishop  of  Glasgow  in  his  favour  :  witli  which  request  the 
curate  compUed,  and  invested  Sir  Richard  in  the  same,  by  delivering  to 
Inm  the  key  of  the  door,  the  chalice  and  paten,  aud  the  missal  of  the 
high  altar  of  the  said  church,  ett.  Done  in  the  chuir  of  the  church  of 
Kilmaronock,  [15th  May  1522,]   211 


376 


ABSTEACT  OF  THE  EEGISTER 


KiLJiARONOCK.  \5o.  Letters  of  Collation  by  Gavin  (Dunbar),  Archbisliop  of  Glasgow,  direeted  to 
the  Dean  of  the  Lennox,  bearing  that  the  perpetual  vicarage  of  the  parish 
church  of  Kilmaronock  was  then  vacant,  through  the  resignation  thereof 
by  Mr.  Walter  Mailvile,  the  last  vicar,  in  exchange  for  the  benefice  of  the 
parish  church  of  St.  Patriclf  of  Strogeith,  which  Mr.  Kobert  Grahaiu 
held  ;  and  directing  the  Dean  and  other  presbyters  in  the  granter's 
diocese,  to  give  institution  into  the  said  vicarage  to  the  said  Mr.  Kobert 
Graham,  who  had  been  presented  thereto  by  the  Abbot  and  convent  of 
Cambuslvynneth.  Datcd  at  tho  arcliiepiscopal  palace  of  Glasgow,  8th 
June  1527,  212 

15G.  Letters  by  Gavin  (Duubar),  Arohbishop  of  Glasgow,  directed  to  Sir  Maurice 
Clerk,  pre.sbyter,  on  the  pre.sentation  in  his  favour  by  the  Abbot  and  con- 
vent  of  Cambuskynneth,  the  patrons,  collating  him  to  the  perpetiial  vicar- 
age  of  the  parish  church  of  Kilmaronock,  which  Mr.  Kobert  Graham 
had  resigned  in  exchange  for  the  vicarage  of  the  parish  church  of  Dry- 
men  ;  and  charging  the  Dean  of  the  Lennox,  or  any  other  ecclesiastical 
persons  in  the  diocese  of  Glasgow,  to  give  the  said  Sir  Maurice  institutiou 
or  investiture  therein.  Dated  iu  the  chiach  of  Glasgow,  25th  July 
1527,  214 


157.  Notarial  Instrument,  narrating  the  compearance  of  Sir  Maurice  Clerk  in 

presence  of  Sir  David  Thomas,  curate  of  Kilmaronock,  requesting  the 
latter  to  give  him  corporal  possession  of  and  institution  into  the  perpetual 
vicarage  of  the  pari.sh  church  of  Kilmaronock,  in  terms  of  the  foregoing 
letters  of  collation  in  his  favour,  following  upon  a  presentation  by  the 
Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskyimeth,  patrons  of  the  said  church  of 
Kilmaronock  :  which  investiture  the  curate  gave,  by  delivering  to  the 
said  Sir  Maurice  the  key  of  the  door  of  the  church,  and  other  things 
requisite.  Done  in  the  parish  church  of  Kilmaronock,  28th  July 
1527,  

158.  Decree  by  the  Lords  of  Council  aneut  the  summons  raised  at  the  instance 

of  Alesander,  Abbot  of  Cambuskeuneth,  and  the  eonvent  thereof,  against 
John  Buchanan,  James  Haldaue  of  Gleneagles,  and  others,  parishiouers  of 
Kilmarouock,  for  wrongfully  withholding  from  the  complainers  the  teind- 


210 


OF  CAMBUSKEXXETH. 


i11 


Pagf 

sheaves  of  tlie  parish  and  church  belonging  to  them,  as  patrons  ;  whereby 
the  whole  defenders  were  decerned  to  pay  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  the 
amounts  of  grain  and  fodder  therein  particularly  specified  for  the  teind- 
sheaves  of  their  respective  lands  within  the  parish.  Dated  at  Edinburgh, 
26th  February  1528,     218 

159.  Contract  between  Alesander,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  and  Andrew  Lord 

Avendale,  by  which  it  was  agreed  that  althongh  the  latter  owed  to 
the  former  and  his  convent  .£72  of  the  fruits  of  the  kirk  of  Kilmaronock 
for  crop  1526,  and  had  also  intromitted  with  a  part  of  the  fruits  for  the 
year  1527,  yet,  because  he  had  renounced  his  riglit  to  a  tack  of  the  said 
fruits  granted  to  him  by  the  Abbot  and  convent,  and  had  promised  to  assist 
them  and  their  factors  in  collecting  and  iiptaking  the  fruits  foresaid,  the 
Abbot  discharged  Lord  Aveudale  of  the  said  sum,  and  assigned  to  him  the 
portion  of  the  fruits  for  crop  1527,  stiU  unpaid,  and  became  bound  to 
pay  200  merks  to  his  mother,  to  get  her  acquittance  therefor,  and  deliver 
it  to  him.     Dated  at  Ediuburgh,  9th  December  1529,   222 

160.  Charter  by  Robert  Erskine,  lord  of  that  ilk  and  of  the  barony  of  Kinnoull, 

granting  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth,  and  their  suc- 
cessors,  for  the  welfare  of  the  souls  of  himself,  his  predecessors,  heirs 
and  successors,  lords  of  the  barony  of  KinnouII,  the  patronage  of  the 
church  of  Kinnoull :  To  be  held  by  them  and  their  successors  in  free, 
pure  and  perpetual  alms,  as  freely  as  any  advowson  or  right  of  patron- 
age  of  any  church  was  held  by  any  abbey  or  religious  house  from  any 
earl  or  baron  in  the  kingdom.     Dated  at  Stirling,  27th  January  1.361,        224 

161.  Charter  by  'William  (deLaudal),  Bishopof  St.  Andrews,  with  consent  of  the 

Prior  and  chapter  thereof,  by  which,  after  setting  forth  the  precediug  grant 
of  the  patronage  of  the  parish  church  of  KinnouII,  and  stating  that  he  had 
often  been  urged  by  Sir  Eobert  and  by  King  David,  at  his  instance,  to 
grant  the  church  itself  to  the  Abbey  and  convent,  he,  considering  the 
devotion  of  the  granter,  the  urgency  of  the  Prince,  and  the  loss  aud 
damage  which  the  Abbey  had  suffered  by  war  and  by  lightniug, 
granted  to  them  the  said  church,  with  its  lands,  teinds,  ofierings,  and 
whole  pertiuents,  and  invested  therein  Gilbert,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth, 
48 


KILMAROXOCK 


378 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  BEGISTER 


Page 

KYNNOULE.  reserving  the  right  of  Brice,  rector  of  the  said  church,  until  his  resigna- 
tion  or  death  ;  the  grantees  being  bound  to  maintain  divine  service  in 
the  church  by  a  qualifieJ  chaplain,  saving  the  riglits  of  the  Bishop  and 
the  Archdeacon.    Dated  at  St.  Andrews,  7th  February  1361, 22.5 

1 G2.  Charter  by  King  David  (the  Second), confirming  the  grant  made  to  the  Abbot 
and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth  by  Kobert  of  Erskin,  knight,  of  the 
patronage  of  the  parish  church  of  Kinnoull  (No.  160).  Dated  at  Edin- 
burgh,  7th  April,  in  the  thirty-second  year  of  the  King's  reign,  [1361,1       226 

1 63.  Letters  by  William  (de  Landal),  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  and  the  Prior  and 
chapter  thereof,  confirming  thecharters  Nos.  160  and  161,  and  ordaining 
that  ,£10  yearly  should  be  paid  out  of  the  fniits  of  the  church  of  Kynnoule 
to  the  perpetual  vicar  or  curate  thereof  for  his  support  ;  saving  the  rights 
of  the  Bishop  and  Archdeacon.  Dated  at  St.  Andrews,  7th  February 
1361,   227 

164.  Letters  by  William  (de  Landal),  Bishop  of  St.  Audrews,  directed  to  Sir 
Andrew,  perpetual  vicar  of  Perth,  setting  forth  that  he,  with  consent 
of  his  chapter,  had  granted  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Carabuskenneth 
the  clmrch  of  Kinnoull,  and  charging  the  vicar  to  institute  the  Abbot  in 
his  own  name  and  in  the  name  of  his  convent  in  the  said  church  and 
induct  him  as  true  rector  thereof,  so  that  it  might  not  be  necessary  to 
grant  institution  anew  on  the  retirement  or  death  of  the  rector  then 
in  possession.     Dated  at  Monimail,  19th  February  1361,  229 

16.5.  BuII  by  Pope  Clement  (the  Seventh),  directed  to  the  Bishop  of  Glasgow, 
narrating  a  petition  presented  to  his  IlolLness  on  behalf  of  the  Abbot  and 
convent  of  Cambuskenneth,  bearing  that  William,  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews, 
had  granted  to  theni  the  parish  church  of  KinnouII,  in  the  diocese  of  St. 
Andrews,  and  that  they  had  peaceably  possessed  the  said  church  for 
about  two  years  after  the  death  of  Brice  de  Biy,  the  last  rector  thereof, 
when  a  dispute  arose  between  them  and  Andrew  of  Trebrine,  a  priest  of 
the  diocese,  who  maintained  that  the  church  had  been  provided  to  him 
by  apostolic  authority,  and  that  he  had  obtained  a  finul  judgment  in  his 
favour  adjudging  it  to  him,  and  that,  upon  the  pretest  of  this  judgment, 


OF  CAMBUSKEXXETH. 


370 


the  saiJ  Andrew  had  depriveJ  the  Abbot  aad  convent  of  it,  and  there- 
after  hehl  it  himself ;  and  charging  the  Bishop  of  Glasgow  to  inquire 
into  the  circumstances  set  forth  iu  tlie  petition,  and  if  he  foimd  it 
expedient  that  tlie  church  of  Kinnoull  should  be  united  to  the  Abbey, 
to  cause  it  to  be  annexed  thereto,  so  that  when  it  should  becouie 
vaeant  by  the  resignation  or  death  of  the  said  Andrew,  the  Abbot 
and  convent  sliould  freely  obtain  corporjil  possession  thereof,  aud  of  its 
fruits,  rents,  and  whole  profits  and  pertiuents  ;  also  charging  hioi  to 
assign  a  suitable  portion  of  these  fruits,  reuts  and  profits  for  the  maiu- 
tenance  of  a  perpetual  vicar  to  officiate  in  the  church.  Dated  at 
Avignon,  the  7th  day  before  the  caleuds  of  November,  in  the  first  year 
of  the  Pope's  pontificate,  [26th  October  1378,]  23» 

1 GG.  BuU  by  Pope  Benedict  (tlie  Thirteenth),  directed  to  the  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews, 
uarrating  the  petition  set  forth  in  the  preceding  bull  (No.  1 65),  and 
stating  that  in  consequence  of  Pope  Clement  having  died  before  the 
annexation  authorized  by  that  bull  could  be  carried  Lnto  eflect,  the 
annexation  had  been  annulled  ;  but  seeing  that  a  new  petition  had  been 
presented  by  Kobert  King  of  Scots,  and  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cam- 
buslcennetli,  his  Holiness  charged  the  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews  to  iuquire  into 
the  circumstances  set  forth  iu  tlie  latter  petition,  and,  if  he  found  tliem  true, 
to  unite  the  church  of  Kinnoule  to  the  Abbey  by  his  apostolic  authority, 
and  to  assign  a  competent  portion  of  the  fruits  and  rents  thereof  for  the 
maintenance  of  a  perpetual  vicar,  to  be  presented  to  it  by  the  Abbot  aud 
convent  of  Cambuskenneth.  Dated  at  Niee,  the  -ith  day  before  the  nones 
(2d)  of  April,  in  the  eleventh  year  of  the  Pope's  pontificate,  [I40.5,]    ...      233 


1C7.  Notarial  Instrument,  narrating  that  Sir  Richard  of  Craufurd  and  Johu  of 
Benyne,  canons  regular  of  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskennetli,  compeared  in  pre- 
sence  of  a  notary  and  witnesses  in  the  vestry  of  the  parish  church  of  Pertli, 
and  that  Sir  Pvichard  produced  letters-patent,  under  the  seal  of  the  abbey, 
convent  and  chapter  of  Cambuskenneth,  appointiug  him  their  procurator 
for  discussing  and  determining  certain  controversies  between  them  and  Mr. 
Andrew  of  Trebrone  respecting  the  possession  of  the  church  of  Kynnoule, 
and  that  upon  these  letters  being  read  in  presence  of  Sir  Andrew  of  Petscoty, 


380 


ABSTEACT  OF  THE  REGISTER 


Piige 

KYNNOULE.  perpetual  vicar,  aud  John  Gill,  Provost  of  Perth,  the  latter,  addressing 
Mr.  Andrew,  said  that  his  master,  the  Earl  of  Craufurd,  had  agreed  with 
the  Abbot  of  Cambuslvenneth  that  the  fruits  of  the  church  of  Kinnoull 
should  belong  to  liim  (Mr.  Andrew)  for  the  year  then  current,  and  after 
that  he  must  be  contented  with  £20  yearly,  to  be  paid  to  him  during  his 
lifetime  or  till  he  obtained  auother  benefice,  and  that  the  whole  church  of 
Kynnoule,  iu  property  and  possession,  should  belong  to  the  abbey  and 
convent ;  to  which  both  Mr.  Andrew  and  Sir  Eichard,  as  procurator 
for  the  said  Abbot  atid  convent,  agreed.  Done  in  the  church  of  Perth, 
2Gth  September  1403,  23G 

1  G8.  Notarial  Instrument,  narrating  that  Sir  Nicholas  of  Erslcine,  kuight,  lord  of 
the  barony  of  Kiiinoull,  had  appeared  personally  in  the  chapter-house 
of  Cambuskenneth,  and  confirmed  the  grant  made  by  Sir  Robert  of 
Erskine,  knight,  his  father,  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  thereof,  of  the 
patronage  of  the  parish  church  of  Kynnoule,  and  had  resigned  aU  right 
which  he  or  his  heirs  could  have  thereto  into  the  hands  of  the  Abbot 
and  convent,  to  be  held  by  them  in  pure  and  perpetual  alras,  in  terms 
of  the  chartcr  granted  by  Sir  Robert  Erskine  ;  and  that  the  Abbot 
and  convent  had  granted  to  Sir  Nicholas  and  his  heirs  the  right  of  pre- 
senting  to  the  vicarage  of  the  church,  which  was  endowed  with  a  pension 
of  twelve  merks  from  the  fruits  thereof  Done  in  the  chapter-house  of 
the  Abbey  of  Cambuskeuneth,  2Ist  March  UOO,    23i) 

1G9.  Letters  by  John,  Prior  of  the  Metropolitan  Chiu-ch  of  St.  Andrews,  and 
Vicar-General,  the  see  being  vacant,  stating  that  he  had  caused  Mr.  John 
Boswell,  claiming  to  be  rector  of  the  parish  chureh  of  Kynnoule,  and  all 
others  having  interest,  to  be  cited  to  see  and  hear  the  coUation  of  the 
rectory  granted  to  hira  on  the  presentation  of  James,  Archbishop  of 
Glasgow,  ChanceUor,  on  behalf  of  the  King,  cancelled  and  annulled,  and 
that  on  the  day  appointed  the  said  Blr.  John  having  compeared,  with 
his  agent,  in  the  aisle  of  the  said  church  of  St.  Andrews,  Sir  William 
Nory  requested  the  Prior  to  cancel  the  said  collation,  and  to  grant 
collation  of  the  rectory  to  him  (Sir  William),  on  the  presentation  of 
Alexander  Earl  of  Huntlie  and  Isabella  Gray,  his  Countess,  to  whoin 
he  alleged  this  turn  of  the  presentation  belonged  ;  against  which  the 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETII. 


381 


agent  for  JMr.  John  Boswell  protested,  alleging  tbat  tliere  was  a  siiit 
respecting  tlie  saiil  church  depending  before  the  Coiirt  of  Rome  against 
Mr.  John  at  the  instance  of  Mr.  William  Stewart.  At  length  Alexander, 
Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  compeared  for  himself  and  his  Abbey,  and 
having  produced  a  libel  in  duplicate,  which  is  therein  narrated,  proposed 
that  the  cause  should  be  proceeded  with,  that  the  collation  given  to 
Mr.  John  Boswell  should  be  cancelled,  and  that  collation  should  not 
be  given  to  Sir  William  Nory,  because  the  patronage  of  the  church 
belonged  to  the  Abbey  of  Carabuskynneth  by  the  gift  of  the  Lord  of 
Kynnoule,  the  undoubted  patron  thereof,  which  gift  was  confirmed  by 
the  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews  and  his  chapter,  and  by  the  Pope  :  AII  which 
the  Abbot  offered  to  prove,  and  requested  that  the  Prior  would  decide 
accordingly.  Done  in  the  aisle  of  the  Metropolitan  Ciiurch  of  St. 
Andrews,  18th  November  1.521,    oj.[ 

170.  Grant  by  King  David  (the  First)  to  the  Abbot  of  Stirling  and  the  canons 

thereof,  for  the  welfare  of  the  souls  of  himself  and  his  ancestors,  of  the 
land  of  Ketlistoun  in  perpetual  alms,  as  free  from  all  secular  service  as 
the  other  lands  which  thcy  held  of  the  King.     At  Kinross,  [eirca  11.50,1     250 

171.  Charter  by  King  Alesander  (the  Second),  confirming  tlie  quitclaim  which 

William  of  Ketliston  made  for  hiraself  and  his  heirs,  in  presence  of  Galfred, 
Bishop  of  Dunkeld,  and  others,  of  the  land  of  Ketliston  to  the  Abbot  and 
convent  of  Cambuskenneth,  and  the  grant  made  by  the  Abbot  and  con- 
vent  to  William  and  his  next  heir  of  their  lauds  of  Benyn  and  Duglyn 
in  return  for  the  said  quitclaim  and  resignation  ;  aud  further  confirmiiig 
the  grant  which  the  Abbot  and  convent  thereafter  made  to  William  and  his 
heir  of  tlie  land  of  Badyndath  in  excambion  for  the  lands  of  Benyne  and 
Duglyn,  with  the  addition  of  eight  merks  to  be  paid  to  Williara  and  his 
heir  by  the  Abbot  and  convent :  To  be  held  by  Williara  and  his  heir  fore- 
said  during  their  whole  life,  in  terms  of  their  charter  thereof,  saving  the 
King's  service.  Dated  at  Stirling,  7th  January,  in  tlie  thirty  first  year 
of  the  King's  reign,  [1244,]  250 

172.  Exemption  by  the  Auditors  of  Exchequer,  of  the  people  dwelling  on  the 

lands  of  the  barony  of  Ketlistoun   from  the  payraent  of  £10  of  tlie 


KETLISTOUN. 


382 


ABSTRACT  OF  TIIE  REGISTEP, 


KETLISTOUN. 


two  bluJewits  of  Jaraes  Broeas  anil  his  son,  allooated  on  tliem  in  the 
aecount  of  James  Hamilton  of  Kincavill,  Sheriff  of  Linlithgow,  because 
Ketlistoun  was  known  to  beloug  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambus- 
kynneth,  and  because  the  Sheriff  had  proceeded  unjustly  against  the  said 
James  and  his  son,  while  the  Abbot  was  absent  in  England  as  one  of  the 
King's  ambassadors,  on  the  business  of  the  State.   Dated  1  -ith  July  15 2/), 


251 


KIXTULACII. 


173.  Precept  by  King  Robert  (tlio  Third)  to  the  Sheritf  of  Edinburgh  aiid  his 

Bailies  of  Linlithgow,  stating  that  William,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  had 
•  appeared  in  presence  of  his  Majesty,  and  complained  that  they  exacted 
from  the  lands  of  Ketli.stoun,  in  the  eonstabulary  of  Liulithgow, 
common  suit  and  services,  contrary  to  the  tenor  of  the  charter  by  the 
deceased  King  David  in  favour  of  the  Abbey  ;  and  charging  them  to 
abstain  therefroin  in  future.  Given  under  the  Privy  Seal,  at  Scone, 
after  his  Majesty's  coronation,  1 8th  August  [1390,]    251 

174.  Charter  by  King  William  (the  Lion),  gi-anting  and  confirming  to  the  church 

of  St.  ]\Lary  of  Cambuskcnneth  and  the  canons  thereof,  one  merk  of  silver 
j'early  for  light,  which  the  Countess  Ada,  his  mother,  gave  to  them  in 
the  burgh  of  Karell  (Crail)  :  To  be  held  in  pure  and  perpetual  alms  as 
freely,  peaceably  and  honourably  as  his  mother's  charter  bore.  At  Stir- 
ling,  [circa  1174,] 252 

175.  Charter  of  Confirmation  by  King  William  (the  Lion),  granting  and  confirm- 

ing  to  the  church  of  St.  Mary  of  Stirling  and  the  canons  serving  God 
there,  a  full  toft  in  the  burgh  of  Karell  which  his  mother  the  Countess 
Ada  gave  to  them,  with  half  a  carucate  of  land  in  Petcorthun,  with 
commou  pasturage  :  To  be  held  as  freely  and  peaceably  in  pure  and 
perpetual  alms  as  the  charter  of  the  Countess  bore.  At  the  Castle  of 
Edinburgh,  \circa  1174,]  252 

17G.  BuU  by  Pope  Gregory  (the  Eleventh),  confirming  the  grant  made  by 
Robert  of  Erskin,  knight,  and  Christian  of  Keith,  his  spouse,  for  the 
welfare  of  the  souls  of  themselves  and  their  ancestors,  and  of  all 
the  faithful  dead,  of  their  whole  land  in  the  place  of  Kintulach,  in 
the   earldom    of  Stratherne,    to  the  Abbot   and  convent  of   Cambus- 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


383 


kenneth  :  To  be  held  by  them  in  free,  pure  and  periietual  alms,  as  freely 
and  honoiirably  as  any  land  in  Scotland  could  be  granted  iu  pure  and 
perpetual  alms  to  any  abbey,  for  performing  divine  services  iu  masses 
and  other  prayers  for  the  granters  and  others  above  referred  to,  daily  for 
ever.  The  charter  of  Robert  of  Erskin  is  dated  at  Stirling,  8th  Septem- 
ber  1361,  and  the  Pope's  confirmation  is  dated  at  Avignon,  the  5th  day 
before  the  ides  (9th)  of  April,  in  the  fourth  year  of  the  Pope's  pontifi- 
cate,  [1374,]    2")3 

177.  Charter  by  Johanna,  Countess  of  Stratherne,  in  her  widowhood,  to  Sir 

Robert  of  Erskin,  knight,  for  his  homage  and  service,  and  to  Dame 
Christian  of  Keith,  his  spouse,  the  granter's  "  dearest  cousin,"  and  to  the 
survivor  of  them,  and  to  the  lawful  heirs  of  their  bodies,  of  the  lands 
and  tenements  of  Kintulach,  in  the  earldom  of  Stratherne  :  To  be  held 
by  the  said  Sir  Eobert  and  Christian,  and  their  foresaids,  whom  failing, 
by  the  lawful  heirs  of  Sir  Robert,  of  the  granter  and  her  heirs  in  feu 
and  heritage,  for  rendering  the  King's  foreign  service  pertaining  to  the 
said  lands  and  tenements,  and  for  paying  to  the  granter  and  her  heirs 
yearly  a  penny  of  silver,  in  name  of  blcnch  farm,  only  if  asked,  for 
wards,  marriages,  or  reliefs,  and  all  other  services.      \circa  1361,]   255 

178.  Charter  by  Robert  Steward  of  Scotland  and  Earl  of  Stratherne,  confirming 

the  charter  granted  by  Sir  Robert  of  Erskin,  knight,  and  Christian  of 
Keith,  his  spouse,  narrated  in  the  preceding  bull,  No.  176.  Dated  at 
Methven,  12th  September  1301,   256 

179.  Letter  of  Resignation  by  John  of  Megille,  lord  of  the  third  part  of  Kin- 

tulach,  resigning  into  the  hands  of  the  Abbot  aud  convent  of  Cambus- 
kenneth,  his  superiors,  the  said  third  part  of  the  lands  of  Kintulach,  iu 
the  earldom  of  Stratherne  and  shire  of  Perth,  which  he  held  of  the 
Abbey  in  chief,  to  be  disponed  by  them  at  their  plea.sure.  Dated  at 
Megille,  16th  February  1381,    258 

180.  Letters  by  King  David  (the  Second)  to  the  sherifl's  and  their  bailies  of  Perth, 

narrating  that  the  land  of  Kintulach  in  their  bailiery  had  been  granted  to 
the  Abbey  and  convent  of  Cumbuskeuneth  in  pure  and  perpetual  alms, 


KIXTUL.^CH 


384 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  REGISTER 


KINTULACH. 


aucl  that  the  grant  had  been  confirmed  botli  by  tlie  King  and  by  tbe 
Apostolic  See ;  and  forbidding  tlie  sberiffs  and  bailies  to  levy  contri- 
butions  ujion  the  inhabitants  of  the  said  eleemosynary  hxnds,  or  compel 
them,  or  suffer  them  to  be  compelled,  to  perform  any  other  services  than 
such  as  were  rendered  by  the  possessors  of  other  alms  lands  •within  their 
bailiery.  Given  under  the  Privy  Seal  at  Edinburgh,  Ist  May,  in  the 
fortieth  year  of  the  King's  reign,  [1369,]  259 

181.  Decree  prouounced  by  John  of  Levingstoun,  knight,  and  others,  on  the  oue 

part,  and  Walter  of  Murreff  of  Drumsergart  and  others,  on  the  other 
part,  arbiters  mutuaUy  chosen  by  the  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth  and 
WiUiam  of  Fentouue,  younger,  to  determine  all  actions  between  them, 
finding  that  Williani  should  assith  the  Abbot  for  the  relief  of  his  land 
of  Kintulach,  and  fulfil  thereanent  the  terms  of  his  obligation  to  the 
Abbot ;  also,  that  he  should  restore  to  the  Abbofs  men  of  Kintulach, 
within  ten  days,  ten  osen  and  five  covfs  ■which  had  been  wrongously 
taken  from  them,  and  veere  still  kept  by  him  :  and  with  reference  to  a 
complaint  by  William  against  the  Abbot  relative  to  the  eating  of  his  part 
of  the  meadow  of  Kyntulach,  they  ordained  that  the  Abbot  should  assith 
WUIiam  for  the  third  part  thereof.  There  are  other  findings  in  this 
decree,  by  one  of  which  Eobert  of  Dunbarny,  for  having  spoken  "  dis- 
pituisly  "  of  the  Abbot  and  hLs  court,  is  ordained  to  come  to  the  Abbey 
on  Lady-day,  hoodless,  hoseless,  hatless,  shoeless,  with  a  wax  candle  in 
his  hand,  and  ask  the  Abbofs  forgiveness  on  his  knees,  etc.  etc.  Dated 
at  the  kirk  of  Perth,  13th  February  1389, 259 

182.  Charter  by  Alesander,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  and  the  convent  thereof, 

granting  aud  confirming  to  Mr.  Henry  Quhite,  canon  of  Moray,  etc, 
rector  of  St.  Modoce,  official  of  Dunblane  and  lord  of  Auchnaguff,  heritably, 
whom  failLng,  to  John  Quhite  of  Lumbenny,  his  brother's  son,  and  the 
lawful  heirs  of  his  body,  whora  faUiug,  to  Robert  Quhite  of  Tethindade, 
brother-german  of  the  said  John,  and  the  lawful  heirs  of  his  body,  the 
third  part  of  all  and  sundry  the  town  and  lands  of  Kintulach,  with 
the  third  part  of  the  mUI  thereof,  lying  in  the  parish  of  Dunbarney, 
near  the  Bridge  of  Enie,  in  the  shire  of  Perth,  which  formerly  belonged 
to  James  Feutoun  of  OgUl,  and  were  held  from  the  Abbey  in  chief,  and 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


385 


had  been  resigned  by  the  said  James  into  the  hands  of  the  granters, 
as  superiors,  in  favour  of  the  said  Mr.  Henry  and  the  persous  foresaid, 
on  payment  of  a  certaiu  sum  of  money  ;  the  said  lands  and  others  to 
revert  to  the  granters  on  the  faihire  of  the  persons  foresaid  and  their 
heirs,  or  on  their  alienating  any  part  thereof  without  the  graiiters  per- 
mission  and  confirmation :  To  be  held  as  freely,  fully  and  honourably  as 
any  lands  in  the  realm  of  Scotland,  for  rendering  to  the  Abbot  and 
convent,  and  their  successors,  the  services  due  and  vront,  aud  paying  to 
a  chaplain  for  performing  masses  for  ever  for  the  soid  of  the  said  Henry 
seventeen  merks  of  aunualrent.  Dated  at  Cambuskyimeth,  Ist  Juue 
1530 2G1 

183.  Letters  hy  William,  Bishop  of  Dunblane,  with  conseut  of  the  dean  aud 

chapter  thereof,  and  of  jMr.  Heniy  Quhite,  canon  of  Moray,  and  Su'  Stevin 
Culrois,  chaplain  of  the  chaplaiury  of  the  Trinity  altar  iu  the  cathedral 
church  of  Dunblane,  founded  by  the  said  Mr.  Henry,  by  which,  on  the 
narrative  that  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth,  as  superiors, 
had  infeft  Mr.  Henry  in  the  third  part  of  the  lands  of  Kintulach,  and 
the  third  part  of  the  mill  thereof,  which  were  to  descend  after  him  to 
John  and  Robert  Quhite,  aud  their  heirs,  and  fuUing  them  to  revert 
to  the  Abbot  and  couvent  ;  and  that  the  said  Mr.  Heury  had,  witli  cou- 
sent  of  the  Abbot  aud  couveut,  iufeft  a  chapLain  to  serve  in  the  said 
cathedral  churcli  iu  au  annualrent  of  seventeen  merks  yearly,  the 
granters  became  bound,  for  themselves  and  their  successors,  upon  the  said 
lands  aud  mill  revertiug  to  the  Abbey,  and  upon  the  Abbot  and  convent 
securiug  to  the  chaplain  aud  his  successors  as  good  an  annualrent, 
to  resign  the  annualreut  of  seveuteen  merks  which  the  chaplain  held 
out  of  the  said  lands  and  mill  to  tlie  Abbot  and  convent,  to  remain  with 
them  and  their  successors  fur  evcr.  Dated  at  Dunblane,  26th  Mareh 
1533  aud  4th  March  1534,  264 

184.  Letters  by  Richard  (Inverkeithiug),  Bishopof  Duukeld,  with  consent  of  the 

Dean  and  chapter  thereof,  aud  of  the  Abbut  and  convent  of  Cambusken- 
neth,  stating  that  the  clmrch  of  Kinclevin  had  been  divided  into  two  parts, 
of  which  the  one  belonged  to  the  preceutor  of  Duukeld,  and  the  other 
to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth,  in  consequence  of  which 
49 


KINTULACH 


KIXCLEVIX. 


386- 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  EEGISTER 


tliere  was  great  danger  to  tlie  souls  of  the  people  from  the  chiirch 
not  being  ■n-ell  served,  and  that  therefore  the  granters,  having  regard 
to  the  advantage  both  of  the  church  of  Dunkeld  and  of  the  Abbey, 
ordained  that  the  cliurcli  of  Kinclevin,  with  all  its  cure  and  burden, 
with  its  lands,  teinds  and  profits,  and  all  its  just  pertinents,  should 
lielong  to  tlie  precentory  of  the  kirk  of  Dunkeld  for  ever ;  reserviug  to 
the  Abbot  and  conveut  six  merks  yearly,  to  be  paid  to  them  by  the  pre- 
centor  of  the  church  of  Dunkeld  for  the  time  being,  for  ever,  in  name  of 
simple  benefice  ;  and  in  the  event  of  the  precentor  of  Dunkeld,  for  the 
time  being,  delaying  the  payment  of  the  six  merks  beyond  fifteeu 
days  after  the  term  appointed,  he  should  pay,  for  each  week  beyond  the 
fifteeu  days,  half  a  merk  to  the  fobric  of  the  bridge  of  Dunkeld,  in 
name  of  peualty  ;  the  Bishop,  for  himself  and  his  successors,  becoming 
bound  to  conipel  the  precentor  to  pay  the  six  merks  and  the  penalty, 
and  to  hold  the  Abbot  and  convent  skaithless  :  The  precentor  being 
bound  to  serve  the  church  of  Kinclevin  by  a  qualified  chaplain,  and 
to  answer  for  the  episcopal  and  all  burdens  pertaiuing  to  the  church, 
and  to  find  a  qualified  and  honest  chaplain,  besides  his  vicar,  to 
perform  the  mass  of  the  Holy  Virgin  Mary  daily  for  ever,  in  the  church 
of  Dunkeld  :  The  Bishop  and  chapter  ordaiued  also  that  the  church 
of  Lecroth  (Lecropt),  in  which  previously  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cam- 
buskenneth  had  no  right,  with  all  its  pertinents,  should,  on  the  granters' 
collation,  pertain  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  for  ever  for  their  own 
private  uses,  they  causing  the  church  to  be  served  by  a  qualified  chaplain 
to  be  presented  to  the  Bishop  and  his  successors,  reserving  to  the  latter 
their  episcopal  rights  in  the  church,  according  to  ancient  usage  ;  and 
declariug  that  the  Abbot  and  conveut  had  right  to  the  half  of  all  the 
teinds  of  the  church  of  Kinclevin,  and  the  whole  offerings  and  income, 
for  whioh  they  were  bound  to  cause  service  to  be  performed  there  in  a 
becoming  manner  by  a  qualified  chaplain.  Dated  at  Dunkcld,  on  the  day 
after  All  Saints  (2d  November),  12G0,  267 


185.  Instrument  narrating  that,  on  the  Monday  next  before  the  Feast  of  Saint 
Urbau,  Pope  and  Martyr,  (19th  May)  1315,  the  Abbot  and  convent  of 
Cambuskenneth  appeared  by  William  of  Anand,  their  Pl-ior  and  pro- 


OF  CAMBUSKENXETH. 


387 


curator,  in  the  church  of  the  Carmelite  Friars,  uear  Perth,  before  William, 
Bishop  of  Duulceld,  anJ  beggej  that  Sir  Duncan,  then  ijrecentor  of 
Dunkeld,  who  was  there  present  on  citation,  should  be  compelled  by  the 
Bishop's  ordiuary  authority  to  pay  to  the  Abbot  and  couvent  an  annual 
pension  of  six  merks  due  by  him  to  the  Abbey  iu  the  church  of  Kin- 
clevin,  under  an  arrangement  made  by  Eichard,  sometime  Bishop  of 
Dunkeld,  together  with  the  arrears  for  eight  years  during  which  he  had 
not  paid  the  pension,  and  that  he  should  be  orJered  to  pay  the  same 
yearly  in  time  to  come  Tvithout  trouble  at  the  terms  appointej  ;  auJ 
that,  after  some  discussion,  by  advice  of  the  Bishojj,  aud  of  Isichulas, 
Bishop  of  Dunblane,  and  others  ■who  were  present,  William,  as  pro- 
curator  for  the  Abbey,  gave  up  the  claim  to  the  arrears,  the  precentor 
declaring  that  he  was  unable  to  pay  them  on  account  of  the  poverty 
of  his  church  ;  and  with  respect  to  the  payment  of  the  pension  in 
future,  it  was  agreed  that  the  precentor  should  pay  to  the  Abbey  the  first 
year  one  merk  sterling,  the  second  year  two  merks,  the  third  year  three 
merks,  and  so  on  until  the  sixth  year,  when  he  should  pay  six  merks, 
and  thereafter  he  should  pay  the  full  pension  at  the  stated  terms. 
Dated  at  the  church  of  the  Carmelite  Friars,  near  Perth,  Monday  above 
mentioned,  (19th  May)  1315,    

18G.  Eesignation  by  John  Eaunaldson,  son  aud  heir  of  the  deceased  Patrick 
Eanualdson,  burgess  of  Linlithgow,  through  his  procurators,  into  the 
hands  of  Henry,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  of  an  acre  of  arable  land,  with 
the  pertinents,  lying  within  the  shire  of  Linlithgow,  at  the  east  end  of 
the  burgh  thereof.     DateJ  at  Linlithgow,  lOth  February  1493, 

18".  Notarial  Instnimeut,  narrating  that  David,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  as 
procurator  of  John  of  Annand,  canon  of  the  Abbey,  compeared  before 
a  notary  and  witnesses,  and  required  Alexander  Haithwy,  bailie  of 
the  burgh  of  Linlithgow,  to  proceed  to  a  certaiu  tenement  within  the 
burgh,  the  boundaries  of  which  are  described  in  tlie  instrument,  and 
to  give  him  sasiue  thereof,  in  name  of  the  Abbey  aud  convent,  in  terms 
of  his  charter  ;  and  that  the  bailie,  resignation  of  the  tenement 
having  before  been  made  into  bis  hands  by  the  procurators  of  the  said 
Sir  John  of  Annand,  gave  sasiue  anJ  personal  possession  thereof  to 


271 


LINLITHGOW. 


388 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  REGISTER 


LINLITHGOW. 


JIOBBISCKOFT. 


the  Abbot,  in  name  and  behalf  of  the  convent  of  the  Abbey,  and  their 
successors,  in  pure  and  peqjetual  alms  for  ever.     Dated  22d  AuiTust 

1440, r.... 

188.  Charter    by  David    Flemyng,   lord  of  Bigar,    with  consent   of   Malcolm 

Flemyng,  his  sou  and  heir,  from  motives  of  piety,  and  for  the  welfare 
of  the  souls  of  his  father  and  of  himself  and  of  his  dearest  spouse,  Isabella, 
and  of  all  hi.s  predecessors  and  successors,  and  of  all  the  faithful  dead, 
granting  to  the  Abbey  of  Cambuskenneth,  and  the  canons  wor.shipping  God 
there,  for  ever,  all  and  sundry  the  lands  of  Muretoun,  formerly  called  Lady- 
land,  with  their  pertinents,  in  the  shire  of  Stirling  :  To  be  held  from  the 
granter  and  his  heirs  by  the  foresaid  canons,  and  their  successors,  in  pure 
and  perpetual  and  peaceable  alms,  for  ever ;  with  courts,  issues  and 
escheats  of  courts,  and  whole  just  pertinents  belonging  to  the  said  lands, 
as  freely  as  any  alms  were  given  and  granted  within  the  realm  of  Scot- 
land,  for  performing  for  all  the  soids  foresaid  at  masses  and  hours  special 
orisons  every  day  for  ever,  in  place  of  all  other  burdens  and  secular  ser- 
vices  exigible  from  the  said lands.    Dated  at  Stirling.  8th  Novemberl399, 

189.  Charter  of  Confirmation  by  King  Robert  (the  Third),  under  the  Great  Seal, 

uf  the  foregoing  charter  by  David  Fleniyiug,  Lord  of  Bigar,  of  the  lands 
of  Muretoun  iu  favour  of  the  Abbey  and  canons  of  Cambuskenueth  : 
To  be  held  in  pure  and  perpetual  alras,  and  in  mortmain  for  ever,  for 
oflering  up  prayers  for  the  king  and  his  successors.  Dated  at  Linlith- 
gow,  24th  February  1400,  

190.  Charterby  King  David  (tlie  Fir.st),  granting  and  confirmingto  theAbbot  of 

Stirling  and  to  the  canons  serving  God  there,  the  land  lying  between  tlie 
Forth  and  the  road  leading  from  Stirling  to  the  ships  as  far  as  the  stream 
which  comes  down  from  the  King's  mill  on  the  Forth  ;  the  fishings  of 
Karsy  and  Tulibody,  and  easements  in  the  King's  wood  of  Keltor,  for 
their  private  use  :  To  be  held  of  the  King  and  his  heirs  in  free  and  per- 
petual  alms,  as  freely,  peaceably  and  honourably  as  His  Majesty  grauted 
any  alms  to  be  held  in  his  kingdom.     At  Stirling,  \circa  1 1 50,] 


191. 


Charter  by  Hugh,  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  granting  to  his  Abbot  and  friars 
of  StirUn?,  and  to  their  church,  his  whole  land  of  Malar  :  To  be  held  of 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


389 


the  granter  and  his  suceessors  free  from  all  custom  and  service  ■which 
pertained  to  him  and  his  foresaids,  for  payment  of  ten  shillings  every 
j'ear  at  Martinmas.     [aVcn  1180,]    278 

192.  Charter  by  the  Countess  Ada,  mother  of  the  King  of  Scots  (William  the 

Lion),  granting  to  the  church  of  St.  Mary  of  Stirling  and  to  the  canons 
serving  God  there,  one  full  toft  in  her  burgh  of  Kerell  (Crail),  and  half 
a  carucate  of  land  in  Petcorthyn,  with  proportional  common  pasturage 
in  free  and  perpetual  alms,  for  the  welfare  of  the  souls  of  herself  and  of 
Earl  Henry  and  her  ancestors.  This  charter  inhibits  any  one  from  mulest- 
ing  or  injuring  the  grantees  with  respect  to  the  said  land,  and  is  dated 
at  Haddington,  \circa  1153,] 279 

193.  Charter  by  King  "William  (the  Lion),  granting  and  confirming  to  the  church 

of  St.  Mary  of  Stirling  and  to  the  canons  serving  God  there,  one  full  toft 
in  his  new  burgh  of  Perth  :  To  be  held  by  them  in  free  and  perpetnal 
alms,  as  freely,  peaceably,  fully  and  honourably  as  the  Kiug's  other 
abbacies  held  any  toft  in  any  of  his  burghs.  Dated  at  Perth,  \circa 
1165,] 279 

194.  Charter  by  JLalcoIm  (the  Fourth),  King  of  Scots,  granting  to  the  church  of 

St.  Mary  of  Stirling  and  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  serving  God  there,  for 
the  weUare  of  the  souls  of  himself  and  his  ancestors,  in  free  and  per- 
petual  alms,  fifty  shillings  yearly  of  his  cane  of  Perth,  and  that  annual- 
rent  which  the  canons  of  Edinburgh  used  to  hold  of  the  King  of  his 
cane  of  Perth  ;  the  annualrent  of  fifty  shillings  being  in  lieu  of  the  cane 
of  one  ship  which  the  canons  of  Stirling  were  wont  to  have  from  the  King 
yearly  at  Perth  :  This  charter  is  addressed  to  Franks  and  Angles,  Scots 
and  Galwegians,  and  is  dated  at  Perth,  \<:irca  1165,] 280 

195.  Final  judgment  pronouneed  by  Jolm  Weddale,  canon  of  Jloray  and  prin- 

cipal  official  of  St.  Andrews,  decernuig  John  Donyng,  burgess  of  Perth, 
to  pay  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth  twenty  shillings 
yearly  of  farm-duty  for  twenty  years  prior  to  1520  in  respect  of  his  intro- 
mission  during  that  period,  either  by  himself  or  others  in  his  name,  with 
a  croft  of  land  belonging  to  the  Abbot  and  convent,  lying  near  the  place 
of  the  Carthusiaus  of  Perth  ;  together  with  the  taxed  expenses  of  the 


PETCORTHY 


390 


ABSTRACT  OF  TEE  BEGISTER 


lawsuit  and  sentence.  Done  in  tlie  chureli  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist, 
in  the  city  of  St.  Andrews,  and  sealed  with  the  seal  of  the  offieialate 
thereof,  Sth  August  1520, 281 

190.  Charter  hy  King  David  (the  Second),  from  motives  of  piety,  and  for  the 
welfare  of  the  souls  of  himself  and  Margaret  Queen  of  Scotland,  and 
of  his  ancestors,  heirs  and  successors,  granting  to  the  church  of  St. 
Mary  of  Cambuskenneth  and  the  canons  serving  God  there,  an  annual- 
rent  of  ten  pounds  of  silver  due  to  the  King  yearly  from  the  lands 
of  Plane,  in  the  shire  of  Stirling  :  To  be  held  by  the  Abhot  and 
convent  and  their  successors  of  the  King  and  his  heirs  and  successors, 
Kings  of  Scotland  for  the  time,  in  free,  pure  and  perpetual  alms, 
without  coutradiction  or  diminution  from  any  cause  or  accident  what- 
ever,  at  the  hands  of  any  persons  whatever  into  whose  possession  the 
said  lands  of  Plane  might  come.  This  charter  contains  an  injunction 
to  the  sherifl"  of  Stirling,  iu  the  event  of  the  proprietors  or  tenants  of 
the  said  lands  refusing  to  pay  the  said  sum  at  the  due  time,  to  distrain 
their  goods,  moveable  and  immoveable,  wherever  found,  that  the  said 
Abbot  and  convent  might  be  fully  paid  term  by  term.  Dated  at  Perth, 
25th  August,  in  the  thirty-sixth  year  of  the  King's  reign,  [13G-1,]  282 

197.  Charter  by  King  David  (the  Second),  afterand  notwithstanding  the  general 

revocation  in  a  Parliament  held  at  Scone  of  all  the  King's  grants,  granting 
and  confirming  to  the  church  cf  St.  Mary  of  Cambuskenneth  and  to  the 
canons  serving  God  there,  for  the  welfare  of  the  souls  of  himself 
and  Margaret,  Qucen  of  Scotland,  an  annualrent  of  ten  pounds  of  silver 
due  to  him  yearly  from  the  lands  of  Plane,  in  the  shire  of  Stirling :  This 
charter  is  in  the  sanie  terms  as  the  one  immediately  preceding,  and  is 
given  under  the  Great  Seal,  at  Edinburgh,  25th  February,  in  the  thirty- 
eighth  year  of  the  King's  reign,  [1366,] 283 

198.  Bull  by  Pope  Urban  the  Fifth,  confirming  the  grant,  No.  19C,  by  King 

David  (the  Second)  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth,  of  an 
annualrent  of  ten  pounds  of  silver  due  to  the  King  from  the  lauds  of 
the  Plane,  in  the  shire  of  Stirling.  Dated  at  Mount  Flasco,  the  1 6th 
day  before  the  calends  of  July  (IGth  June),  in  the  seventh  year  of  the 
Pope's  Pontificate,[13G9,] 281 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


391 


199.  Letter  by  ■WiUiam  (of  Lambertoune),  Bishop  of  St.  AnJrews,  narrating  tbat 
tbe  controversy  movetl  before  the  Official  of  St.  Andrews  between  the 
Abbot  and  convent  of  Dunfermliug,  pursuers,  on  the  one  part,  and  the 
Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenueth,  defenders,  on  the  other  part, 
respecting  the  right  of  rcceiviug  the  teind  sheaves  of  the  old  park  of 
Stirling,  of  new  brought  under  cultivation  iu  the  time  of  Eobert  King  of 
Scots,  had  been  at  length  amicably  and  finally  settled  as  follows  : — That 
the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth  should  have  in  farm  from  the 
Abbot  and  convent  of  Dunfermling  for  ever  all  the  teind-sheaves  of  the 
town  of  Cambusbaroun,  with  the  teinds  of  the  okl  park  foresaid,  aud 
should  enjoy  the  same  as  their  own,  for  paymeut  to  the  latter  of  the  sum 
of  100  shillings  sterling  yearly,  excepting  the  teind  of  the  croft  of  Hugh 
Parker,  lying  in  the  forementioneJ  park,  the  teind  whereof  belonged  to 
the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth  in  terms  of  an  old  agreement 
betweeu  the  two  Abbeys  ;  and  that  in  the  event  of  the  said  park  being 
opened  agaiu,  twenty  shillings  shouIJ  be  subtracted  from  the  100 
shillings  yearly,  and  from  that  time  the  cauons  should  be  freed  from 
the  payment  of  these  twenty  shilliugs,  and  should  pay  for  the  remain- 
ing  teinJs  six  merks,  so  long  as  the  park  remaiueJ  uncultivateJ,  and 
if  the  teinds  of  Cambusbaroun  and  of  the  park  should  happen  to  be 
wasted  or  destroyed,  iu  whole  or  in  part,  by  common  vvar,  aUowance 
should  be  made  therefor  to  the  Abbot  and  conveut  in  the  payment  of 
their  form-duty.  Dated  at  DunfermeUng,  on  the  day  of  the  Annunciation 
of  the  blessed  Virgin  Mary,  [25th  March]  1319,    286 


iOO.  MemoranJum,  bearing  that  the  Abbots  of  Dunfermeling  anJ  of  Cambus- 
kenneth  compeared  in  presence  of  William  (of  Lambertoun),  Bishop  of 
St.  AnJrews,  at  Torry,  on  MonJay,  Martinmas  eve  (lOth  November), 
1 320,  Jisputing  respecting  a  certain  agreemeut  maJe  between  them,  with 
the  authority  anJ  consent  of  the  said  Bishop,  anJ  reJuceJ  to  writing, 
relative  to  the  teind-sheaves  of  the  town  of  Carabusbaroun  and  the  old 
park  of  StirUng,  and  at  length,  with  consent  of  the  Bishop,  agreed  as 
foUows  : — That  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenueth  should  only 
pay  to  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Dunfermeling  for  the  teiud-sheaves 
as  much  as  they  could  be  set  in  tack  for  by  the  procm^ators  of  either 


392 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  REGISTEB 


Page 

party,  until  they  reached  the  value  of  100  shillings,  and  after  that  the 
principal  agreement  formerly  made  betweeu  the  parties  relative  to  the 
teinds  should  again  come  into  force.  Dated  at  Torry,  the  said  Martin- 
mas  eve,  1320, 288 

20  i.  Precept  by  King  Robert  (the  Third), directed  to  his  justices,  sheriffs,  provosts, 
and  their  hailies,  charging  them  to  cause  all  those  in  their  bailieries  or 
burghs  who  were  indebted  to  the  Abbot  and  conveiit  of  Cambuskenneth 
to  pay  their  debts  to  theni,  or  to  their  attoruey,  justly  aud  without  delay, 
so  that  his  Majesty  might  no  longer  hear  just  complaint  on  account  of 
their  faihire  to  do  so  :  The  precept  to  lie  in  force  for  a  year.  Dated  at 
Stirling,  Tth  Juue,  in  the  sixth  year  of  the  Kiug"s  reign,  [1395,] 288 

202.  Confirmation  by  King  James  (the  Fourth)  of  a  Decree  of  the  Lords  of  his 

Council,  ordainiug  that  the  provost,  bailies  and  community  of  Stirling 
sliould  cease  to  occupy  the  fishiugs  of  the  Forth  between  the  Abbey  of 
Cambuskeuneth  and  Polmaise,  aud  also  the  fishing  of  the  water  of  Kersy 
and  Tulibody,  to  be  brooked  and  enjoyed  by  the  Abbot  and  convent  of 
Cambuskemieth,  in  terms  of  the  charters  and  evidents  made  to  them 
thereupon,  which  were  produced  before  the  Lords  of  Council ;  and  that 
the  provost,  bailies  and  community  should  pay  to  the  Abbot  and  convent 
the  profits  of  the  fishings,  in  so  far  as  it  could  be  proved  that  they  had 
iiitromitted  with  the  same  during  the  space  of  the  tweuty-five  years 
mentioned  in  the  summons.  The  decree  is  dated  at  Edinburgh,  19th 
February  1495,  and  the  confirmatiou  is  given  under  the  Great  Seal  at 
Stirling,  8th  April  1495,  289 

203.  Confirmation  by  King  James  (the  Fifth)  of  an  Act  by  the  Lords  of  his 

Council  settiug  forth  that  anent  the  summons  raised  at  the  instance  of 
the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth  and  the  tenants  of  their 
fishing  on  the  Forth,  against  John  Forestar  and  Walter  Grahame,  bailies 
of  StirliTig,  and  other  persons  named,  for  the  wrongous,  violent  and 
masterful  spoliation  by  themselves  and  their  accomplices,  and  away-taking 
of  cobles  and  nets  from  the  said  tenants,  under  silence  of  night,  out 
of  the  Abbey  lands  called  Abbotishude,  in  the  shire  of  Clackmaunau, 
the  parties  had  compeared  before  the  Lords  of  Council,  and  that  the 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


393 


procurator  for  tlie  defenders  baving  referred  tlie  inatter  to  tlie  Abbot's 
conscience,  tbe  latter  assigned  tbe  26tb  Marcb  next  following  to  tbeni  to 
compear  at  Stirling  and  bear  bini  decbire  bis  will  tbereanent.  Tbe  Act 
is  dated  at  Edinburgb,  27tb  February  1531,  and  tbe  confirmation  is 
given  under  tbe  Great  Seal,  at  Edinburgb,  8tb  Marcb,  in  tbe  nineteentb 
year  of  tbe  King's  reign,  [1531,]  290 

204.  Notarial  Instrument,  narrating  tbat  Alexandcr,  Abbot  of  Cambuskennetb, 
for  bimself  and  bis  convent,  and  tbeir  successors  on  tbe  one  part,  and  Blr. 
AVUIiam  Hamilton,  vioar  of  Stirling,  on  tbe  otber  part,  compeared  in  pre- 
sence  of  Mr.  Hugb  Spens,  Provost  of  tbe  College  Cburcb  of  St.  Salvator, 
in  tbe  eity  of  St.  Andrews,  delegate  of  tbe  apostolic  see,  and  tbe  sub- 
delegate  of  his  colleagues  tbe  Official  of  St.  Andrews  and  tbe  sub-dean 
of  Moray,  in  St.  Ann's  Cbapel,  St.  Andrews,  and  approved  tbe  contract 
made  between  tbem  respecting  tbe  teinds  of  the  fisbings  of  tlie  water  of 
Fortb,  between  tbe  Abbey  of  Cambuskennetb  and  tbe  Orcbardbead, 
wbich  teinds  tbe  said  Mr.  WiUiam  tben  possessed,  tbe  Abbot  being 
content,  for  himself  and  bis  convent,  that  the  vicar  should  possess  the 
teinds  of  the  fishes  taken,  and  to  be  taken,  as  long  as  he  enjoyed  the 
vicarage  of  Stirling,  peaceably,  and  witbout  any  bindrance  whatever  :  and 
tbe  Abbot  was  warned,  for  bimself  and  his  convent,  to  observe  this  Act 
in  all  its  points,  under  pain  of  suspension  ;  and  tbe  vicar  confessed  that 
the  Abbot  had  made  lawful  interruption  for  preventing  prescription  witb 
respect  to  tbe  teinds  by  answering  the  libel  and  proponing  exceptions 
against  tbe  same  :  Upon  all  which  botb  parties  craved  instmments. 
Done  in  St.  A-nn's  Cbapel,  St.  Andrews,  16tb  November  1526, 292 


205.  Letters  of  Inhibition  by  Patrick  (Grabam),  Bisbop  of  St.  Andrews,  narrating 
tbat  the  Abbot  and  convent  of  Cambuskenneth  bad  compeared  before  bim 
and  made  a  verbal  complaint  and  appeal  from  (1)  an  interlocutor  and 
(2)  a  final  judgment  in  favour  of  one  Thomas  Carmicbael,  alleged  vicar  of 
tbe  parish  cburch  of  Stirling,  prouounced  against  them,  by  Mr.  William  of 
Elphinstoune,  canon,  and  GUbert  Rerik,  arcbdeacou  of  the  churcb  of  Glas- 
gow,  pretending  to  be  judges  delegated  by  the  apostolic  see  in  the  cause 
respecting  tbe  teinds  of  the  salmon  caugbt  in  the  Forth  within  tbe  parishes 
50 


394 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  REGISTER 


of  the  parish  churches  of  Cambuskenneth,  St.  Ninians,  near  Stirling,  and 
Clackmanuan,  in  the  diocese  of  St.  Andrews,  against  which  unjust  judg- 
ments  they  had  appealed  to  the  said  See,  and  caused  intimation  thereof 
to  be  made  to  Mr.  William,  alleged  judge  foresaid,  in  absence  of  the 
said  Gilbert,  and  had  received  letters  dimissory  from  himself  thereanent, 
and  lawfully  remitted  the  cause  to  the  apostolie  see,  respecting  all 
which  they  made  faith  before  the  said  Patrick  by  legal  and  authentic 
proofs  ;  notwithstanding  which,  as  the  complainauts  alleged,  the  said 
pretended  judges  intended  to  carry  out  their  uujust  judgments  against  the 
appellants  in  contempt  of  the  suit  in  dependence,  and  to  the  scandal  and 
loss  of  the  appellauts,  and  of  the  apostolic  see  ;  wherefore  the  Bishop 
inhibited  Thomas  Carmichael,  and  all  others,  from  presuming  to  carry 
out  the  said  judgments  or  to  demand  that  they  should  be  put  into 
execution  until  the  term  expressed  in  these  appeals  should  have  elapsed 
and  the  appeals  should  be  abandoned,  undcr  pain  of  the  gi'eater  excom- 
munication.     Dated  at  Cambuskenneth,  9th  November  li68, 29;i 

20G.  Extract  from  the  Book  of  the  Acts  of  the  Official  of  St.  Andrews,  within  the 
Archdeanery  of  Lothian,  narrating  a  letter  of  agreement  by  John  Creich- 
toun  of  Strathurd,  knight,  in  which,  submitting  himself  to  the  jurisdictioii 
of  the  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  he  confessed  that  he  had  no  riglit  nor 
title  of  right,  on  account  of  the  lands  of  the  Orchard  of  Tulibody,  to  the 
fishing  upon  the  water  of  Forth,  except  only  by  toleratiun  of  the  Abbot 
and  convent  of  Cambu.skenueth,  and  promised  that  in  time  to  come  he 
would  not  intromit,  by  himself  or  his  tenants,  with  the  said  water  and 
fishing,  without  the  permission  and  assedation  of  the  said  Abbot  and 
convent  :  which  agreement  the  said  John  was  warned,  on  Ist  March 
1521,  to  observe  and  fulfil,  on  pain  of  excommunication.  The  Extract 
is  sealed  with  the  seal  of  the  Oflicial  of  St.  Audrews,  at  Ediuburgh, 
12th ,  1527,     295 

207.  Notarial  Instrument,  narratiug  that  Helen  Murray,  lady  of  Easter  Polmais, 
compeared  iu  presence  of  Alexander,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  and,  with- 
out  compulsion  as  she  asserted,  declared  that  she  had  intromitted  witli 
a  certain  fishing  in  tbe  water  of  Forth  to  the  present  time  without  any 
title,   and,    with  reference  to   the  future,  faithfully    promised    to   the 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


395 


Abbot  that  slie  -would  not  intromit  therewith  unless  by  his  special  per- 
mission  and  assedation,  and  not  otherwise  :  upon  all  whioh  the  Abbot 
asked  instruments.  Done  in  the  new  hall  of  the  Abbot,  at  Cam- 
buskenneth,  9th  August  1520,  29G 

208.  Charter  by  King  Alexander  (the  Third),  granting  to  God  and  St.  Mary  of 

Stirling,  and  to  the  canons  serring  God  there,  in  excambion  for  the 
King's  mill  of  Clackmannan,  twenty  merks  of  annualrent  to  be  uplifted 
from  the  fiirm  of  the  King's  burgh  of  Stirling  :  To  be  held  by  the  said 
canous  in  free,  pure  and  perpetual  alms,  as  freely  and  honourably  as  any 
alms  were  held  in  the  kingdom.  This  charter  forbiils  the  provosts  of 
Stirling  to  withhold  from  the  canons  the  twenty  merks  at  the  usual  terms, 
on  pain  of  forfeiture,  and  coniirms  to  the  latter  an  additional  annual- 
rent  of  three  merks  from  the  same  farm  which  they  were  wont  to  receive 
under  a  gift  of  the  King's  predecessors.  Dated  at  Stirling,  30th  April, 
in  the  sixteenth  year  of  the  King's  reign,  [12G5,]  297 

209.  Charter  by  John  Barboure,  burgess  of  Stirling,  from  motives  of  compassion 

and  piety,  and  for  the  welfare  of  the  souls  of  himself,  his  ancestors 
and  successors,  and  of  all  the  faithful  dead,  granting  to  God  and  the 
blessed  Virgin  Mary,  and  to  the  altar  of  St.  Ninian,  Coufessor,  in  the 
parish  church  of  Cambuskenneth,  and  to  the  chaplaiu  performing  divine 
service  thereat,  an  aunualrent  of  two  shillings,  due  to  the  granter  from 
the  tenement  of  Jolin  Rayny,  skinner,  burgess  of  Stirling,  lying  in 
the  Middle  Raw  of  the  burgh,  and  bounded  as  described  in  the  charter  : 
To  be  held  by  the  said  altar  after  the  deatli  of  the  granter,  and  by  the 
chaplains  serving  God  there,  from  the  granter  and  his  heirs  and  assignees, 
in  pure  and  perpetual  alms,  and  heritably  for  ever,  as  freely  as  any  alms 
within  the  kingdom  was  given  or  gifted  by  any  one.  Sealed  with  the 
seal  of  Sir  Patrick  Scot,  vicar  of  the  parish  church  of  Stirling,  and  dated 
at  Stirling,  8th  October  1436,  297 

210.  Indenture   between  Patrick,    Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,   and  the  convent 

thereof,  on  the  one  part,  and  John  ScougaU,  residing  at  Vthirbannock,  on 
the  other  part,  bearing  that  the  Abbot  and  convent,  for  the  advantage  of 
their  Abbey,   set  in  feu-farm  to  John  and  his  heirs,  aU  and  whole  a 


396 


ABSTRACT  OF  TIIE  EEGISTER 


tenement  in  the  Hill-weynd,  in  Stii-ling  :  To  be  helcl  by  John  and  his 
heirs  of  them  and  their  successors,  in  feu-farm,  heritably  and  for  ever, 
as  freely,  fuUy  and  peacefully  as  any  tenement  could  be  set  to  feu- 
fami  by  or  to  any  one  whatever  within  burgli,  for  payment  yearly  of  five 
shillings  lawful  money  of  Scotland,  and  to  the  lord  in  cliief  thereof  the 
service  due  and  wont  :  Provided  that,  in  the  event  of  John  or  his  heirs 
failing  in  the  payment  of  the  annualrent  of  five  shilliiigs  for  the  entire 
space  of  four  years  after  any  term  of  payment,  the  Abbot  and  convent 
should,  without  the  permission  of  any  one,  have  regress  to,  and  resume, 
the  tenement,  for  their  own  private  uses,  until  the  whole  of  the  arrears 
of  the  anuualrent,  with  damages,  interest  and  expenses,  should  be 
paid  :  Provided  also,  that  if  John  or  his  heirs  wished  to  sell  or  alienate 
the  tenement,  the  Abbot  and  convent  should  obtain  it  in  preference  to 
all  others,  and  at  a  lower  price.  Done  at  Cambuskenneth,  1  Oth  Decem- 
ber  1-112,     


298 


211.  Letters  by  the  Provost,  Bailies,  Council  and  community  of  the  burgh  of  Stir- 
ling,  attesting  that  the  procurator  of  Henry,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth, 
and  the  convent  thereof,  compeared  before  them  in  four  of  their  ehief 
burgh  courts  successively,  and  made  process  respecting  the  tenement  of 
the  old  school  in  St.  Mary's  Vennel,  which  belonged  to  the  deceased 
Laurence  Dridane,  on  account  of  the  non-payment  for  several  years  to 
the  Abbot  and  convent  of  an  annualrent  of  five  shillings,  due  to  them 
from  the  tenement  ;  and  that  at  the  last  diet  of  the  courts,  the  Abbot's 
procurator  a.sked  judgment  that  the  possession  of  the  tenement  should, 
in  defiuilt  of  payment  of  the  annualrent,  revert  to  the  Abbot,  con- 
vent  and  Abbey,  and  obtained  pledge  respecting  this  :  after  which,  the 
opposite  party  having  been  often  called  at  the  door  of  the  court  to 
compear  and  defend  his  cause,  or  satisfy  the  Abbot  and  convent  respect- 
iug  the  arrears  of  the  annualrent,  with  damages,  expenses  of  process 
and  interest,  and  not  compearing,  the  court,  after  consultation,  by  the 
mouth  of  Thomas  Cathkin,  their  judiciar  or  dempstar,  adjudged  posses- 
sion  of  the  tenement  to  the  Abbot  and  convent ;  whereupon  John  Craig, 
one  of  the  bailies  of  the  burgh,  gave  sasine  thereof  to  the  Abbot's  pro- 
curator,  in  name  of  the  Abbot  and  convent,  and  caused  it  to  be  publicly 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


397 


ragc 

proclaimed,  that  if  any  one  having  right  or  interest  wished  to  reclaim 
the  tenement,  they  should  corae  within  the  lawfiil  time,  and  satisfy  as 
above,  and  obtain  peaceable  possession  of  the  tenement  for  ever,  as  the 
order  of  law  required.     Dated  at  Stirling,  24th  June  1481,   300 

212.  Letters  by  the  Provost,  Bailies,  Council  and  community  of  Stirling,  attesting 

tliat  James  Reidheuch,  procurator  for  Henry,  Abbot  of  Cambuskeuneth, 
and  the  convent  thereof,  compeared  before  them  in  the  town-hall,  in  four 
of  their  chief  courts  successively,  and  made  process  respecting  a  tenement 
which  belonged  to  the  deceased  John  Wilson,  on  the  west  side  of  St. 
Mary's  Vennel,  on  account  of  failure  of  payment  of  an  annualrent  of  five 
shillings  due  to  the  Abbot  and  conveut,  of  which  they  had  not  received 
payment  for  several  years  ;  that  the  procurator,  with  a  serjand  and 
several  witnesses,  had  gone  to  the  tenement,  and  found  nothing  tbat  could 
be  distrained  for  the  annualrent  except  the  earth  and  stones  ;  and  that 
at  the  last  diet  the  procurator  compeared  and  asked  judgment  that 
the  possession  of  the  teneraent  should,  in  default  of  payment  of 
the  above  annualrent,  revert  to  the  Abbot  and  convent,  and  upon  this 
ofiered  and  obtained  pledge  :  after  whioh  the  party  prosecuting  went 
out  of  the  court,  and  the  adverse  party  haviug  been  often  called  to 
compear  and  defend  his  cause,  or  satisfy  the  Abbot  and  convent 
respeeting  the  annualrent,  with  interest,  damages,  and  expenses  of 
process,  the  prosecuting  party  being  re-adraitted  after  the  ■  Court  had 
consulted,  possession  of  the  tenement  was  adjudged  to  the  Abbot  and 
convent,  by  the  mouth  of  Thomas  Cathkin,  then  judiciar  or  derapstar 
of  the  court  ;  whereupon  John  Craig,  one  of  the  bailies  of  Stirling,  gave 
to  James  Reidheuch,  as  procurator  foresaid,  lawful  possession  thereof,  by 
the  delivery  to  him  of  earth  and  stone,  as  the  custom  of  burghs  is. 
Dated  at  Stirling,  20th  June  1481,   303 

213.  Notarial   Instrument,  narrating   that   John   Craig,    one   of  the   bailies   of 

Stirling,  by  command  of  the  Provost  and  other  bailies  and  councillors  of 
the  burgh,  went  to  the  tenement  mentioned  in  No.  212,  and  in  terras 
thereof,  in  presence  of  a  notary  and  witnesses,  gave  heritable  sasine  of  the 
same,  by  delivery  of  earth  and  stone,  to  Henry,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth. 
Done  on  the  ground  of  the  said  tenement,  20th  November  1482,    305 


398 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  REGISTER 


Page 

214.  Notarial  Instniment,  narrating  that  David,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  with 

consent  of  his  convent,  gave,  granted,  and  for  ever  confirmed,  to  the 
private  altars  of  their  Abbey  church,  the  small  annualrents  of  their  lands 
of  the  town  of  Stirling  for  their  maintenance  ;  to  the  altar  of  St. 
Andrew  the  Apostle,  an  annualrent  from  the  land  of  Schakelok  of 
Cs.  8d.  ;  to  the  altar  of  St.  Juhn  the  Evangelist  and  St.  John  the  Bap- 
tist,  an  annualrent  of  -Is.  from  the  land  of  John  Riehard,  and  also  an 
annualrent  of  30d.  from  the  land  of  John  Darach  of  the  Cross,  and  one 
of  12d.  from  the  land  of  Jolin  Tuch  ;  to  the  altar  of  St.  Laurence  the 
Martyr,  an  annualrent  of  3s.  from  Croftmagra,  and  two  others,  amount- 
ing  together  to  3s.  8d.  ;  and  to  the  altars  of  St.  Nicholas,  St.  Ninian, 
St.  Catherine,  and  of  AU  Saints,  other  annualrents  specified,  araongst 
which  are  certain  annualrents,  amounting  to  £3,  6s.,  arising  from 
gardens  formed  by  the  members  of  the  convent.  Done  in  the  chapter- 
house  of  the  Abbey,  on  Epiphany  Eve,  (5th  January)  1445, 307 

215.  Precept  by  King  David  (the  First),  directed  to  his  justices,  barons,  sherilis, 

provosts,  and  all  the  good  people  of  his  realm,  declaring  that  the  canons 
of  Stirling,  and  the  people  of  their  lordsliip,  should  be  quit  of  toll,  and 
all  riglits  and  custums,  wherever  they  should  come,  in  his  Majesty's  whole 
land  ;  and  that  they  should  justly  possess  the  King's  firm  peace  wher- 
ever  they  should  be  or  come.     Dated  at  Kinross,  \_circa  1150,]  312 

21G.  Charter  by  Simon,  son  of  Makbeth,  granting  to  the  canous  of  the  church 
of  St.  Mary  of  Cambuskenneth,  after  the  decease  of  Hugh  of  Rokesburg, 
the  ChanceIlor's  clerk,  the  church  of  Tulibody,  in  free  and  perpetual  alms, 
for  the  welfare  of  the  souls  of  himself  and  his  ancestors  and  successors  : 
To  be  held  as  freely,  peaceably,  fully  and  honourably  as  they  held  their 
other  alms.     Given  at  Stirling,  [cjVca  1170,] 312 

217.  Charter  by  Jonathas,  Bishop  of  Dunblane,  confirming  to  the  church  of  St. 
Mary  of  Cambuskenneth,  and  the  canons  serving  God  there,  the  churches 
of  Tulibody,  Tulicultry  and  KLncardin,  with  their  chapels,  teinds  and 
offerings  of  every  kind,  with  the  profits  and  all  other  just  pertineuts  of 
the  said  churches  :  To  be  held  by  them  in  free  and  perpetual  alms,  as 
freel}',  peaceably,  fuUy  and  honourably  as  they  held  and  possessed  their 
other  churches,  saving  episcopal  right.     [circa  1200,]     312 


OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


399 


218.  Agreement  between  Laurence,  Bishop  of  Duublaue,  and  the  Abbot  and  cou- 
vent  of  Cambuskenueth  with  respect  to  the  church  of  Tulibody,  by  which 
the  latter  agreed  to  pay  annually  four  shillings  for  all  episcopal  rights 
which  pertained  to  the  Bishop,  and  on  accoiint  of  all  debts  due  to  him 
in  connexion  with  the  cliurch.     \ciixa  1170,] 


TULIBODY. 


.313 


219.  Charter  by  Laurence,  Bishop  of  Dunblane,  granting  to  the  cliurch  of  St. 

Mary  of  Cambuskenneth  and  the  canons  serving  God  there,  the  elmrch  of 
Tulibody,  after  the  decease  of  Hugh,  the  chancelIor's  clerk  :  To  be  held 
in  free  and  perpetual  alms,  with  the  lands  and  teinds,  and  all  rights  per- 
taining  to  it,  as  freely,  peaceably,  fully  and  honourably  as  they  held  their 
other  alms  ;  saving  all  rights  wluch  pertained  to  the  Bishop.  Given  at 
St.  Andrews,  [aVra  1170,] 313 

220.  Charter  by  King  William  (the  Lion),  granting  to  the  church  of  St.  Mary  of 

Cambuskenneth  and  the  canons  serving  God  tliere,  the  church  of  TuUi- 
cultrie,  with  its  lands,  teinds  and  ofleriugs  of  every  kind,  and  all  the  just 
pertinents  of  the  said  church  :  To  be  held  in  free  and  perpetual  alms  as 
freely,  peaceably,  fully  and  honourably  as  they  held  and  possessed  their 
other  churches.      Given  at  Stirling,  \_circa  1199,] 314 

221.  Charter  of  Confirmation  by  Simon,  Bishop  of  Dunblane,  granting  to  the 

church  of  St.  Mary  of  Cambuskenueth  and  to  the  canous  serving  God  there, 
the  church  of  Tullicultry,  with  its  lands,  teinds,  ofi^erings  of  every  kind, 
and  all  their  just  pertinents  :  To  be  held  iu  free  and  perpetual  alms  as 
freely,  peaceably,  fully  and  houourably  as  they  held  and  possessed  their 
other  churches,  saviug  episcopal  right,  as  the  charter  of  King  William 
bore.    \circa  1199,]  3U 

222.  Charter  by  Colin  Cambell,  Lord  of  Tullicultry,  granting  and  confirming  for 

himself,  his  heirs  and  assignees,  aud  for  tbe  benefit  of  the  souls  of  himself, 
his  ancestors  and  successors,  in  pure  and  perpetual  alms,  to  the  cauons  of 
the  church  of  St.  Mary  of  Camlmskenneth,  and  to  St.  Servan  of  the  church 
of  Tillicultry,  ten  acres  of  arable  land  lying  in  Tullicultrie  :  To  be  held 
by  them  as  freely,  peaceably  and  honourably  as  any  alms  in  the  kingdom 
of  Scotland  was  held  and  possessed  :  AIso  undertaking  to  provide  them 
with  two  oxen  to  assist  in  their  tillage,  during  his  lifetime.     [circa  1300,]     315 


TULLICULTRY. 


400 


ABSTEACT  OF  THE  REOISTER. 


TULLICULTHV. 


TULLYMURTHAC. 


TESTIMONIAL 
LETTERS. 


223.  Cliarter  by  King  Rubert  (the  Bruce),  for  the  welfare  of  the  souLs  of  him- 

self  and  all  bis  ancestors  and  successors,  Kings  of  Sootland,  granting  and 
confirmiug  to  the  Abbot  and  cauous  of  the  church  of  St.  Mary  of  Cambus- 
kenneth,  and  to  St.  Servan  of  TuIIicultry,  ten  acres  of  arable  land  in 
Tullicultry  :  To  be  held  by  tliem  for  ever,  in  pure  and  perpetual  alms,  as 
freely,  peaceably,  fully  and  honourably,  as  any  alms  in  the  kingdom  of 
Scotland  was  held  and  possessed.  Sealed  with  the  seal  of  the  gTanter, 
and  dated  at  Ediuburgh,  4th  March,  in  the  teuth  year  of  the  King's  reign, 
[1315,]     316 

224.  Charter  by  Kiug  Alexander  (the  Second),  grautiug  aud  coufirming  to  the 

church  of  St.  Mary  of  Cambuskenneth  and  the  canons  serving  God 
there,  tweuty  "  cowgall "  of  cheese,  to  be  received  each  year  from  the 
farm  of  the  King's  land  of  Tulymurthac,  by  the  hands  of  the  sherifl"  of 
Stirling  for  the  time,  instead  of  twenty  "  cuddrinis  "  of  cheese,  which 
they  used  to  receive  from  the  bailiery  of  Stirling  by  the  gift  of  King 
David,  confirmed  to  the  canons  by  the  granter's  ancestors  :  To  be  held 
by  them  in  free  and  perpetual  alms,  as  freely,  peaceably,  fully  and 
honourably  as  any  alnis  in  the  whole  land  was  possessed  by  any  religious 
persons.  Dated  at  Stirling,  15tb  January,  iu  the  niueteenth  yeav  of 
the  King's  reign,  [1232,]  316' 

225.  Letters  by  King  Robert  (the  Third),  attesting  that  the  Abbot  of  Carabus- 

kenneth  neither  caused  nor  ordered  the  Bishop  of  Dunkeld  to  be  brought 
to  trial  before  the  King  for  any  cause,  and  that  the  Bishop  was  not 
brought  before  him  judicially  on  the  Abbofs  account,  and  that  when 
both  parties,  the  Bishop  and  Abbot,  compeared  before  the  King  on  the 
llth  February  preceding,  in  the  vestry  of  the  Preaching  Friars  of  Perth, 
he  was  not  sitting  judicially  on  their  cause.  Given  under  the  Privy  Seal, 
at  Dundonald,  28th  March,  in  the  fifth  year  of  the  King's  reign,  [1395,]     317 

The  copy  of  these  Charters  aud  Evidents  having  been  reduced  to  book- 
form,  and  one  by  one  subsoribed  by  James  Foulis  of  Colintoune,  Clerk 
Register,  the  King  (James  the  Fifth)  commanded  that  the  same  faith 
should  be  attached  thereto  as  if  each  of  the  deeds  were  separately  inserted 
in  an  Act,  and  in  the  Books  of  his  Majesty's  Council.  Given  under  the 
Great  Seal,  at  EtUnburgh,  24th  July  1535,  318 


COLLECTED  SEALS  OF  ABBOTS  ANT)  CONVENT.  401 


1.  Abbot  Jobn,  1292. 

3.  Abbot  Patrick  Pantar,  c  1515. 


2.  Abbot  Patrick,  ,:.  1430. 
4.   Convent  Seal,  1562. 


51 


402 


COLLECTED  SIGNATURES  OF  ABBOTS. 


^ 


^^%:^-<.^:l^yfe:te' 


/i    y^n^ff- 


"it 


'/a 


a**t4-Ay 


[\JC^(L&  C:  ^*y^-> vM^;f^ 


<:p 


X 


1.  Henry  Arnot,  1501. 

2.  David,  1506. 


3.  Patrick  Pantar,  1512. 

4.  Ale.xander  Mylne,  1524. 


COLLECTED  SIGNATURES  OF  ABBOTS. 


/^^         C^&T^-^^^^^^  ^^M^ 


403 


i^ldiM  Uj^edmi^/b^^ 


U 


^//^^/4 


"^ 


\.  David  Pantar,  Secretary,  154G.  2.  David  Pantar,  1357.         3.  Adam  Erskine,  15G2. 


404 


COLLECTEI)  SIGNA  TURES. 


'^J^. 


c 


^ 


1.  Kiug  James  IV..  \o\1.         -1.  King  .Jauies  VL,  1013.  ;).  Jobn  Eail  of  Mar.  IC03 


405 


MEMBERS   OF   THE   GRAMPIAN   CLUB. 

2d  Apkil  1872. 


1.  HIS  ROYAL  HIGHXESS  THE  PRIXCE  OF  WALES,  Paln 


■2.  His  Grace  the  Duke  of  Aj-gyll,  Pirsldntl. 

."?.  His  Graee  the  Duke  of  Richmond. 

4.  The  Mosfc  Hou.  the  Marquess  of  Bute. 

5.  The  Most  Hou.  the  Marquess  of  Huutly. 

6.  The  Right  Hon.  the  Earl  of  Rosslyn. 

7.  The  Right  Hon.  the  Earl  of  Dalhousie. 
S.  The  Right  Hon.  the  Earl  of  Mar. 

•J.  The  Right  Hon.  tlie  Earl  of  Glasgow. 

10.  The  Right  Hon.  the  Eai-I  of  Strathmore. 

11.  The  Right  Hon.  the  Earl  of  Abercleen. 

12.  The  Right  Hon.  the  Earl  of  Hopetoun. 

13.  The  Right  Hon.  the  Earl  of  Seatield. 

14.  The  Rigbt  Hon.  the  Earl  of  Airlie. 
1.5.  The  Right  Hon.  the  Lord  Bortlnvick. 
IG.  The  Right  Hon.  the  Lord  Houghton. 
17.  The  Eight  Hon.  the  Lord  Elphinstone. 

15.  The  Right  Hon.  the  Lord  Cliuton. 

19.  The  Right  Hon.  the  Lord  Wharucliffe. 

20.  The  Right  Hon.  the  Lord  Talbotde  Malahide. 

21.  The  Right  Hon.  Sir  John  Stuart. 

22.  Sir  J.  Ranald  Martin,  C.B.,  London. 

23.  Sir  John  Powlett  Orde,  Bart.  of  Kilmory. 

24.  Sir  Robert  Menzies,  Bart.  of  that  Ilk. 

2.5.  Sir  Keuueth  Mackenzie,  Bart.  of  Gairloch. 

2l3.  Sir  William  Maxwell,  Bart.  ot  Monreith. 

27.  Sir  Walter  Calverley  Trevelyan,   Bart.    of 

Wallingtou. 

28.  Sir  William  Forbes,  Bart.  of  Craigievar. 


29. 


Sir  George  Samuel   Abercromby,   Bart.   of 

Birkeubog. 
Geueral  Johu  Drummond,   Dymock,  Glnu- 

cester. 
Lieut.-Geueral  Browne,  C.B.,  Warkwoi-th. 
Colouel  Kiug,   F.R.G.S.,  F.S.A.   Scot.,    of 

Tertowie. 
Colonel  Macdouald  Maciion.ild  of  St.  Mar- 

tin"s. 
Colonel  Edgar,  Junior  United  Service  C'lul>, 

Londou. 
Colonel  William  Henry  Sykes,  M.P. 
Lieut.-Colonel  W.  R.  E.  Alexander. 
Colonel  C.  J.  Guthrie  of  Achavain. 
Lieut.-Colonel  AHan. 
Major  Pemberton  Campbell. 
Major  John  Fergusson  Home  of  Bassendean. 
Cajitaiu  Alexander  Graeme,  R.N.,  Fouthill. 
Captain  AJexaiuIer  Mackeuzie.  Springlield, 

Fortrose. 
Captaiu  Robert  Steuart  of  Westwoud. 
George  Stirling  Home  Drummoud,  Esq.  cif 

Blair-Drummond. 
T.  L.  Kiugton  Oliphant,  Esq.  of  Gask. 
John  Ross   Coulthart,  Esq.,   Croft   House. 

Ashton-under-Lyne. 
Rev.  Charles  Rogers,  LL.D.,  F.S.A.Scot. 
Rev.  J.  G.  Wright,  LL.D.,  Southampton. 


40G 


MEMBERS  OF  THE  GRAMPIAN  CLUB. 


William  Euing,  Esq.,  Glasgow. 

GeorgeE.  Swithinbank,  Esq.,  LL.D.,  Loiidon. 

Richarrl  Bennet,  Esq.,  London. 

L.  C.  Alexander,  Esq.,  LL.D.,  London. 

Alfred  Gliddon,  Esq.,  Loudon. 

Alexander  Smith,  Esq.,  St.  Audrews. 

•Tohn  Grieve,  Esq.,  Loudon. 

William  Rider,  Esq.,  London. 

AJexander  Laing,  Esq.,  Newbiirgh. 

J.  AV.  Flemiug,  Esq.,  Brighton. 

J.  Davidson,  Esq.,  Edinburgh. 

•John  Dalziel,  Esq.,  Londou. 

■John  Anderson,  Esq.,  London. 

(ieorge  Auderson,  Esq.,  London. 

Skeue  Craig,  Esq.,  Clayhill,  Eniield. 

Benjamin  Bond  Cabbell,  Esq.,  London. 

J.  Chisholm  Gooden,  Esq.,  Londou. 

The  University  of  Aberdeen. 

Alexander  Dunean,  Esq.,  London. 

Peter  Graham,  Esq.,  London. 

W.  G.  Beattie,  Esq.,  London. 

David  Semple,  Esq.,  Paisley. 

F.  de  Chaumont,  Esq.,  Southamptou. 

W.  A.  Mackinnon,  Esq.,  C.B.,  Southamiitou. 

Peter  Denny,  Esq.,  Dumbarton. 

Alexander  Macintosh,  Esq.,  London. 

Peter  Murdoch,  Esq.,  Londou. 

Alexander  Gordon,  Esq.,  Lomlon. 

James  Guthrie,  Esq.,  London. 

WiUiam  MacCash,  Esq.,  Stratford,  Essex. 

David  Hunter,  Esq.  of  Blackness. 

Thomas  Stratton,  Esq.,  M.D.,  Devonport. 

Professor  Aitken,  Southamptou. 

C.  F.  Mackintosh,  Esq.  of  Drummoud. 

Hugh  E.  Montgomerie,  Esq.,  Sydenham. 

Johu  Gordou,  Esq.,  Londou. 


85.  Duncan  Davidson,  Esq.  of  TiUIoch. 

86.  Kev.  George  Weare  Braikenridge,  Cleve- 

don,  Souiersetshire. 

87.  Joseph  Bain,  Esq.,  Rock  Cottage,  Lynton. 

88.  George  F.  WiJson,  Esq.,  Weybridge. 

89.  Richard  Rolt  Brash,  Esq.,  Cork. 

90.  .J.  B.  Greeushields,  Esq.  of  Kerse. 

91.  J.  D.  Macdonald,  Esq.,  M.D.,  London. 

92.  A.   Campbell   Swinton,   Esq.   of   Kimmer- 

ghame. 

93.  J.  W.  Baillie,  Esq.  of  Cnlterallers. 

94.  J.  S.  Muschet,  Esq.,  M.D.,  of  Birkhill. 

95.  A.  Beattie,  Esq.,  Summerhill,  Chislehurst, 

Ivent. 

96.  E.  3.  Reed,  Esij.,  C.B.,  J>oudon. 

97.  F.  Bishop,  Esq.,  Thc  Mount,  Stoke-ui.oii- 

Trent. 

98.  J.  W.  Larking,  Esq.,  London. 

99.  A.  Angus  Croll,  Esq.,  Highgate. 

100.  J.  A.  Chalmers,  Esq.,  Aberdeen. 

101.  Balfour  Stewart,  Esq.,  LL.D.,  Fallowtield. 

102.  .\ndrew  Ranisay,  Esq.,  LL.D.,  London. 

103.  W.  H.  Macfarlaue,  Esq.,  Ediuburgh. 

104.  Robert  Ferguson,  Esq.,  Morton,  Carlisle. 

105.  William  Thorburu  Wilson,  Esq.  ot  Burii- 

sid  e. 

106.  Robert  C.  Farquharsou,  Esq.  of  Haughton. 

107.  Isaac  M'Bnruey,  Esq.,  LL.D.,  Isle  of  Man. 
lOS.   Chas.  Stewart,  Esq.,  WestHall,  Cheshire. 

109.  William  Crichtou  Hepburn,   Esq.,  Jjewis- 

ham. 

110.  Alexander  Tod,  Esq.,  Peebles. 

111.  George  W.  H.  Ross,  Esq.  of  Cromarty. 

112.  .J.  W.  Mackenzie,  Esq.,  W.S.,  Ediuburgh. 

113.  Rev.   J.  Legge,    D.D.,  LL.D.,   Viewlield, 

Dollar. 


MEMBERS  OF  THE  GRAMPIAX  CLUB. 


1 14.  Robert    Hamilton    Ilamsay,    Esq.,    JI.D., 

Duncan  Hoiise,  Tortjuay. 

1 15.  J.  H.  Christie,   Esq.,   9   Stauhope    Street, 

Hyde  Park  Gardens,  Loudon. 
1 10.  C.  A.  Stewart,  Esq.  ot  Aclinacoue. 

1 1 7.  W.  J.   Taylor,  Esq.,    Piothiemay   House, 

Huntly. 

118.  Eev.  W.  0.  Macfarlane,  M.A.  Oxon. 

IIU.  BenjaminBondCabbell, Jun.,Esq.,London. 

120.  Edward  0.  Douglas,  Esq.  of  Killiechassie. 

121.  Principal  J.  C.  Shairp,  St.  Audrews. 

122.  James  Anderson,  Esq.,  Q.C.,  London. 

123.  Heotor  Drysdale,  Esq.,  London. 

1 24.  .Tames  .J.  Lamb,  Esq.,  Paisley. 

125.  Edward  Adamson,  Esq.,  M.D.,  Rye. 

126.  G.  T.  Clark,   Esq.,   Dowlais   House,    Mer- 

thyr  Tydvil. 

127.  C.  J.  Stewart,  Esq.,  London. 
12S.  John  Fowler,  Esq.  of  Braemore. 

129.  James  Davidson,  Esq.  of  Ruchill. 

130.  Walter  Berry,  Esq.,  Ediuburgh. 

131.  P.  Comyn  Maegregor,  Esq.  of  Brediland. 

132.  Rev.  J.  Brodie  Innes,  of  Milton  Brodie. 

133.  G.  R.  Kiuloch,  Esq.,  Edinburgh. 

134.  A.  G.  Dallas,  Esq.  of  Dunain. 

135.  Robert  Tennant,  Esq.,  Scarcroft  Lodge. 

136.  R.  B.  E.  Macleod,  Esq.  of  Cadboll. 

137.  Donald  Maclnnes,  Esq.,  Loudon. 

138.  James  W.  Davidson,  Esq.,  London. 

139.  John    Fiimie,    Esq.,    Town-Clerk,     Fort- 

140.  E.  W.  Garland,  Esq.,  Waleot,  Torquay. 

141.  Archibald  Weir,  Esq.,  M.D.,  Malvern. 

142.  William   Nathaniel  Fraser,   Esq.  of  Tor- 

navecn. 

143.  Samuel  Gordon,  Esq.,  Darlingtun. 


144.  William  ilenelaus,    Esq.,    Dowlais,   Mer- 

thyr  Tydvil. 

145.  Francis  Garden  Fraser,  Esq.  of  Findrack. 
140.  Gilbert  Rainy  Tennent,  Esq.,  Edinburgh. 

147.  Audrew  Edgar,  Esq.,  LL.D.,  London. 

148.  E.  Chishoku  Batten,  Esq.  of  Aii;a.s. 

149.  Charles  Shaw,  Esq.,  London. 

150.  Patrick  Buchan,  Esq.,  Manchester. 

151.  John  P^ae,  Esq.,  LL.D.,  London. 

152.  Rev.  Wmiam  A.  Keith,  M.A.,  Burham. 

153.  Mark  Boyd,  Esq.  of  Merton  Hall. 

154.  J.  C.  Dalton,  Esq.,  Twickenhani. 

155.  Claud  .Tessett,  Esq.,  London. 
150.  .Tohn  Blackie,  Esq.,  Stonehaven. 

157.  James  Campbell,  Esq.,  London. 

158.  Thomas  Aubrey  Turner,  Esq.,  Chelsea. 

159.  Rev.    WUIiam   H.    Milman,    M.A..     Sion 

CoIIege,  London. 

160.  George  Middleton  Kiell,  Esq..  Loiidon. 

161.  John  Mackay,  Esq.,  Moutreal. 

162.  David  Campbell,  Esq.,  Montreal. 

163.  Rev.  G.  R.  Badenoch,  London. 

164.  W.  C.  Gordon,  Esq.  of  Fyvie. 

165.  WiUiam  T.  Morrison,  Esq.,  Lonilcn. 
160.  W.  H.  Smith,  Esq.,  London. 

167.  Thomas  Kennedy,  Es(j.,  London. 

168.  Keith  Stewart  Jlackenzie,  Escj.  of  Seafortli. 

169.  Alexander  Howe,  Esq.,  W..'^.,  Edinburgii. 

170.  W^    A.    Duncan,    Esq.,     Custoni    House, 

Sydney,  Aiistralia. 

171.  Charles  E.  Hamilton,  Esq.,  Liverpuul. 

172.  William  Blewitt,  Esq.,  SoUcitor,  Lond..u, 

173.  William  R.  Philp,  Esq.,  Solicitor.  LoMd..n. 

1 74.  Ambrose  L.  W. Salsbury,  NorthumberLind. 

175.  H.  W.  Hope,  Esq.  of  Luffness. 

176.  T.  W.  Swiuburne,  E.=!q.,  Camdean  Ilall. 


408                         MEMBERS  OF  THE 

GRAMPIAN  CLUB. 

1 77.   Freilerick  B.  Kirby,  Esq.,  Londou. 

199.  Rev.  J.  0.  Haldane,  Kingoldrum. 

17S.  William  Fergusson,  Esq.  of  Kilmimdy. 

200.  Miss  Catherine  M.  Watson,  Edinburgh. 

170.  Finlay  T.  Gird wood,  Esq. ,  Solicitor,  London. 

201.  A.  C.  Guthi-ie,  Esq.  of  Duart,  London. 

ISO.  The  University  Library,  Edinburgh. 

202.  C.  J.  Guthrie,  Juu.,  Esq.,  of  -4ohavain. 

181.   Robert  J.  A.  Hay,  Esq.  of  Nunraw. 

203.  David  A.  Camegie,  Esq.,  M.D.,  London. 

182.  Dr.  W.  0'Donnavan,  Portarlington. 

204.  J.  Milne,  Esq.,  EcUuburgh. 

183.  Thomas  A.  Wise,  Esq.,  M.D.,  Norwoorl 

205.  H.  Huggins,  Esq.,  London. 

1S4.  Alfred  A.  Sylvester,  Esq.,  Worcester. 

206.  G.  A.  Guthrie,  Esq.  of  Craigde. 

18.5.  Mi-s.  Sylvester,  Worcester. 

207.  Miss  B.  A.  Taaffe  Laurence-Archer,  Edui- 

186.  R.  H.  Campbell,  Esq.,  Cambridge. 

burgh. 

187.  Arthur  Pemberton,  Esq.,  Cambridge. 

208.  James  T.  Mackenzie,  Esq.  of  Kuitail. 

188.  ilrs.  Hudson,  Cambridge. 

209.  James  StilHe,  Esq.,  Ediuburgh. 

189.  Mrs.  Russell,  Cambridge. 

210.  George  H.  Dickson,  Esq.,  Edinburgh. 

190.  A.  Pemberton,  Esq.,  Cambridge. 

211.  A.  J.  Dennistouu  Brown,  Esq.  of  Balloch 

191.   W.  C.  EusseU,  Esq.,  Cambridge. 

Castle. 

192.  Mrs.  Bird,  Cambridge. 

212.  The   Honourable   Society   of  the    Middle 

193.  Miss     Mary     Caroline     Eilgar,     Aix-la- 

Temple,  London. 

Cha|ielle. 

213.   John  Macaulay  Arnaud,  Esq.,  London. 

194.   Thomas  Falconer,  Esq.,  Usk,  Moumouth- 

214.  Donald  Ogilvie,  Esq.  of  Clova. 

shire. 

215.   WiUiam    Cunliffe    Brooks,     Esq.,    M.P., 

195.  Mi-s.  Alicia  Bi)gue,  Kingston-on-Thames. 

Londou. 

19G.  Logan  B.  Edgar,  Esq.,  Trinity  HaU,  Cam- 

216.   William  Erskine,  Esq.,  Edinburgh. 

bridge. 

217.  George  Macfarlane,  Esq.,  Glasgow. 

197.  Francis  Aberdein,  Esq.  of  Keithock  House. 

218.  F.  Mackeuzie  Fraser,  Esq.,  Londoii. 

198.  .J.  P.  Wise,  Esq.,  RostiUon  Castle,  Ireland. 

J  certify  tliat  tlie  above  list  lias  bee 

n  correctly  tran.scribed  from  the  Eoll  of 

Members  of  tlie  Grampian  Club. 

Ch.\rles  Eogers,  LL.D.,  Hun.  &r. 

SSOWDOU-N-  VlLL.\,  LEWI.SH.iM,  S.E. 

OF  PERSOI^S. 


Abbericus,  Bishop  of  Ostia,  39. 
Abercromby  (Abbircrummy,  Abircrumby,  Abir- 

crummy),  Heniy,  38,  2C4. 

Johu,  306. 

Leoaard  of,  306. 

Aberbrothock     (Abbirbrothock,     Abirbrothoc, 

Abirbrothok),  Beruard  (Barnard),  Abbot 

of,  9,  200,  202,  316. 

David,  Abbot  of,  318. 

G[Ubert],  Abbot  of,  66,  149. 

•  R.,  Abbot  of,  56. 

Aberdeen,    Gavin  Dunbar,   Bishoi^  of,    17,  22, 

181,  182,  188,  218,  222,  291. 

Gilbert,  Bishop  of,  278. 

WiUiam,Bishopof,x.xxiv., 88,170,175,318. 

Abirnethy,  Lancelot,  130. 

Abraham,  Bishop  of  Dnnblane,  161,  105. 

Mr.,  24,  144,  312. 

brother  of  the  Parson  of  Kincardine,  101. 

A[da],  Countess,   mother  of  Kin£(  William  the 

Lion,  44,  88,  252,  253,  279,  280. 
Adam,  heir  of  Hamelin,  93. 

brother  of  the  Bishop  of  DnnlJane,  102. 

seirant  to  the  Bishop  of  Dunblaue,  162. 

■  son  of  Regner,  137. 

Adamson,  John,  Ixxx. 

Ade,  John,  85. 

Adrian,  Rope,  69. 

Advocates,  Faculty  of,  xi.,  xiv.,  xv.,  xviL,  xciv., 

xcv. 
Agnes,  daughter  of  Williamof  Ketilistoune,67. 
Akinhead  (Akjmheid),  John  of,  126. 
Alan,  the  son  of  Walter,  44. 

Steward,  133. 

Albania,  AJbinus,  Bishop  of,  46. 

Walter  (Gralter),  Bishop  of,  42. 

Albany,  Duke  of,  Ixvi.,  237. 


Albany,  AJexander,  Duke  of,  Ixv.,  Ixvii. 

John,   Duke  of,   Ixxvii.,   Ixxviii.,    Ixxxi., 

Ixxxiii.,  Ix.xxriii.,  242,  244,  246. 

Murdoch,  Duke  of,  Ix. 

Robert,  Duke  of,  Earl  of  Fife  and  of  Men- 

teith,  275,  277,  273. 
Albert,  Cardinal  Presbyter  of  St.  Lawrence  in 

Lucina,  42. 
Alexander,  servant  to  Osbert,  Bishop  of  Dun- 

blane,  162. 

Col.  Sir  James  E.,  cxxxiii.,  cxxxvii. 

Duke  of  Ross,  cxxxvi. 

Alexander  IL,  King  of  Scots,  xxi.,  Ixxviii,,  01, 

02,  73,  176,  250,  316. 

IIL,  King,  xxxvi.,  xliv.,  U.,  297. 

III.,'Pope.  XX.,  xlviii.,  40,  42. 

IV.,  Pope,  52. 

VI.,  Pope,  174. 

Chaplain  to  the  Bishop  of  St.  Audrews, 

144,  279. 

Lord  of  Stirling,  knight,  24. 

Lord  of  Stirling,  John,  son  of,  25. 

•  brother  of  Patrick,  son  of  Elias,  108. 

aon  of  Thor,  93. 

son  of  Walter  Earl  of  Menteith,  168,  109. 

son  of  William  son  of  Thorald,   137,  176, 

279. 

Thomas,  of  Menstray,  80. 

Alfred,  second  Abbot  of  Cambuskenueth,  xlviii., 

xlix.,  40. 
Alison  (Alieson),  John,  burgess  of  Liulithgovv, 

109,  112. 
Allerdes,  Thomas  of,  311. 
Alloway,  David,  212. 
Alswyu,  Clerk,  250. 
Alweth,  Forsyth  of,  316. 
Simon  (Symon),  Parson  of,  161. 

3 


Alweth,  Siward  of,  94. 

Ambini,  M.  de,  79. 

Anderson,  John,  Notary,  x.\xi. 

WiUiam,  279. 

Andrew,  brother  of  Hiigh  Bishop  of  St.   An- 
drews,  279. 

Clerk  to  Walter  Bishop  of  Glasgow,  177. 

•  son  of  William  Provost  of  Stirling,  137. 

Augus,  Archibahl,  Earl  of,  ChanceUor,  170,  175, 
2S9. 

George,  Master  of,  xeiv. 

Annabella,   Princess,  daiighter  of  Kiug  James 
I.,  cxxxvii. 

Annand  (Annande),  AJexander,  Vicar  of  Lenze, 
195-19S. 

James,  tenant  of  Fourgy,  1.3,  15,  16. 

Sir  John  of,   Canon  of   Cambuskenneth, 

Ix.,  272,  273. 

John,  tenant  of  Arryngrosk,  13-16. 

Eobert,  tenant  of  Arryngrosk,  13,  14. 

•  William,  Prior  of  Cambuskeuneth,  270. 

Aunandale,  Robert  Bruce,  Lord  ot,  xxxviii. 

Apilgarth,  WiUiam,  108. 

Arbald,  Cardinal  Presbyter  of  the  Holy  Cross 

in  Jerusalem,  42. 
Archibald,  Johu,  of  Tulibody,  85. 
Arduthre,  Robert,  22. 

ArgyU  (Argile),  Archibald,  Earl  of,  Master  of 
Household,  289. 

Archibald,  second  Earl  of,  xcvii.,  170,  175, 

318. 
Armstroug,  Sir  WiUiam,  xxiv.,  310. 
Arnald,  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  79,  144. 
Arragon,  Ferdinand,  King  of,  Ixxxvi. 
Arran,  James,  Earl  of,  Regent,  xcix.,  c,  318. 

Earl  of,  X. 

Arth  (Arthe),  Friar  William,  xcvi. 

Sir  Wiiliam  of,  109. 

Articles,  Lords  of  the,  xciv. 

Atheray,  John  of,  Treasurer  of  Dunblane,  118. 

Athole  (Ethol),  Maleolm,  second  Earl  of,  280. 

Countess  of,  eix. 

John,  fifth  Earl  of,  cix. 

Atkin  (Atkyn),  Alexander,  tenant  of  Cathcoc- 
hUl,  13,  15,  16. 

WiUiam,  16. 

Atkinson,  Sir  David,  ISO. 

Auchiulek,  James,  194. 

Avendale  (Avendaill),  Andrew,  Lord,  222-224. 


AveneU  (AueneU),  Gervas,  29,  133,  280. 

Robert,  7.3,  75,  133,  252. 

Roger,  317. 

Avilsus  (Auilsus),  Dean  of  St.  Andrews,  144. 
Ayson  (Asone),  John,  305,  306. 
Dean  John,  xxxv. 

Baill,  Henry  of,  297. 

Hugh  of,  279. 

Balcasky,  John,  son  of  Mr.  Thomas  of,  12. 

Mr.  Thomas  of,  12. 

Balcorniock  (Ealcomiok),  David  of,  57. 
Balduien,  Clerk,  137. 

Baleward  (Balwarde),  tenants  cf,  7,  11,  18,  20. 
Balfonr  (Balfoure),  David,  118,  157. 

Sir  James,  Lyon  King-of-Arms,  xli.,  ci. 

Martin,  21. 

Martin,  Vicar  of  Monymeill,  242,  293. 

Baliol  (Bailiol),  Henry,  Chamberlain,  251. 

John,  xlii. 

Balmyll,  Nicholas  of,  of  St.  Andrews,  143. 
Balvaird  (Balward),  AIan,Vicarof  Kalender,264. 
Banclery,  Robert,  of  Clackmannan,  85. 
Bann.ityne,  John,  Notary,  210. 
Banochtyne,  Hugh  of,  113. 
Barbour,  .John,  burgess  of  Stirling,  297. 

John,  309. 

Barclay  (Bercley),  GeUs,  219,  221. 

Marg.aret,  spouse  of  Sir  Andrew  Murray, 

13,  14,  16,  17,  19-22,  34-3G. 
Barde,  William  of,  64. 
Barnard,  Bishop  of  Port  of  Ostia  and  St.  Rufina, 

42. 
Bawlvyne   (Ballinbiu),  James,  teuant  of  Cath- 

cochiU,  13,  15,  16. 
Bean,  Master  of  Dunblane,  161. 
Bedford  (Bedefort),  Richard,  Clerk  of,  132. 
Bell,  Andrew,  130. 
Belsis,  James,  Prebendary  aud  Canon  of  Dun- 

blane,  17.3. 
Bemys,  William,  76. 

Benedict  XIII.,  Pope,  Ux.,  32,  52,  233,  236. 
Benjamin  (Beniamyn),  Sir,  177. 
Benn  (Beyn),  tenauts  of,  7,  11,  18,  20. 
Bennyn   (Benny,    Benyne,   Beynyn),    WiUiam, 

301,  304,  313. 

John  of,  34,  236,  310. 

Thomas  of,  125. 

Bercar,  Patrick,  109-111. 


LXDEX  OF  FEESOXS.                                          411 

Berkley  (Barkillie,  Berkyle),  Eobert  of,  26,  280. 

Brechin,  John,  Bishop  of,  138,  139. 

Walter  of,  Chamberlain,  26,  133. 

Patrick,  Bishop  of,   Chauccllor,  124,  283, 

Bertoun,  Nicholas  of,  114. 

284,  286. 

Beveridge  (Bauerage),  Alexander,  291. 

Leod  of,  72. 

Beverlaw  (Beuerlao),  Stepheu  of,  70. 

Sams.  Bishop  of,  314. 

Bickerton  (Bikirtoune),  Eichard  of,  knight,  110- 

Brice  (Brys),  Dean  of  Fife  and  Futhriff,  Iv.,  161. 

111. 

Donald,  219,  220. 

Bidun,  W[alter]  of,  Chancellor,  88,  133,  252. 

Prior  of  St.  C'olme's  Isle,  24. 

Bighohne,  Thomas,  129. 

Brigerakis,  Thomas  of,  76. 

Bigly  (Bligly),  Stephen,  100,  105. 

Brimymare,  Richard,  of  Clackmannan,  70. 

Bisset  (Biset,  Bysset),  W.,  176. 

Brisou  (Bryson),  Heury,  teuant  of  Fourgy,  13, 

Walter,  297. 

15,  16. 

Blackadder  (Blakader),  John,  209. 

Brocas,  Jaraes,  in  Ketilstoun,  251. 

Mr.  Robert,  178. 

■  Mr.  Patrick,  Chaplain,  272. 

Blackburn  (Blakburne),  William  of,  Abbot  of 

Brown  (Broun,  Broune),   Sir  Alexander,  Chap- 

Cambuskenneth,xx\-ii.,  xxviii.,  lvi.,lviii.. 

lain,  190. 

27,  28,  90,  99,  103,  106. 

Robert,  Chaplain,  22. 

Eichard  of,  34 

Siraon,  308. 

Robert  of,  34. 

. •  Thomas,  Notary,  296. 

■  William  of,  Notary,  34. 

W.,  Prior  of  Cambuskenneth,  311. 

WiUiam  of,  Vicar  of  Kii-kyntulach,  32,  33. 

,Sir  William,  xxxv. 

Blackivood  (Blakwod),  James,  Notary,  123. 

William,  273. 

Blantyre,  Stephen  of,  109,  111,  112. 

Bruce  (Brus,  Bruse),  Alexander,  of  Stannos,  118, 

Boece,  Hector,  Ixxiii. 

121. 

Boldred,  Official  of  the  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  4. 

Christian,  sister  of  King  Robert,  xlv. 

Bonar,  Eobert,  Ixii.,  309. 

David  of  Clackmannau,  knight,  Ixxi.,  86, 

Bonating,  David,  x.xxv. 

88,  90,  91. 

Bonde,  Adam,  108. 

David,  son  of  King  Eobert,  xl.,  xlii.,  Ivi. 

Bondington,  W[ilHam]  of,  Chancellor,  317. 

David  of  Kennet,  88. 

Borthwick  (Borthuik),  Lord  William,  289. 

Edward,  King  of  Ireland,  brother  of  King 

Boscho,    ilr.  Hugh  of,  Vicar  of  Tulibody,  162, 

Robert,  xlii.,  xliii. 

164,  166. 

John,  of  Clackmannan,  136. 

William  of,  92. 

Marjory,  daughter  of  King  Eobert,   xl.. 

Boso,   Cardinal  Deacon  of  St.  Cosmus  and  St. 

xlii.,  xliii. 

Daraian,  42. 

Eobert,  Earl  of  Carrick,  xxxviii. 

Boswald  (Boswell),  George,  159. 

King  Eobert  the.      Vide  Robert  I. 

Mr.  Juhn,  242-248. 

Robert,  118. 

Bothwell  (Boituile,  Bothuile),  Mr.  Francis,  3, 218. 

Brume,  John,  76. 

Patrick,  Earl  of,  170,  175,  289. 

Bryet,  Brice  of,  Eector  of  Kinnoull,  231. 

■  Eichard,  Rector  of  Erskirk  (Ashkirk),  2. 

Buchan,  Earl  of,  cxix.,  cxxiv. 

Boyd  (Boid),  Archibald,  194. 

David,  Earl  of,  cxx. 

Archibald  of  Bonshaw,  Ixxiii. 

Buchanan      (Buchquhaunane,      Boquhennane), 

Margaret,  daughter  of  Arcbibald,  Ixxiii. 

Johu,  218,  220. 

Thomas,  Esquire,  275,  277. 

Morice,  sou  of  Walter  Buchauan  of  that 

Brade,  Mr.  Ralph  of,  177. 

Ilk,  168. 

Brady,  Gilbert,  87. 

Thom.is,  219,  221. 

John,  298. 

.  Walter,  168,  217,  218,  220. 

Brebot,  Henry  of,  92. 

BuIIerwale,  Sir  John,  Curate  of  Ai-ringrosk,  38. 

Brechin,  Gregory,  Bishop  of,  138. 

Bullisland,  Adam,  218,  220. 

412 


INDEX  OF  PERSONS. 


Bully,  Adam,  305. 
Bimclie,  Alexander,  281. 
Burhame,  William  of,  92. 
Btiruet  (Burnate),  Dunean,  21,  22. 

•  Diincan,  Vicar  of  Leuze  or  KirkiutiUach, 

190-192,  194,  195. 

Duucan,  Vicar  of  Auchtirhous,  186,  293. 

Bute,  Marquess  of,  cxl. 
Buthlar,  Thomas,  175. 

Cairncro.ss,  Robert,  Bishop  of  Koss,  c. 

Caithuess  (Katenes),  Andrew,  Bishop  of,  314. 

Caithuess  and  Orkney,  William  Earl  of,  x. 

Calbraith,  Patrick,  217.      Vide  Galbraith. 

Calcho.    Vide  Kelso. 

Caldronar.  William,  58,  59. 

Calendar  (Calenter,  Calleuter,  Kaleder,  Kalen- 
ter,  Kalentyr),  Alwyu  of,  109. 

.Tohn  of,  fishermau,  7G. 

Malcolm,  Thaue  of,  108. 

Patrick  of,  Abbot  o£  Cambuskenneth,  55, 

121,  135,  136. 

Richard  of,  Constable  of  Stirling,  70,  241. 

Calixtus  III.,  Pope,  120. 

Cambrou  (Cambroun),  Robert,  of  Siphalne,  150, 
152. 

Robert,  137. 

Cambuskenueth    (Cambuskynneth),    Abbot   of, 
137,  146,  237,288. 

■  Abbot  and  Canous  of,  xx.,  xxi.,  47,  65, 

66,  78,  149-152,  199. 

Abbot  aud  Convent  of,   v.,  xi.,  xx.,  xxv., 

xxxi.,  xxxiv.,  Ixv.,  4-7,  9,  10,  13,  14,  16, 
18,  20,  21,  23,  24,  48,  49,  51,  53,  54,  58, 
59,  61,  62,  64,  65,  67,  75,  76,  84,  89, 
94,  110,  111,  119,  124,  128,  129,  134, 
135,  139,  140,  147,  153,  154,  104,  177, 
191,  200,  201-205,  208,  209,  214,  218, 
224-228,  239,  246-248,  250,  258-260, 
267-270,  281,  284,  287,  288,  293,  313, 
318. 
Abbots  of  Cambuskenneth  : — 

I.  WiUiam  (1147-1164),  xlviii.,  38,  142. 
II.  .\lfred  (1164-1195),  xlviii.,  xlix.,  40. 

III.  Xicholas  (1195-1207),  xUx.,  1..  42. 

IV.  William  (1209-1253),  1. 

V.  Hichard  (1253-1269),  1,,  110. 
VI.  Richard  (1269-1285),  li., 
VII.  John  (1285-1296),  U.,  lii. 


Cambuskenneth,  Abbots  of — 

VIII.  Patrick  (1296-1310),  lii.,  14.3. 
IX.  Gilbert  (1310-1311),  lii.,  liii. 
X.  Fergus  (1311-1330),  liii.,  liv.,  137. 
XI.  John  (1330-1335),  liv.,  130. 
XII.  Johu  of  Kincardine  (1336-1342),  liv., 

131. 
XIII.  WilHam  (1342-1350),  Iv.,  205,  251. 
-XIV.  Adam  (1.350-1360),  Iv.,  77,  80. 
XV.  Gilbert  (1360-1389),  Ivi.,  226,  256. 
XVI.  William    of   Bl.ackburn    (1389-1400), 

Ivi.-lviii.,  27,  28. 
XVII.  Patrick  of  Calendar  (1400-1440),  Iviii- 
Ix.,  32,   33,  52,  55,   113,  115,  120, 
121,  13.5,  136,  141,  299. 
XVIII.  David   White  (1440-1445),    Ix.,    Ixi., 
126,  127,  272,  310. 
XIX.  David  CeUe  (1445-1463),  xxxiii.,  Ixi., 
Ixii.,  117,  121,  129,  307,  311. 
XX.  John  (1463-1473),  l.\iii.,  Ixiv. 
XXI.  Heury    Amot    (1473-1504),    xxxiii., 
Ixiv.-lxx.,  31,   174,  271,  289,  301, 
303,  306. 
XXII.  David  (1504-1508),  Ixxi.,  86,  186. 
XXIII.  Andrew    (1508-1510),     Ixxi.,    Ixxii., 

156,  167,  170,  171. 
X.XIV.  Patrick  Pantar  (1510-1517),  Lxxii.-xc. 
.XXV.  Alexander    Myhie     (1517-1548),    v., 
viii.,    XX.,  L\xxviii.-xcvi.,   1,  2,   17, 
23,    37,    38,    122,    12.3,    156,    179, 
181-18.5,   187,   192,   193,   195,  209, 
212,  215,  218,  222,  22.3,  243,  245, 
251,  261,  265,  267,  290,  292-296. 
XXVI.  John  Erskine,  Commendator  (c.  1550), 
xevii.,  ci. 
XXVII.  David  Pantar,    Commendator  (1552- 
1558),  XXXV.,  xcviii.-civ. 
XXVIIL  Adam  Erskiue  (1562-1608),  cv.-cxii., 
cxxii. 
XXIX.  Alexander     Erskine,      Commendator 
(1608-1640),  cxiii.-cxvui. 
CampbeU,  CoHu,  Lord  of  TuUicultry,  315. 

John,  of  Lunday  (Lundie),  knight,   xcix., 

2,  183,  184. 

Lady  Margaret,  xcvii. 

NeU,  father  of  CoUn  of  TuUiciJtry,  315. 

■  Xeil,  son  of  Colin,  70. 

Sir  Xeil,  of  Lochaw,  lii. 

Cant,  Henry,  309. 


INDEX  OF  PEESONS.                                       413 

Cardny,    Eobert,    Bishop    o£    Dunkekl,   Ivii., 

Clement  VII.,  Pope,  53,  54,  95,  99-] 01,  105, 

Iviii. 

106,  157,  159,  182,   188-190,   193,  197, 

Cardros3,  Lord  of,  cxxii. 

213,  216,  230,  233,  292. 

CargiU,  Barnard,  Chaplain  of,  26. 

Clerk-Eegister,  The,  vi.-ix.,  xii.,  xiii.,  xxxiv. 

Caribir  (Carribris),  Andrew  of,  •H\. 

Clerk,  Arthur,  219,  221. 

William  of,  bailie  of  Edinburgh,  129. 

Gavin,  Notary,  198,  199. 

Carmiehael  (Carmichel),  Thomas,  293,  294. 

.John,  38,  217,  296. 

Carnane,  Robert,  92,  94. 

Dean,  Johu,  223. 

Carnis,  John,  Presbyter,  216. 

Sir  John,  Canon  of  Cambuskenneth,  191, 

Carrall,  John  of,  Prior  of  Cambuskenneth,  liv., 

210. 

130. 

Sir  John,  farmer  of  Clackmannan,  88. 

Cathkin,  Thomas,  302,  304. 

Sir  Maurioe,  Vicar  of  Kilmaronock,  214, 

Celestine  111.,  Pope,  xx.,  xlix.,  42,  46. 

215,  217. 

Celle,  David,  Abbot  of  l^ambuskenneth,  xxiii.. 

Cluue,  John  of,  120. 

Ixi.,  Ixii.,  117,  121,129,  307,  311. 

Clydesdale  (Cliddisdale),  Alexander  of,  311. 

CeUerat,  John,  311. 

Cochraue,  Eobert  of,  256,  258. 

Cencius,  Cardinal  Deacon  of  St.  Luoia,  46. 

Cockburn,  AJexander,  of  Langtoune,  knight,  91. 

Chalmer  (Camera\  Herbert  of,  93,  112,  312. 

John,  of  Mortoune,  knight,  91. 

Hugh  of,  71. 

CoUane,  John,  273. 

John,  197. 

Colly,  Andrew,  87. 

Ralph  of,  29,  57,  71,  133. 

Robert  of,  309. 

Richard  of,  160. 

CoIIyne,  W.,  of,  137. 

Williamof,  137. 

Colonia,  James  of,  58-60. 

Chamberlain,  Richard  the,  66. 

Colquhoun,  (Colquhoue),  Johu,  Canon  of  Glas- 

Chancellor,  the  Lord,  xciii. 

gow,  193. 

ChajJain,  Peter,  122. 

John,  secundus,  of  Glasgow,  216. 

Sir  Robert  the,  4. 

CoIviUe,  James,  of  Estwemis,  knight,  2,  318. 

Charles  II.,  King,  xli. 

PhUip  of,  88. 

V.  of  Germany,  xcix.,  c. 

Comyn,  John,  xxxi.,  136. 

Chattow,  John  of,  knight,  140. 

Family  of,  xxix.,  xxxvi. 

Chery,  John,  218,  220. 

WUham,  Earl  of  Buchan,  xxx.,  xxxi.,  176. 

Chishohn,  (Chesholme),  James,  123. 

Constable,  Malcolm,  xxxii. 

.John,  21. 

Cook  (Kuyk),  Sir  Johu,  Chaplain,  28. 

John,  Prebendary  of  Kippane,  122. 

Corbet,  Walter,  xxxu. 

John,  ChanceDor  of  Dunblane,  207. 

Cormac,  the  Priest,  315. 

Christian  (Cristian),  mother  of  David  Fleming, 

CornewaU,  Robert  of,  279. 

Lord  of  Biggar,  274,  276. 

Corntone,  Mure  of,  fisherman,  76. 

of  Keith,   wife  of  Sir  Robert  of  Erskin, 

WUliam  of,  76. 

knight,  253-256,  25S. 

Costein,  Ralph,  knight,  79. 

Christina,  daughter  of  the  Parson  of  Ki].ipen, 

Costentin,  Robert,  252. 

XXX  ii. 

Coventre,  Sir  Patrick,  Rector  of  Kjqjpane,  167, 

Clackmannan,  Procurators  of,  87. 

171. 

Sheriff  of,  xxix. 

Cowtis,  Thomas,  Official  of  Lothian,  2IS. 

■ •  Chaplaiu  of,  29. 

Cowy,  Andrew,  200. 

R.,  Curate  of,  176. 

Crab,  WUliam,  309. 

Clement  III.,  Pope,  cxxviii. 

Cragyngelt,  Thomas,  118,  302,  305,  307. 

IV.,  Pope,  49-51. 

Craig  (Crag),  Alan,  304. 

V.,  Pope,  xxx\-ii.,  81,  84. 

John,  302-307. 

■  VL,  Pope,  Iv.,  205. 

Thomas,  Notary,  159. 

Crail  (Karel),  Galfrid,  Sheriff  of,  57. 

Craustou    (Craustoune),   Sir  Johu  of,   knight, 

140. 

WiUiam,  129. 

Crawfurcl      (Crauford,     Craufurtl,     Crawford), 

Agnes,  218-221. 

Audrew,  bailie  of  Edinburgh,  129. 

GaUred  of,  79. 

John,  Earl  of,  Ixxx.,  175. 

Johu,  18(1. 

Nicholas,  of  Oxiiigangis,  Justice-Clerk,  2, 

218. 
Eicliard  of,  Canon  of  Cambuskenneth,  236, 

237. 

William,  190,  194. 

Creichtou   (Creichtoune,  Crichtoun),  Abraham, 

Kector  of  Chu-nside,  159. 

Abraham,    Rector    of     UpsadUlingtonu 

(Vpsetlingtoune),  193,  281. 

George,  of  Brothertoun,  xxxiii.,  xxxiv. 

Sir  John,  of  Strathurd,  knight,  295. 

Patrick,  306. 

Provost  of  the  CoUegiate  Church  of,  xcvi. 

Robert,  Provost  of  the  Church  of  St.  Gdes, 

193. 

William,  Lord,  Lxvi. 

Crestesou  (Cristesou),  Sir  Alexauder,  180. 

Henry,  299. 

Creyth,  Richard  of,  Notary,  29. 

Crichton,     Margaret,     formerly     Countess     of 

Rothes,  xcviii. 
Croc,  Symon,  251. 
Cromwell,  Oliver,  xli. 
Crupetune,  William  of,  92. 
Cuhos,  Thomas,  Abbot  of,  181. 
Cuh-oss,  Sir  Stevin,Chaplaiu  of  the  Trinity  Altar 

withiu  the  Kirk  of  Dunblaue,  265,  267. 
Cultoune,  Robert  of,  kuight,  xxxii. 
Cummiug   (Comyn,    Cumyn,    Cwmyng),    Alex- 

ander,  Earl  of  Buchan,  75. 

David,  176. 

Johu,  xxxi. 

. ■  Walter,  176,  297. 

• AVilliani,  Earl  of  Buchau,  xxx.,xxxi.,  176. 

Cunuingham  (Conynghame,  Cunynghame),  Alex- 

ander,  of  Auchinbowy,  302,  303,  305. 

Mr.  David,  207. 

Lady  EUz.abeth,  of  Mackfailand,  218,  220. 

James,  303. 


Cunningham,  Johu  o{,  27. 

Sir  William  of,  Chaplaiu,  99. 

William,  217,  219,  221. 

Cunyngburgh,  Malcolm,  194. 

Cuparin  Angns,  Abbotof,  xi.,liii.,  lix.,  137,  150. 

Abbot  and  Convent  of,  137-139. 

William,  Abbot  of  the  Monastery  of,  139. 

Curchyus,  Cardinal  Deacon  of  St.  Adrian,  42. 
Curror  (Currour),  William,  126. 

Waiiam  of,  126. 

Curry,  Sir  Walter  of,  knight,  3. 

Cuthbertson  (Cuthbertsoune),  John,  114,  116. 

Cuthlar,  Robert,  tenant  of  Newtoun,  13,  14,  10. 

Dalmahoy,  Dean  James,  xxxv. 

Dalzell,  Sir  John  Graham,  xiii. 

Sir  Johu  of,  knight,  140. 

•  Sir  William  of,  knight,  140. 

Darach,  John,  of  the  Cross,  Ixii.,  309. 

Darow,  James,  Notary,  306. 

David,  Abbot,  Ixi.,  Ixii.,  311. 

I.,  Kiug  of  Scots,  vii.,  xi.,  xviii-xx.,  xxii., 

xlviii,,  1.,  Lxxv.,  cxi.,  43,  44,  48,  61,  70- 
75,  77,  79,  80,  123,  133,  144,  152,  250, 
252,  259,  278,  282-285,  312,  317. 

■ IL,  King  of  Scots,  225,  226. 

Marischal  to  King  William  the  Lion,  93. 

Marischal  to  King  Alexander  IL,  176. 

Davidson  (Dauidson),  John,  245. 

Dempster,  Thomas,  Ixxxv. 

Denzelstoune,  Patrick,  of  Culgrane,  217. 

Detiden,  Domiuus,  Ixxv. 

Dickson  (Dekeson,  Dicson,  Dikson),  Johu,  130. 

Thomas,  tenant  of  Fourgy,  13,  15. 

DingwaU,  Sir  John,  Provost  of  Trinity  College, 
Ediuburgh,  183,  184,  218. 

Dippelere,  Beruard  of,  75. 

Doby,  John,  of  Ancrum,  216. 

DoUar  (Dolar,  DoUare),  Andrew,  189. 

Robert,  194. 

DoualJsou,  John,  Vicar  of  Kinghorn,  193. 

Douglas,  Archibald,  Earl  of,  115,  278. 

Gavin,  Bishop  of  Duukeld,  Ixxvii.,  xcv. 

Sir  James,  xHi.,  Ixv. 

James  of,  knight,  9,  316. 

James,  Earl  of,  Ixv. 

Jaraes  of,  Lord  of  Dalkeith,  278. 

J.imes,  Lord  of,  xliii.,  200,  202. 

Robert,  teuant  of  Petilloch,  13,  15. 


INDEX  OF 

PERSONS.                                        415 

Duncan,  Earl  of  Fife,  56,  72,  202,  280. 

Doiiglas,  William,  Earl  of,  124,  283,  284,  286. 

Dreghorne.  Jamea,  291. 

Earl,  Justiciar  to  William  the  Lion,  133. 

Drew,  James,  291. 

son  of  Hamelin,  92-94. 

Jolm,  190. 

Duncanson  (Duncaneson),  Thomas,  291. 

Duncan,  291. 

Dundas,  George,  Ixxiii. 

Walter,  194. 

Dundranan,  James,  Abbot  of,  181. 

Drummoncl  (Dromonfl),  Lady  Elizabeth,  xeiv. 

Dunfermline,  Abbot  and  Monks  of,  150-152. 

John,  Lord,  175,  289. 

Abbot  and  Convent  of  tlie  Monastery  of, 

Lord  John,  Justiciar,  to  King  James  IV., 

134,  135,  149,  151,  152,  286-288. 

170. 

A.,  Abbot  of,  xxxii.,  314. 

John  of,  burgess  of  Perth,  256. 

Abbot  of,  xi.,  288. 

8ir  George,  Chaplain,  197. 

Galfrid,  Abbot  of,  71,  72. 

Malcobn  of,  Lord  of  Marr,  89. 

George,  Abbot  of,  170. 

Margaret,  cxL 

P.,  Abbot  of,  66. 

Walter,  Dean  of  Dunblane,  xxxiv.,  173. 

William,  Aljbot  of,  lix.,  134,  135. 

WiUiam,  Dean  of  Dunblane,  267. 

Dunkeld,  Chapter  of  the  Church  of,  94. 

Dryburgh  (Driburght),  Peter  of,  66. 

Alexander    Mylne,  OfBcial    of,   Lxxxviii., 

Drydeii  (Dridaue),  Mr.  Lawrence,  301. 

xciv.,  xcv. 

Dunbar,  Gavin,  Clerk  of  the  Pi,olIs,  251. 

Bishop  of,  xxvii.,  xxviii.,  105,  317. 

Gavin,     Archbishop    of    Glasgow.      Vkle 

Bishops  of,  xciv.,  xcv. 

Glasgow. 

Dean  and  Chapter  of,  24,  165,  267-269. 

Gavin,  Bishop  of  Aberdeen,  22,  218,  222. 

Duncan,  Precentor  of,  270,  271. 

Gawin,  Archdeacon  of  St.  Andrews,  Ixxvi., 

■  Elwyn,  Dean  of,  279. 

13. 

Galfrid,  Bishop  of,  94,  1 G2,  250. 

Thomas,  197. 

Gavin,  Bishop  of,  Ixxvii.,  xcv.,  251. 

Dunbarny,  Robert  of,  259-261. 

George,  Bishop  of,  xciv. 

Dunblaue,  Abraham,  Bishop  of,  161,  165. 

G[ilbert],  Bishop  of,  317. 

Archdeacon  of,  8,  9,  12. 

Gregory,  Bishop  of,  72. 

Bean  Master  of,  161. 

Henry,  Archdeacon  of,  137,  101. 

Bishop  of,   xxxvi.,  cxxix.,  55,   139,  149, 

Hugh,  Archdeacou  of,  26. 

150,  162,  166. 

Hugh  de  SigiUo,  Bishop  of,  25. 

Clemeut,  Bishop  of,  xxvi.,  75,  164,  165. 

James,  Bishop  of,  xcii. 

Commissary  of,  xxix. 

Jocelin,  Archdeacon  of,  279. 

Dean  and  Chapter  of,  165. 

John  of  Leicester,  Bishop  of,  25. 

Gabert,  Archdeacon  of,  161,  162. 

Richard  de  Prebeuda,  Bishop  of,   23-25, 

James,  Bishop  of,  Ixxi.,  122,  170,  173. 

44,  267,  268,  270. 

J.,  of,  313. 

Robert,  Bishop  of,  xxvii.,  Ivii.,  Iviii.,  25, 

. ■  James,  Administrator-General  of  the  fruits 

27,  28,  97,  99,  100,  103,  104,  106. 

of,  265,  267. 

Waiiam,  Bishop  of,  200,  202,  270. 

Jonathan,  Bishop  of,  165,  312. 

Dunyng,  John,  burgess  of  Perth,  281. 

•  Lawrence,  Bishop  of,  313. 

Dunypais  (Dunipais),  Ebas,  Clerk  of,  108. 

Malise,  Parson  of,  161. 

Thomas  of,  109. 

Sir  Mathew,  Dean  of,  162. 

Durie    (Dury),   Andrew,  Bishop  of   Galloway, 

Nicholas,  Bishop  of,  139,  270. 

ciii. 

Osbert,  Bishop  of,  161,  165. 

George,  210. 

Robert  de  Prebenda,  Bishop  of,  3,  25,  70. 

•  John,  Minister  of  Leith,  ciii. 

S[imon],  Bishop  of,  165,  314. 

William,  87. 

William,  Archdeacon  of,  270. 

Durward  (Hostiarius),  Alan,  Ixxvlii. 

WilUam,  Bishop  of,  1 60,  256, 264-267, 270. 

Gamill,  279. 

EDE>f  AM,  Mr.  William  of,  26. 
Edinburgh,  Eobert,  Canon  of,   279. 
Edward,  Monk  of  Cambuskenuetli,  311. 
I.,  King  of  England,  xxxvi.,  xxxvii.,  lii. 

III.,  King  of  England,  lix. 

. ■  IV.,  King  of  England,  Ixiv.,  Ixv. 

son  of  Patrick  of  Stirling,  57- 

Chancellor  to  King  David  I.,  72. 

Eichard,  teuant  of  Newtoun,  13,  14,  16. 

Effren  insnla  (Inchaffray),  Mahse,  Prior  of,  313. 
Eghntou  (Eggliuton,  Eglingtoun,  Eglyntouue), 

Hew,  Earl  of,  181,  218,  258,  318. 
John  of,  Prior  of  Blantyre,  etc,  95,  97, 

99,  101,  103,  106. 
Eliihinstou  (Elphinstoune),  William  of,  294. 

William,  Lord,  Ixxxvii. 

Engelram,  ChanceUorto  King  MalcolmlV.,  71, 

132. 
Errol  (Erol),  William,  Earl  of,  Ixxvi.,  175. 
Erskine  (Erskin,  Erskyn),  Adam,Commeudator 

of  Cambuakenueth,  xcvii.,  cv.-cxii. 

Adam,  Chancellor  of  Glasgow,  cv.,  cvi. 

Alan  of,  brother  to   Sir  Eobert   of  that 

Dk  and  of  KuinouU,  225,  227. 

Honourable  AIexauder,cxiii.,exxiii.,cxxiv. 

Alexander,  Eector  of  Monabroth,  188. 

Colonel    Alexander,    of   Cambiiskenneth, 

cxiii.,  cxiv.,  cxvii.,  cxxiv. 

David,  Commendator  of  Dryburgh,  xcviL 

David,  cxxiv. 

Harry,  cxix.,  cxx. 

Henry,  "  fear  of  Cardross,"  cxxiii. 

Houourable  Johu,  cxra. 

John,  cxv. 

John,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  xcvii.,  ci. 

John,  Earl  of  Mar,  xiv.,  cxxiv. 

John  Lord,  xcvii.,  ci.,  cv.-cvii.,  122,  188. 

John  of,  76. 

Johu  of,  Chancellor  of  Glasgow,  32,  33. 

John,  of  Dun,  cix.,  c-x. 

John  of,  Vicar  of  lucheschenaue,  34. 

Lady  Catherine,  cxiv. 

Nicholas  of  Kynnoule,  237-240,  275,  277. 

— —  Eobert,  Master  of,  xcvii. 

Eobert  of,  knight,  64,  124,  253-256,  258, 

283,  284,  286. 
Eobert,  of  that  Ilk  and  of  Kynuoule,  Ivi., 

224-229,  239,  240. 
Eobert,  younger  of  Dun,  cix.,  cx. 


Erskine,  Honourable  Sir  Charles,  of  Cambus- 
kenneth  aud  Alva,  cxiv.,  cxv. 

Houourable     Sir     Charles,     of     Cambus- 

kenneth  and  Alva,  son  of  the  preced- 
ing,  cxiv.,  cxv. 

—  Sir  James,  of  Cambuskenneth,  cxii. 

Sir  John,  of  Alva,  cxv.-cxvii. 

Sir  John,  of  Cambuskeimeth,  xiv. 

Sir  Thomas  of,  of  that  Ilk,  lix.,  33. 

•  Thomas,  Lord,  Ixvii. 

Thomas,  Master  of ,  xcvii. 

Thomas,  of  Brechin,  Secretary,  318. 

Thomas,  of  Cambuskenneth,  cxiv. 

Thomas,  of  Haltoune,  Secretary,  218. 

Thomas,  of  Linlathen,  cxx. 

Thomas  of,  Lord  of  Alway,  275,  277,  278. 

William,  Curate  of  Lenze,  189,  191,  194. 

William,  at  Otterston,  cxvii. 

Erth  (Airth),  John,  258. 

Ethole.      Vkle  Athole. 

Eugene,  Clerk,  24. 

IIL,  Pope,  XX.,  xlviii.,  38-40. 

IV.,  Pope,  55,  272. 

Eva,  mother  of  John  Cwmyng,  xxxi. 

Ewin,  John,  290. 

Eobert,  290. 

Ewison,  Duncan,  291. 

Walter,  291. 

Faber  (Fabre),  Alexander,  299. 

Gilbert,  76. 

Eichard,  34. 

Falconar,  Wmiam,  218,  220. 

Falkirk  (Faukirk),  Alexauder  of,  114. 

Faruile   (F.arnyle),  Alau  of,  Provost   of   Ediu- 

burgh,  124,  125. 

Clement  of,  of  Gogiir,  Ixi.,  126-129. 

Fausyde,  Thomas  of,  knight,  256,  258. 
Fenton  (FentoHne),  Alexander,  264. 

James,  of  Ogil,  262. 

WQIiam  of,  Ivi.,  Ivii.,  259,  260. 

Ferdinaud,  King  of  Arragon,  Ixxxvi. 
Ferguson,  Eobert,  son  of  William  of  Eaith,  xvii. 

William,  of  Eaith,  xvi. 

Ferue,  Mr.  George,  Eector  of  the  University  of 

St.  Andrews,  22. 
Fife  (Fyff,  Fyffe),  Duncau,  Earl  of,  200,  202. 

and  Fothrick,  Dean  of,  4,  80. 

aud  Fothriff,  Brice,  Deau  of,  77. 


INDEX  OF  PERSONS.                                         417 

Fife,  Johnof,  311. 

Fourgy  or  Petillok,  Lord  of,  18. 

Fiulay  (Finelei),  William  of,  92. 

Duncan,  Lord  of,  4. 

Finlayson  (Fini.Uauson),  Kessog,  113. 

GUbert,  Lord  of,  3,  4,  6. 

Fleming  (Flemyng),  Andrew,  19S. 

Franceis,  Adam,  lOS. 

Davitl,  Lord  of  Bigar,  32,  33,  115,  140, 

Fraucis  I.,  King  of  France,  Ixxvi.-lxxviii. 

241,  274-277. 

Fraser   (Fresale,    Frasar,    Fresare),    Sir   Alex- 

Sii-  David,  225,  227. 

ander,  knight,  Chamberlain  of  Scotland, 

John,  Lord,  Great  Chamberlaiu  of  Scot- 

200,  202. 

land,  179,  lSl-183,  185,  ISG. 

Bernard,  Sheriff  of  Stirling,  108,  297. 

Sir  Maloolm,  183-185,  274,  270. 

■  James,  Notary,  S7. 

^Lolcolm,  son  of  David,  274. 

Johu,  Deauof  Eestalrig,  290. 

Thomas,  179,  180. 

—  Wdliam,  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  3,  5,  6, 

Patriok,  BaiHe  of  Kirkintulach,  189,  194. 

12,  146. 

Fleteher  (Flesar,  Flescheware),  Sir  John,  180. 

Freslay    (Freslaw),   Henry  of,  Lord  of    Arriu- 

John,  310. 

groskaud  Foiirgy,  6,0,  10,  12-14,  18,  20. 

Robert,  310. 

WilUam  of,    kuight,   Lord  of  Fourgy,  9, 

Forestar  (Forestare,  Forester,  Forstare,  Foster), 

10,  23. 

Alexander,  of  Drip,  Provost  of  Stirling, 

122. 

Galeraith,  Alexasder,  219,  221. 

Alexander,  of  Culraore,  168. 

John,  218,  220. 

Da\-id,  teuant  of  PetiUoch,  13,  15,  16. 

Patrick,  217,  219, 

Duncan,  302,  305. 

Walter,  219,  221,  301. 

Sir  Duncan,  of  Skippinche,  xxxiii. 

Walter,  of  PortneUene,  217. 

Henry,  271. 

Galin,  W[iIIiam]  of,  66. 

John,  168. 

Galletly  (Galychtly),  John,  218,  220. 

John,  219,  221. 

Galloway,  WiUiam,  218,  220. 

•  John,  Baihe  of  Stirling,  291. 

GamUI,  John,  311. 

Sir   John,   Lord  of  Corstorphiu,    knight, 

Ostiariiis   to    Hugh,    Bishop   of    St.   Au- 

Lxi.,  126,  127. 

drews,  279. 

Marnin,  109-111. 

GamUsone,  Adam,  76. 

Matthew,  burgess  of  Stirling,   117,    US, 

Garclin,  George  of,  107. 

305. 

Gardner  (Gardnarj,  Alexander,  212,  218,  220. 

Eobert,  76. 

John,  219,  220. 

Thomas,  272,  298. 

Eobert,  Rector  of  Moniabrok,  298. 

■  Thomas,  of  Schiregardene,  38. 

Robert,  Notary,  114,  116,  120. 

Forman,   Mr.    Robert,    Preceutor  of   Glasgow, 

Thomas,  of  Denovane,  122. 

177,  178. 

Garuath,    nephew  to   Simon,   Bishop  of   Duu- 

■  Eobert,  Dean  of  Glasgow,  Ixxvi.,  218. 

blane,  315. 

Forsyth  (Forsith),  Clerk,  64. 

Garschore,  WUham,  194. 

David,  218,  220. 

Garteuocht,  David  of,  xxxii. 

Robert,  300,  309. 

Geildewrd.      Vide  Jedburgh. 

Fortune  (Fortoune),  Thomas,  209. 

George,  Cardinal  Deacon  of  St.  llary  in  Porticu, 

Foulartoune,  Charles,  223. 

46. 

FouHs,  James,  burgess  of  Edinburgh,  183,   184. 

Gerard,  Cardinal  Deacon  of  St.  Adrian,  46. 

Mr.  James,  of  Colintoun,  Clerk  Eegister, 

Gibson,  John,  Notary,  209. 

vi.,  viii.,  ix.,  2,  4,  318. 

Robert,  126. 

James  of,  Notary,  273. 

•  WiUiam,  Dean  of  Restalrig,  2,  218. 

Thomas,  Xotary,  18S,  214,  216. 

Giffard  (Giffert),  David,  92. 

William  of,  Vicar  of  Kirkis,  143,  146. 

Hugh,  280. 

54 

418                                          INDEX  OF  PERSONS. 

Gilbert  (Gaiebert),  Earl,  xx.xii.,  57,  280,  314. 

Goiirlay    (Gourlaw),   WiUiam,   Vicar    of    Kil- 

Clerk  to  Kiiig  William  tbe  Lion,  92,  142. 

maronok,  306. 

Priest  of  St.  Martin,  39. 

Grahame  (Graham,  Grame,  Graym),  Sir  David. 

son  of  Kichard,  253. 

225,  227. 

Gilcristin,  315. 

David  of ,  1 09,  283,  284,  286. 

Gill,  Jobn,  Provost  of  Pertb,  237,  238,  256. 

Jobn  of,  Rector  of  Erole,  107. 

Gillastoi),  brotber  of  Gilcrist  jVIagilmore,  70. 

John  of,  107,  114,  116. 

Gillecbrist,   Chaplaiu    to  Jouatbau,    Bishop   of 

Nicholas  the,  of  Achinclocb,  113,  116. 

Dunblane,  313. 

Sir  IviQi.an,  xxxv. 

Gillebesboc,  son  of  Jobn  of  Clecbenes,  313. 

Sir  Patrick  of,  Sheriff  of  Stirling,  70. 

GiUemichel,  Parsou  of  Moetbel,  313. 

Sir  Patrick  of,  25. 

Gillespy,  Alexander,  219,  221. 

Sir  Patrick,  of  Cuyl,  li. 

GiUies  (GeUs,  GUleis),  Robert,  198. 

Robeit,    Presbyter    of     Dunblane,     212- 

Thomas,  189,  194,  198. 

214. 

Gilmore,   Cristiane,  relict  o£    Donakl  M^^Cane, 

WUIiam,  of  Aucbinclocht,  122. 

218,  220. 

Walter,  Bailie  of  Stirling,  291. 

Gilstoun,  Jobn  of,  311. 

Gralterius,  Bishop  of  Albania,  42. 

Glasgow,  (Glasgu),  Arebbisbop  of,  Ixix. 

Gray,  Da\-id,  130,  311. 

Bishop    of,    .xxvii.,    53,    165,    205,    230, 

IsabeUa,   spouse    of   Alexauder,    Earl  of. 

234. 

Huntly,  242. 

Cbapter  of,  206,  231. 

Patrick,  130. 

Dean  and  Chapter  of,  201. 

Robert,  85. 

Engeh-am,  Elect  of,  132,  253. 

Greenlaw  (Greuelaw,    Grenlaw),    Sir   Johu  of. 

George  Lockbart,  Dean  of,  xcvi. 

X.XV.,  310,  311. 

Gavin  Dunbar,  Archbishop  of,  xcviii.,  2, 

William  of,  Arcbdeacon  of  St.  Andrews, 

187,  190,  191,  195,  198,  212,  214,  218, 

224,  227. 

318. 

Greg,  Patrick,  tenant  of  Fourgy,  13,  15,  16. 

GoceUn,  Bishop  of,  44. 

Gregory  VL,  Pope,  81,  153,  253. 

Herbert,  Bishop  of,  71. 

IX.,  Pope,  162. 

■  Herbert,  Elect  of,  72. 

Cardinal  Deacon,  39. 

James,    Arcbbishop  of,    liv.,    209,     242, 

Cardiual  Deacon  of  St.  Jlary  iu  Aquiro, 

244-246. 

46. 

John,  Bisbop  of,  Uv.,  200-203,  206,  207. 

Grose,  Ricbard,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  li. 

Jobn  of,  109. 

Gudeswane,  Jobn,  Notary,  136. 

Official  of,  204. 

Guido,  Cardinal  Deacou  of  the  Church  of  Eome, 

■ Eobert,  Archbisbop  of,  175,  177,  207. 

39. 

Walter,  Bisbop  of,  176,  234,  284. 

of  Lindores,  149. 

WilUam,  Arcbbisbop  of,  175. 

Guld,  David,  308. 

William,  Bishop  of,  63,  64,  162. 

Gurle,  Ingram,  251. 

Glencairn  (Glencame),  Cuthbert,  Earl  of,  218, 

Guthilgurdy,  The  Arcbdeacon,  Lord  of,  9,  10. 

220. 

Gynnis,  Cristofer,  273. 

Glendovan,  Prebendary  of,  xciL 

Gollane,  Jobn,  76. 

H.4.DDINGT0N,  Thomas,  SECOND  KlKL  or,  cxiv. 

Goodall,  Walter,  xv. 

Hagj',  Audrew,  cvii.,  cviii. 

Gordon,  Duke  of,  x. 

Hailes,  Lord,  xxxix. 

Lady  Catherine,  cxxxvii. 

Haithwy,  Alexander,  Bailie  of  Linlithgow,  273. 

Gourlay  (Gourlaw),  Alexander,  38,  157. 

Haldane  (Haldene),  James,  of  Glennegess,  knigbt. 

John,  Mouk   of   Aberbrothock,   99,   100, 

122,  218,  220. 

105. 

Haldany,  Judge,  9,  10. 

INDEX  OF  PEBSONS.                                         419 

Haliburton  (Haliburtoune),  Henry  of,  111. 

Herbert  (Harbert),  Clerk  to  the  Bishop,  312. 

Walter  of,  2S3,  2S4,  2SG. 

Marshal,  160. 

Halker.stone,  Thoma.s,  249. 

son  of  Herbert  of  Chalmer,  107. 

Halkerton,  Sii'  Tliomas,  Ixxiii. 

Herries  (Herrice),  John,  124. 

Halyday,  Alexani-ler,  219. 

Hervey,  Clerk,  161. 

Jobn,  219,  221. 

Hetun,  Mr.  John  of,  26. 

Hamilton    (Hamiltoune,   Hamiltoun,    Hammil- 

Hiberuia  (Ybernia),  Thomas  of,  76. 

toune),  Andrew,  87. 

Hibestoter,  R.  of,  xxxi. 

Lord  George,  xi. 

Hill,  Peter,  272. 

JameSjOf  Kyncavill,  Sberiff  of  LinUthgow, 

Holyrood  (Holy  Cross),  [Alwyn],  Abbot  of,  72. 

251. 

George,  Abbot  of,  Ixxvi. 

Jobn,  Abbot  of  Paisley,  xeix. 

H.,  Abbot  of,  162. 

. ■  Mr.  Patrick,  cxiv. 

0.,  Prior  of,  162. 

Robert,  cxiv. 

Priorof,  151. 

WilUamof,  275,277. 

W.,  Abbot  of,  lOS. 

William,  Vicar  of  Stirling,  292. 

WiDiam,  Abbot  of,  71,  79,  144. 

Harmann,  Subdeacon  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  42. 

Home,  Sir  Andrew,  xxxv. 

Harpar,  Jamea,  16S. 

Hoppiland,  William,  Notary,  130. 

Harrow,  Robert,  76. 

Horne  (Horn),  Thomas,  303,  306. 

Harrowar,  WilUam,  114. 

William,  190. 

Harvey  (Harwy),  Alan,  38. 

Houden  (Houeden),  John  of,  133. 

Hastings  (Hastinggis,  Hastingis,  Hastitig),  John 

Houston  (Houstone),  Robert,  130, 

of,  29,  280. 

Howy,  John,  218,  220. 

Hay,  Sir  Gilbert,  of  Locherward,  liii. 

Hubald,   Cardinal  Presbyter   of  St.  John   aud 

Gilbert  of,  Constable  of  Seotlaud,  9. 

St.  Paul,  39. 

Gilbertof,  knight,  316. 

Hucheon,  Mathevv,  290. 

•  John  of,  250,  297. 

Huctyrcardoner,  Brice,  Chaplain  of,  161. 

Mr.  Richard  Augustine,  ix.,  1. 

Hugh,  the  Cemeutar,  94. 

Richard,  tenant  of  the  mill  of  Arryngrosk, 

Chancellor    to   King   William   the    Lion, 

13,  14. 

160,  167,  314. 

Robert,  38. 

Chaplainto  KingWilliamthe  Lion,  88,  252. 

Sir  Thomas  of,  12. 

Clerk,  24,  94,  314. 

Helyas,  Theodoret,  xxx. 

Hunctroddis,  Alexander  of,  298. 

Henrison  (Henrisone),  James,  175,  2S9. 

Hungary,  Jlary  Queen  of,  o. 

ilanykyn,  of  Saloucby,  85. 

Hunuy,  Walter,  303. 

Henry,  Priuce,  son  of  David  L,  xlvUi.,  71,  72, 

Huntly,  Alexander,  Earl  of,  242,  244,  246,  24S. 

133. 

George,  second  Earl,  cxxxvii. 

IIL,  King  of  England,  xxxvi. 

Hnme,   Alexander,   Lord,    Great  Chamberlaiu, 

VIII.,     King   of    England,    Ixxvi.,    xcii.. 

170,  175. 

cxxxiii. 

Hutouu,  John,  85. 

the  Archdeacon,  161. 

the  Chaplain,  161. 

lox.ip.ns,  BisHOP  OF  TuscunjM,  39. 

Clerk  to  J.,  Bishop  of  Dunkeld,  313. 

IUebert,  Clerk,  279. 

Earl  of  Huntingdon,  279. 

Inchaffray    (Etfren    insula),    Malise,    Pi-ior    of. 

■  Presbyter  of  St.  Nereus  and  St.  Archil- 

313. 

leus,  42. 

Inchmahome,  Malcolm,  Parson  of,  161. 

Hepburne,  George,  Dean  of  Dunkeld,  181,  249. 

Inglis,  Margaret,  cxrii. 

Herbert  (Harbert),  Chamberlain  to  King  David 

William,  116. 

L,  72,  312. 

Innes,  Mr.  Cosmo,  xUi. 

420 


INDEX  OF  PERSONS. 


lunocent  m.,  Pope,  xx.,  47-49,  51,  52,  6C,  149- 

151. 
Ireland,  Thomas  of,  76. 
Isaac  (Ysaac,  Ysaach),  Priest,  lOS,  112. 

James,  114,  116. 

Jolm,  34,  116. 

Isabella,    spouse    of   David   rieming,   Lord   of 

Biggar,  274,  276. 
Isles,  John  Earl  of  Ross,  Lord  of  tlie,  Ixiv. 

Jacint,    Cardinal    Deacon   of    St.    Martin    in 

Cosmidyne,  42. 
James  L,  King  of  Scots,  xlvii.,  Ix.,  cxxxvii.,  64, 

164,  2S9,  290. 

II.,  xlvi.,  Ixi. 

III.,    Ixiii.,    Ixiv.,    Ixvii.,    Ixix.,     cxxix., 

cxxxi.,  cxxxv.,  168,  305. 
IV.,  Ixvii.-lxix.,  I.xxi.,  Ixxiii.,  Ixxiv.,  Ixxvi., 

Ixxvii.,  Ixxix.,  Ixxxv.-lxxxvii.,  cxxviii., 

cxxxii.,   cxxxiii.,  cxxxvi.,    cxxxvii.,    31, 

167,  168,  171,  17.3,  174. 
V.,    V.,    vii.-x.,    Ixxvii.,    Ixxxi.,    Ixxxvii., 

xcii.-xciv.,  cxxxW.,  1,  38,  181,  197. 

VI.,  cix.-cxiii.,  cxix.-cxxiv. 

VIL,  X. 

Prince,  eldest   son   of   King  James    IV., 

cxxxvi. 
Jameson  (Jamesone),  Thomas,  of  Wodheid,  S6. 

William  and  John,  137. 

Jardin,  Alexander,  of  Apilgarth,  210,  211. 
Jedburgh     (Geddewrt,    Jeddewrd,     Jedworth), 

Abbot  of,  xxxvi. 

■  Osbert,  Abbot  of,  71,  72,  80. 

Jerusalem,  Walter,  knight  of  the  Order  of  St. 

John  of,  2. 

Knights  of  St.  John  of,  Ixxv. 

Joffrason,  Alexander,  301-304. 
Johu,  Chaucellor  of  the  Earl,  161. 

Chaplaiu  to  King  David  L,  77,  278. 

Cardinal  Presbj-ter  of  St.  Anastasia,  42. 

Clerk  to  Abraham,  Bishop  of  Dimblaue, 

161. 

Clerk  to  Sir  Hugh  Giffard,  110,  112. 

XXIL,  Pope,  205. 

tanner,  76. 

son  of  Elias,  burgess  of  Liulithgow,  109, 

112. 

son  of  the  Earl  of  Fife,  94. 

son  of  Eobert  Flescheware,  310. 


John,  son  of  Hemot,  fisherman,  76. 

son  of  Hugh,  fisherman,  76. 

son  of  James,  137. 

son  of  Michael,  fisherman,  76. 

son  of  Walter,  burgess  of  Perth,  28. 

Johnson     (Johneson,    .lohneston,     Johnestoun, 

Johnnstoun,  Johnston,  .Jolmstoim),  Dean 

George,  xxxv. 

.lames,  249. 

James,  tenant  of  Lethame  and  Hethame, 

1.3,  15,  16. 

John,  of  that  Ilk,  85. 

Richard,  burgess  of  Stirling,  300. 

Jonathan,  Bishop  of  Dunblane,  165,  312,  313. 

Archdeacou  of  Dunblane,  315. 

Archdeacon,   Chaplain   to   King  William 

the  Lion,  160. 
Julius  II.,  Pope,  Ixxiv.,  Ixxvi.,  208. 
Justiciary,  Cominissioners  of,  cxv. 

Kaleder,  Eichabd  of,  70.     Vhle  Calendar. 
Kalenter  (Kalentyr).      Vide  Calendar. 
Karrel,  Galfrid,  Sheriff  of.      Vkle  Crail. 
Keir  (Keyr),  .lohn,  of  Edinburgh,  Ixii.,  117,  121. 
John  of,  son  and  heir  of  John  of  Keir  of 

Eandalstoune,  119,  120. 

John,  father  of  John  Keir,  113,  115,  116. 

Keith,  Christian  of,  253-256,  258. 

Eobert,  Bishop,  xvi.,  xxv.,  Iviii. 

Robert  of,  9,  316. 

Kelso   (Calcho,   Kalchoch,    Kelcho,    Kelkhow), 

John,  Abbot  of,  56,  71,  73,  75. 

John  of,  279. 

Kennedy,  Fergns,  xxxii. 

.Tohn,  xxxii. 

Ker,  Mr.  George,  Provost  of  Dunglas,  2. 

John,  113. 

John,  of  the  Quattetar,  113. 

William,  76. 

Keremure,  Mam-ice,  Chaj;Iain  of,  315. 

John,  Parson  of,  31.3. 

Kergill,  Barnard,  Cliaplaiu  of,  26. 

Kessaneson,  Alan,  301. 

Kettleston   (Ketylistoune,    Ketilistoime),    Wil- 

Uam  of,  67-69,  250. 
Kincardine,  John  of,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth, 

Hv.,  131. 
Kinloss,  Eobert,  Abbot  of,  2. 
Kinross,  Henry  of,  29. 


INDEX  OF  PEBSONS. 

421 

Kintulafb,  ilen  of,  h-ii. 

Lawson,  Eichard,  175,  289. 

Kippen   (Kyijpen),    Christina,  danghter  of  the 

Eobert,  Notary,  249. 

Parson  of,  xxxii. 

Layng,  Archibald,  Notary,  178,  179. 

Prebendary  of,  xcii. 

Legate,  Adam,  300. 

Kirkiutilloch,  Proprietors  of,  xxix. 

John,  303,  309. 

Jlr.  Hugh,  Rector  of,  xxx. 

Leirmonth,  Eobert,  21. 

Kuok,  Jolm  of  Arflinanwell,  IGS. 

Leith,  John  Durie,  minister  of,  ciii. 

KnoUis,  Sir  William,  Ixx. 

Leky(Leke),  Murdoch,  219,  220. 

Kuox,  Cristiane,  219,  221. 

Leuihale,  Thomas  of,  lOS. 

John,  xcix.,  cii.,  ciii.,  cx. 

Lennox  (Leuenax),  Dean  of,  177,  187,  192, 

196, 

Kossard,  Pachard,  4. 

203,  207,  209,  212,  215. 

Kuyk.      Vide  Cook. 

Duke  of,  cxx. 

Kyd,  Alexauder,  Cauon  of  the  Hoyal  Cliapel  of 

Ciilchrist,  brotherto  Maldoneu  Earl  of 

xvi. 

Stirling,  193. 

Maldoueu,  Earl  of,  xvi. 

Kynbute,  Joachim  of,  Knight,  89. 

Earls  of,  xv. 

Kyumoude,  William  of,  67. 

Lenze,  Curate  of,  179. 

Kyuuard,   William  of,  Clerk  of   St.   Andrews, 

Leo  X.,  Pope,  lxxviii.,lxxxviii.,  15,  22,  249, 

296. 

238. 

Liberatiooe  de.      Vide  Liverauce. 

Kynnoule,  Lord.<!  of,  240. 

Liberton  (Libertoune),  Henry,  130. 

Brice,  Eector  of  the  Church  of,  226. 

John,  130. 

■  William  of,  129,  130. 

Lacraie,  W[illia5i]  of,  94. 

Liddale,  Sir  James  of,  of  Halkerstoun,  Ixvi., 

xvii. 

Lamarderob,  Eobert  of,  xxxii. 

Johu  of,  Ixvi. 

Lamb,  James,  291. 

Lilburu  (Libburu,  Lilburne),  Alexander,  2 

11. 

James,  Rector  of  Quecht  (Conuetht?),  293. 

James,  218. 

William,  Canon  of  Moray,  Eector  of  Con- 

John,  220. 

veth  and  Kynnell,  122. 

Thomas,  21S,  220. 

Lamberton  (Lambertoun,  Lambertouue),  Heury 

Lina,  WiUiam  of,  79. 

of,  Constable  of  Stiriing,  137. 

Liudsay  (Lindesay,  Lindesi),  David  of,  Earl  of      | 

.John  of,  111,  251. 

Craufurd,  237. 

William     of,    Bishop    of    St.     Andrews, 

■  .John  of,  203,  206. 

1                 xxxviii.,  146,  286. 

W[alter]  of,  160. 

Lauark  (Lanarc),  Eichard  of,  4. 

WiUiam  of,  xxxu.,  44,  51,  71,  72,  1 1 1 

190, 

Robert  of,  2S. 

314. 

Landale,  William,  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  Iv., 

Linlithgow  (Liulithqw),  Bailies  of,  272. 

Ivi.,  7S. 

John,  Clerk  of,  112. 

Lardner,  John,  burgess  ot  Stirliug,  316. 

Dean  of,  143,  146,  155. 

Lascelis,  WiUiam  of,  133. 

Robert,  Dean  of ,  112. 

Lasdeles,  Thomas  of,  75. 

.  WiUiam,  Vicar  of,  112. 

Lauder  (Laudre),  George  of,  125. 

Lintou  (Lintoune),  James  of,  125. 

Hem-y,  291. 

Liston  (Listomie),  John  of,  273. 

Johu,  Chaplain,  123. 

Litstar,  John,  Serjaud,  273,  301,  304. 

John,  Notary,  190,  193,  197,  198,  216. 

. WiUiam,  Notary,  156,  157,  190,  194 

Law,  Gilbert,  Notary,  xxxi.,  xxxii. 

Liverance,  Symon  of,  133. 

Thomas,  245. 

Livingston    (Leuingstoune,    Leuinstoun, 

>ui- 

Lawrence  (Laurence),  Officialof  St.  Autlrews,151. 

stoune,    Leviugston,    Leviugstoun, 

Le- 

Lawson  (Lausone,  Lauson),  James,  of  Bordland, 

viugstouue,  Levistoune),  Alexander 

271, 

Provost  of  Edinburgh,  2. 

275,  277. 

James,  biirgess  of  Edinburgh,  218. 

AJexander  of,  Lord  of  Calentar,  91. 

422                                          INDEX  OF  PERSONS. 

Livingston,  David,  309. 

Macfarlane,  John,  of  Arroehar,  xvii. 

Heury  of,  Lord  of  Manerstoune,  9L 

Elizabeth,  Lady  of,  218-220. 

Henry,  of  Myddill  Benyne,  272. 

Walter,  of  that  Ilk,  or  of  Arrochar,  xiv.- 

Jolin  of,   Knight,  Lord  of   Calandar,  32, 

xvii. 

33,  241,259,275,277. 

M'Kawla,  John,  217. 

Joseph,  309. 

M'Kenzie,  Sir  George,  x. 

Robert  of,  24L 

M'Kinlay  (Macynlay),  Donald,  219,  221. 

Robert,  Lord  of  Dalrv,  9L 

John,  219-221. 

Robert  of,  of  the  Calenter,  114,  116,  300. 

MicheU,  218,  220. 

Williara,  of  Kilsyth,  cviii. 

M'Ky,  John,  291. 

Lochmaben  (Lacmaban),  Nicholas  of,  Clerk,  316. 

M'Lere  (Maklere),  John,  219-221. 

Lockhart  (Lockart,  Lokart),  George,  xcvi. 

M'Liutoch,  Andrew,  219-221. 

John,  118,  209. 

M'NakUl,  John,  Chaplain,  272. 

Logan  (Logane),  John,  218,  220. 

M'Peth,  Andrew,  273. 

London  (Londone),  John  of,  Mayor  of  Berwick- 

Macyntoch  (M'Yntosh),  Andrew,  219. 

npon-Tweed,  57,  59,  61. 

David,  219. 

Lorne,  Patrick  of,  310. 

Magilmore,  GUerist,  70. 

Lorraine,  Mary  of,  c,  cv. 

Mailler,   WiUiam,    tenaut   iu    Cambuskennetli, 

Lothian  (La\idonia),  John,  Archdeacon  of,  79. 

cviii. 

William,  270. 

MaUwyne  (Thomas),  Notary,  224. 

Ludo,  William  (Walter  de  Biduii),  Chancellor, 

Makgilhois,  Patrick,  168. 

252. 

Makilquhene,  John,  221. 

Lnke,  Clerk  to  Abraham,  Bishop  of  Dnnblane, 

Makkillay,  John,  219. 

161. 

Makison,  Mr.,  cxxxviiL 

Lundeif,  Alexander  Myhie,  Rector  of,  Ixxxviii., 

MakkisweU,  .John  of,  297. 

xciv. 

Maklintoch,  Donald,  221. 

Lundin  (Lundyu),  Philip  of,  44,  57. 

Makmoriss,  Patrick,  219,  221. 

Thonias,  sou  ot  Walter  of,  57. 

Maky,  Henry,  teuant  of  Beyn,  13,  15. 

Walter,  son  of  Philip  of,  56,  57. 

Makynquhoue,  John,  219. 

Lundores  (Luudoris),  Y.,  Abbot  of,  66. 

Malcarmes,  A.,  of,  142. 

f;[uido]  of,  149. 

Malcolm,  Rector  of  Forteviot,  106,  107. 

Henry ,  Abbot  of  the  Monastery  of,  17,  22. 

IV.,  King  of  Scots,  xix.,  xxii.,  xlix.,  44, 

Lyn,  James,  Canon  of  Dunkeld,  1S7-1S9,  191. 

70,  73-75,  79,  150,  280. 

father  of  Malcolm,  136. 

M.,  THE  Archdeacos,  132. 

servant  ot  the  King,  150. 

M.,  the  Deacon,  176. 

M[alcoIm],  brother  of  King  WUliam,  133. 

M.,  the  Presbyter,  176. 

Parson  of  Inchmahome,  161. 

Macalpy,  Mouathe,  9,  10. 

Malcolm,  son  of  Malcolm  the  son  of  Roger,  136. 

M'Authane,  John,  220. 

Maleuile  (MailuUe,  MaluiU),  GaIfredof,^57,  280. 

Macbeth  (Machbeth),  Chaplain  to  Michael,  161. 

Mr.  Walter,  21,  212. 

Macbeth  (Makbeth),  the  Priest,  315. 

Mr.  WiUiam,  Chaplain,  22,  35-37. 

M'Brek,  Dean  Archibald,  xxxv. 

Malise,  Prior  of  Inchaffray,  313. 

Dean  Thomas,  xxxv. 

Parson  of  Dunblaue,  161. 

M'CaUay,  John,  221. 

Malpole,  Cormac,  Prior  of  the  Culdees,  161. 

M'Cane  (Makane),  Donald,  21S,  220. 

Malyson,  John,  169. 

Maccorkill  (M'KarkiU),  MichiU,  219,  221. 

Maufred,  Cardiual  Deacon  of  St.  George,  42. 

JLacdonald,  Donald,  cxv.,  exvi. 

Manuell,  Roger,  Prior  of,  108,  112. 

Lord  of  the  Isles,  cxxxvii. 

Mar,  John  Earl  of,  cix.,  cx.,  cxiii.,  cxvii.,  cxix.- 

Macduschath,  24. 

cxxiv.,  cxxv.,  cxxxviii. 

INDEX  OF  PEBSONS.                                         423 

Mar,  William,  Earl  of,  75. 

Melrose  (Melros,  Melross),  William,  Abbot  of,  7 1 . 

Lady  Mary  Stewart,  Countess  of,   cxix., 

Abbot  of,  xxxvi. 

cxxiv. 

Sir  WiUiam  of,  xxv.,  310,  311. 

Marche,  Peter,  Notary,  175. 

Menteith  (Menteth),  Maurice,   Earl  of,  Sheriff 

ilarch  and  Moray,  Patrick:,  Earl  of,  124. 

of  Stirling,  176. 

Margaret,    spouse  of   King  James   III.,   Ixvii., 

.  James  of,  Provost  of  Stirling,  xxxiv. 

cxxix.,  cxxxi.-cxxxv.,  168. 

John,  87. 

Queen  of  Seotlaud,  li.,  lii.,  2S2-2S5. 

Walter,  Earl  of,  cxxviii.,  1C8,  169. 

Queen  of  King  James  V.,  Ixxvii. 

WUUam,  of  West  Kerss,  knight,  86. 

Mariscba),  William,  Earl  of,  175. 

WiUiamof,  116. 

Marshall  (Marschall),  David,  297. 

MeothUl  (Modhel,  Mothel,  MuthiU),   Audrew, 

Donald,  113. 

Archdeacou  of,  314. 

Herbert,  160. 

MalegiU,  Prior  of,  313. 

Jlartin  (Martyn),  Alexander,  21,  2S1. 

Patrick,  Parsou  of,  313. 

Steward  to  Simou  Bishop  of  Dunblane,  315. 

Merchant,  Henry,  76. 

V.,  Pope,  119,135. 

Eoger,  76. 

Steward  to  WiLUam,  Bishop  of  Dunblane, 

Mersar,  John,  256. 

161. 

Mestrin,  Macbeth  of,  56. 

WUliam,  301,  304. 

Michael,  Clerk,  56,  66. 

Mary,  Princess,  daughter  of  King  Henry  Vllt., 

Isaac  (Ysaae),  Clerk,  Parson  of  Logyn,  161. 

xcii.,  cvii. 

"  Minnye,  Lady,"  Countess  of  Mar,  cx.xiii. 

Qiieen  Dowager,  cviii. 

MitcheU  (Michell),  Angus,  219,  221. 

. •  Queen  of  Scots,  cv. 

Mocfen,  Roger  of,  kuight,  256. 

Mason  (Masoun,  Masoune),  Alexander,  273. 

Moffet,  John,  Ixxxiv. 

David,  311. 

Moleudinam,  Heury,  34. 

Robert,  Canon  of  Dunblane,  267. 

Monros,  Robert  of,  Rector  ot  Quylk,  99, 100, 105. 

Masterton    (Maistertoun),    Sir    Johu  of,  xxv., 

Monyabruu,  Curate  of,  179. 

310. 

Monymiisk,  Thoraas  of,  li. 

WiUiam,  311. 

Moray,  Robert,  Cliancellor  of,  Ixxvi. 

W.,  (Jauon  of  Cambuskeuneth,  311. 

Thomas  Randolijh,  Earl  of,  xliii. 

Matheson,  Mr.  Robert,  exxxv. 

More,  Gilehrist,  64. 

Matdda,  sjiouse  of  Alexander,  son  of  Walter, 

Reginald,  64. 

Earl  of  Menteith,  cxxxviii.,  168. 

WilUam,  of  Abircorue,  62. 

Matthew  (Mathew),  ChanceUor  to  King  Alex- 

Moreville,  Hugh  of,  72,  77,  80,  250,  278. 

auder  III.,  297. 

Ivichard  of,  Constable,  26,  73,  75. 

Chaplain  of  Tulybody,  161. 

WiUiam  of,  xxxii.,  314. 

Dean  of  Dunblaue,  162. 

Morham,  Adam  of,  108-111. 

Eichard,  79. 

John  of,  108. 

son  of  Symon  of  Tulibody,  161. 

Morioe  (Morris,  Marres),  Chai>lain  to  Jonathan, 

Maurice,  Perjietual  Vicar  of  Kilmaronock,  204, 

Bishop  of  Dunblane,  313. 

215. 

Richard,  309. 

Chaplain  of  Kerimure,  315. 

Mom,  Alexander,  knight,  64. 

May,  John,  Prior  of,  66,  149. 

Mortimer  (Mortemer,   Mortuomari),  Sir  Roger 

Meffane  (Meifeu),  Andrew,  of  Clackmanuan,  85. 

of,  225,  227,  279. 

David,  218,  220. 

.  WUUam  of,  142. 

WiUiam,  270. 

Mortou,  Thomas  of,  Canon  of  Cambuskenueth, 

MegiUe,  John  of,  258. 

311. 

Melflrum,  WiUiam,  Notary,  1S6. 

Moubray,  Philip  of,  317. 

Meleburue,  Mr.  Hugh  of,  142. 

Moygne,  Thomas,  126. 

424 


INDEX  OF  PERSONS. 


Multray,  John,  tenant  of  Letliame  and  Hethame, 

13,  15,  16. 
jNIuudrum   (Mindrum),  Giles  of,  Bailie  of  Ber- 

■wick-on-Tweed,  59,  61. 
Murdoch   (Mordao),  Stewart,   son   and  heir  of 

Kobert,  Duke  of  Albany,  275,  277. 
Murehead,  Mr.  Richard,  Dean  of  Glasgow,  xxxiv. 
Murray   (Moravia,   Murreflf),   Andrew,   knight, 

of  Balward,  13-22,  34,  35,  37,  3S. 

Andrew,  Bishop  of,  175. 

Annabella,  cxxiii.,  cxxv. 

Sir  Andrew,  of  Bothwell,  xlv. 

Archibald,  Bishop  of,  317. 

Bishop  of,  Ixx^n. 

David,  knight,  of  Fourgy  or  Arryngi-osk, 

17-22,  .34-37. 

Ellen,  Lady  of  Easter  Polmais,  296. 

Sir  Gideon,  of  Elibank,  Deputy-Treasurer, 

cxii. 

Herbert,  305. 

James,  Bishop  of,  240. 

Johu,  brother-germau  of  David,    17,    18, 

20-22. 

Patrick,  38. 

Thomas  of,  Panetar  of  Scotland,  256. 

AValter  of,  of  Drumsergart,  259. 

Mr.  William  of,  12,  16. 

Wiiliam,  Bishoi)  of,  77,  80. 

William  of,  of  Polmaise,  xxxiii.,  xxxv.,  ci. 

William,  tenant  of  Lethame  and  Hethame, 

13,  15,  16. 

William,  of  Tulehadam,  117,  121. 

Muscliampe,  Thomas  of,  88. 

Mushet  (Muschet),  Alexander,  .303,  305. 

IMuthOI.      Vide  MeothiU. 

ilwhantis,  R.  of,  xxxi. 

Myll,  Heury,  264. 

Mylne,  Alexander,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  v., 

viii.,  Hv.,  Iviii.,  Lxxii.,  Ixxxiv.,  Ixxxviii.- 

xcvi. 
Alexander,  Canon  and  Official  of  Dunkeld, 

Ixxxi. 
Henry,  38. 

Naghty,  Johx,  218. 
Nairn,  Duncan,  cvi. 
Xapier  (Napare,  Naper,  Napere),  Alexander,  129. 

Alexauder,  knight,  son  and  heir  of  Archi- 

bald  Napere  of  Marchamstoune,  209. 


Napier,  Sir  John,  Vicar  of  Kilmaronock,   20S, 

209. 

John,  of  Kilmahew,  217. 

Narne,  Robert,  309. 

Robert,  Advocate,  cxi. 

Thomas,  305. 

Nessus  (Nesus),  son  of  William,  91-93,  312. 
Netretide,  Thomas,  Chaplain  of,  24. 
Newbigging  (Newbygynnis),  W         ,  of,  107. 
Newbottle  (Newbotill),  Amfrid,  Abbot  of,  71. 

Roger,  Abbot  of,  250. 

Newland  (Newlandis),  David,  272. 

Duncan,  272. 

Newton    (Newtoun),    George,    Archdeaeon    of 

Dnnblane,  122,  267. 

tenants  of,  7,  11. 

Nicholas,  Chancellor  to  King  William  the  Lion, 

73,  75,  253,  280,  312,  31-1 

Cbaniberlain  to  King  M*""  'V.,  71. 

Clerk  to  King  David  I.    ../,  278. 

Clcrk  to  King  Malcolt    IV.,  80. 

NichoII,  Robert,  194,  ;    , 

Nicbolson,  John,  245. 

Robert,  son  of,  273. 

Normand,  John,  Bailie  of  Berwick-on-Tw( 

59,  61. 
Normaville  (Normavill,   Normawelle),    Robert, 

275,  277. 

. John,  113,  116,  298. 

Norton  (Nortouu,  Nortoune),  AJexauder,  303. 

Audrew,  Notary,  168. 

Nory,  Sir  William,  242,  244-248. 
Nusy,  Symon  of,  66. 
NychoII,  Sir  David,  xxxv. 

OCTAVIAN,  Bisbop  of  Ostia  aud  Velletri,  46. 
Odo,  servant  to  the  King  ( William  the  Lion) ,  1 50. 

Cardinal  Deacon  of  St.  George,  39. 

Cardinal  Deacon  of  St.  Nicholas  in  the 

TuUian  prison,  42. 
Ogih-y  (OgUby),  John,  of  Fingask,  289. 
Olepene  (Olipeue),  William  of,  73,  75. 
Olikis  (Olifard),  Walter,  26,  251. 
Oliphant,  Lawi-ence,  Lord,  289. 

Walter,  1S6,  256. 

Oliver  (Olifer,  Olifard),  David,  73,  75,  144. 

W.,  Justiciar  of  Lothian,  317. 

Walter,  26,  251. 

Oppidum,  Peter  of,  56. 


INDEX  OF  PEBSONS.                                          425 

Orenestet  (Eestinnot),  Eobert,  Prior  of,  280. 

Patrick,  son  of  WiUiam,  250. 

Orkney  (Orknay)  aud  Caitlmess  (Katnes),  Wil- 

Pennek,  John,  291. 

liam,  Earlof,  x.,  117,  121. 

Pentland,  James  of,  311. 

Bishop  of,  xciv. 

Perth,  Magistrates  of,  cxvi. 

Osbert,  Bishop  of  Dunblane,  161,  165. 

Earl  of,  Lord  Chancellor,  x. 

Otterburne  (Otterburn),  Adam,  Provost  of  Edin- 

Preaching  Friars  of,  xxviii.,  318. 

l)urgh,  223. 

Sheri6Fs  and  Bailies  of,  259. 

Adam  of  AuMhame,  181, 183, 184, 186, 218. 

Sir  Andrew,  Perpetual  Vicar  of,  Dean  of 

Adam  of  Reidliall,  knight,  2. 

Gebry,  229. 

Otterston,  Heiress  of,  cxvii. 

Pete  (Peyt),  Laurence,  tenant  of  Xewtoun,  i:S, 

Ouide,  A[dam],  66. 

14,  16. 

Peter,  Bishop  of  Porto  aud  St.  Paifina,  etc,  46. 

Painter,  Georoe,  264. 

Cardinal    Descou    of    St.    Eustach    ne.ir 

(Payntoure),  Thomas,  130. 

the  Temple  of  Agrippa,  42. 

Paisley,  George,  Abbot  of,  treasurer,  170. 

The  Clerk,  250. 

Palgrave,  Sir  Francis,  xxxvii.,  xxxix. 

brother  of   the  Abbot   of  Diuiferuieline, 

Palmer,  John,  141,  272. 

279. 

Pantar  (Pi.   "   -,  Pauiter,   Panter),  Alexander, 

PetUlok,  Adam  of,  9,  10. 

Vic.             Tstairs,  xcviii. 

Petrus,  M.,  Ixxxi. 

David,  Abo,    of  Cambuskenneth,  xcviii.- 

Petscoty,  Andrew  of,  237.  238. 

civ. 

John  of,  259. 

•  Javid,  Vicar  o'  Carstairs,  xcviii.,  xcix. 

Philip,  Marischal  to   King  WiUiam  the   Lion, 

David,  Bishop  of  Ross,  xxxv.,  xcviii.-ci. 

93. 

—  Family  of,  Ixxxvi. 

Philp,  Andrew,  Curate  of  Kynnoule,  245. 

-  Sir  John,  xxxv. 

John,  Carate  of  Kynnoule,  245. 

Patrick,  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  Ixxii.- 

Philpson,  AncU-ew,  198. 

Ixxxvii.,  Ixxxix.,  xc,  xcviii.,  civ.,  cviii. 

Picarde,  Sir  Patrick,  Rector  of  Torry,  77. 

Paparo,  John,  Cardinal  Ueacon  of  St.  Adrian, 39. 

Pinnun,  Henry,  313. 

Pardovyn  (Perduvyn),  Robert  of,  259. 

PiuslL,  Pope,  117. 

William,  121,  122. 

Port  of  Ostia  and  St.  Rufina,  Barnard,  Bishop 

Parker  (Parcur),  Hugh,  150,  152,  286. 

of,  42,  46. 

Parkle,  Patrick  of,  273. 

Portar,  Audrew,  219,  221. 

Parklye,  James  of,  of  tb.at  Ilk,  273. 

Poi-tarfield,  John,  of  Molenduuo,  85. 

Passele,  W[iDiam]  of,  100. 

Pra-neste,  Johu,  Bishop  of,  46. 

Paterson,  John,  123. 

Prebenda,  Hugh  of,  92. 

Thomas,  291. 

Richard,  of,   Clerk  to  King  WiUiara,   29, 

William,  296. 

57,  93,  160. 

William,  Canon  of  Cambuskenneth,  189. 

Preston  (Prestoun),  Thomas  of,  129. 

Williani,  Factor  to  -A.lexander,  Abbot  of 

William,  Rector  of  Beltonn,  2. 

Carabuskenueth,  223. 

Prethir,  Richard,  burgess  of  Stirling,  70. 

Paton,  Mr.  .Joseph,  Dunfermline,  cxxxix. 

Purves,  David,  Ixvi. 

Patouson,  Eichard,  129. 

Pyat,  John,  130. 

Patrick,  150. 

Eaxl,  160. 

QuHiTE.      Vide  White. 

Justiciar  to  King  William  the  Lion,  93. 

Quhiting.      Vide  Whitiug. 

sou  of  Elias,  108. 

Qnhiteheid.      Vide  Whitehead. 

son  of  GiUemauthach,  313. 

Quinci,  Robert  of,  57,  144. 

sou  of  Maebeth  of  Mestrin,  56. 

Seher  of,  Earl  of  Winton,  xxi.,  91-93. 

son  of  Patrick  Bercar,  109,  110. 

5 

Symon  of,  92. 

5 

426                                          IXDEX  OF  PEESOXS. 

Radulf,  the  Ch-U>laix,  24,  160. 

Riddell,  Walter  of,  72. 

Railuliih,  Presbyter,  5G. 

William  of,  Clerk,  279. 

Rae  (Ra,  Raa),  Dean  Anclrew,  xx.w. 

Eobert,  brother  of  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  144, 

Robert,  7G. 

279. 

Ramsay,  Janies,  20S. 

^  ChanceUor  to  Richard,  177. 

Randolph,  Thomas,  Earl  of  Moray,  xliii. 

Chaplain  to  the  King,  xxxii.,  132, 

Rankyn,  John,  Rector  of  Hutoune,  209. 

Chaplain,  4,  1 76,  2S0. 

Rannald,  John,  son  and  heir  of  the  late  Patrick 

Chaplain  to  King  William,  314. 

Rannald,  burgess  of  Linlithgow,  271. 

the  Executioner,  76. 

Rannaldson,  Sir  John,  86,  1G7,  29G. 

Prior  of  Restenet,  280. 

Raparlaw,  Richard  of,  26. 

1.,  King  of  Scots,  xxxix.,  xl.,  xlvi.,  liii.. 

Rayny,  John,  298. 

Iv.,  9,  61,  141,   199-20.3,  205,  20G,  234, 

Eeid  (Rede),  Alexander,  87. 

251,  275,  287,  288,  316,  317. 

Alexander,  of  the  Forest,  85. 

II.,  xlvi. 

Charles,  .302,  3U5. 

III.,  xxviii.,  xlvi.,  Ivii.,  Ixxii. 

John,  180. 

Mr.,  137. 

John,  ]  26. 

son  of  the  Parson  of  TuthedeU,  315. 

John,  of  the  Forest,  85. 

son  of  Seulf,  144,  312. 

John,  Vicar  of  Mearns  and  Rector  of  the 

son  of  Seher  of  Quinci,  91-94. 

ITuiversity  of  Glasgo w,  213. 

son  of  Walter,  94. 

Robert,  Notary,  21,  22,  242,  243. 

Kobertson,  Donald,  cxv. 

Robert,  Sub-Dean  of  Moray,  292. 

JoHn,  cxv. 

Sir  William,  of  Chalmer,  137. 

John,  of  Geleam,  85. 

Sir  William,  xxxv. 

William,  218,  220. 

Reidheuch,  Alexander,  303. 

Mr.  William,  xlii. 

Andrew,  of  the  Qiiarell,  122. 

Robeson,  Sir  John,  180. 

James,  301-305. 

WiUiam,  212. 

Richard,  303. 

Roger,  Clerk,   133. 

Remorgun,  John  of,  259. 

grandfather  of  Malcolm,  136. 

Eerik,  Gilbert,  294. 

Prior,  92. 

Restalrig,  Dean  of,  xxxii. 

son  of  Henry,  92. 

Restinnot,  Robert,  Prior  of,  280. 

Rogerson  (Rogersone),  Ste])hen,  124. 

Rew,  Dionisius,  Chajjlain,  123. 

Eoglyn,  John,  Canon  of  Dunlilane,  2.5. 

Rhodes,  Grand  Master  of,  Ixxv. 

Eichard,  Canon  of  Dunblane,  25. 

Knights  of,  Ixxv. 

Rolland.  son  of  Vctred,  160. 

Eichard,  Chamberlain,  GG. 

WilUam,  129. 

•  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  144. 

Ross,  Hugh  of,  225,  227. 

Chancellor  to  King  William  the  Liou,  144, 

Alexander,  Duke  of,  cxxxvi. 

Chaiilaiu  to  King  William  the  Lion,  312. 

David  Pauter,  Bishop  of,  xxxv.,  xoix.-civ. 

Chaplain,  79,  94. 

James,  Bishop  of,  Ixxvii.,  2,  66,  318. 

Chaplaiu  of  the  Earl,  IGI. 

(Rossie),  James,  Duke  of,  Ixix.,  174. 

Clerk,  79,  92,  133. 

John,  Earl  of,  Ixiv. 

John,  309. 

Robert,  Bishop  of,  66. 

Priest  of  Forteviot,  133. 

Eothes,  Margaret  Crichton,  formerly  Countess 

son  of  Hugh,  29,  57,  133. 

of,  xcviii. 

— — •  son  of  John,  300. 

Rothesay,   David,   Duke  of,  Earl  of  Carrik  aud 

son  of  Luguen,  89. 

Athole,  and  Ste%vard  of  Scotland,  278. 

Eichardson,  Robert,  xci.,  xcii. 

Rowe,  WiUiam  of,  109-111. 

RiddeU  (Ridale,  EiddaU),  Gervas,  280. 

Roxburgh  (Rogesburg),  Adam  of,  77,  278. 

INDEX  OF  PERSONS.                                          427 

Eoxburgli,  Hugh  o£,  the  Chancellor's  Clerk,  312, 

St.  Andrews  and  Duublane,   Stephen  of,    131, 

314. 

132. 

FaKltUmau,  ilr.  Thotaas,  xv.,  Ixxiii.,  Ixxxv.,  c. 

Thomas  o£,  xxv.,  310. 

civ. 

Walter,  Bishop  of,  95,  99,  101,  278. 

Euffo,  William,  knight,  xxxii. 

William,  Archbishop  of,  175. 

Eule,  A.  of,  Clerk,  xxxi. 

William  Fraser,  Bishop  of,   3,   5,  6,  143, 

144,  140,  153. 

Saddler  (Sadill.\r),  Hugh,  120. 

William  Lamberton,  Bishop  of,    12,  200, 

. •  John,  120. 

202,  286,  288. 

Salisbury  (Salusbiri),  AVilliam,  Earl  of,  94. 

William  Landale,  Bishop  of,  Ivi.,  63,  80, 

Salle,  William  of,  92. 

124,   159,  224,  225,  227,  228,  230,  233, 

Sanchar,  John,  Canon  of  Glasgow,  19.S. 

234,  258,  283,  2S4,  286,  288. 

John,  o£  Edilstoune,  210. 

William  Malvoisine,  Bishop  of,  65,  66. 

St.  Andrew,  the  Apostle,  x. 

Willi.am,  Prior  of,  314. 

St.  Audrews,  Arcbdeacon  of,  78. 

St.  CoIme's  Isle  (Inchcolm),  Brice,  Prior  of,  24. 

Archbishop  of,  Ixix. 

St.  Johu,  Canons  of,  xxvii. 

Alexauder  Stewart,  Archbisbop  of,  Ixxiii., 

St.  Johu  o£  Jerusalem  at  Torphicheu,  Kuights 

Ixxiv. 

of,  Ixxv. 

St.  Audrews  and  Dunblane,  Archdeacons  of,  8, 

St.  Jobns,  George,  Lord  o£,  218. 

9,  12. 

WilUam,  Lord,  289. 

-Bisliopof,  Lxiii.,  09,    112,  149,  1.51,  163, 

St.  Martin,  Alexauder  o£,  142,  253,  279. 

226,  233. 

Gilbert,  Priest  of,  39. 

Cbapter  of,  5. 

Laurence,  the  Martyr,  Ixii. 

Official  of,  157. 

St.  Mary's  Isle,  David  Pantar,  Prior  of,  xcix. 

Prior  of,  06. 

St.  Serfs  Inch,  Andrew  of  Wyutoun,  Prior  of, 

Prior  and  Chapter  of,  130,  226. 

xviii.,  xL 

Arnald,  Bishop  of,  144. 

St.  Tbomas  the  Martyr,  203. 

Boldred,  Official  of.      Vlde  Boldred. 

St.  Victor,  Abbot  of  (iu  Frauce),  Ixxxiv.,  Ixxxix., 

David  Beuham,  Bishop  of,  142,  148. 

xc,  xci. 

G[ameliiie],  Bishop  of,  112. 

Schanwall,  Eobert,  Vicar  of  Kirkcaldy,  28 1. 

Henry,  Bishop  of,  29. 

Scoue,  Abbot  of,  150. 

Hngh,  Bishop  of,  133,  278. 

Abbey  and  Convent  of,  xlvi. 

James,  Archbisbop  of,  155,  150. 

Johnof,VicarofForgouuddeveuy,  100, 105. 

Johu,  Prior  of,  Ixxvi.,  175,  243.  245,  289. 

•  John  of,  Chaiilain,  99. 

Johu,  Prior  of  the  Cathedral  Church  of,  5, 

Seotlaud,  Bishops  of  the  Kingdom  of,  95. 

122,  241. 

Gavin  Duubar,  ChanceUor  of,  xcviii.,  2. 

Lawrtuce,  Archdeacon  of,  66. 

Kings  o£,  61,  199,  201,  316. 

ilattbew,  Archdeacon  of,  253,  312,  314. 

Eobert,  Earl  o£  Stratberue,  Steward  o£. 

Patrick,  Bishop  o£,  293. 

124,  256,  257,  283,  284,  286. 

Patrick,  Prior  of,  318. 

Walter,  Steward  o£,  9,  200,  202. 

Prior  of  the  Chnrch  o£,  227. 

Scott  (Scot),  Adam,  xxxii. 

Eanulph,  Arcbdeaeon  of,  79. 

Alau,  116,  310. 

Richard,  Bisbop  of,  144,  312,  314. 

Alexander,  281,  291. 

Eichard,  Elect  of,  71. 

Andrew,  198. 

Eicbard,  Minister  of  the  Church  of,  144. 

Isaac,  79. 

Eobert,  Bishop  of,  xx.,  xxv.,  38,  44,  72, 

^ Maurice,  113. 

78,  142,  144. 

Patriek,  Notary.  293. 

Eobert,  Prior  of,  xlviii.,  38,  72,  142. 

Patrick,  Vicar  o£  Stirling,  298. 

Eobert,  Canon  of,  144. 

Sir  WilUam,  o£  Balwery,  knight,  181,  218. 

428                                          INDEX  OF  PERSONS. 

Scott,  Thomas,  194,  198. 

Smythetune,  Emma,  li. 

Thomas,  of  Petgormo,  2. 

Gilbert,  li. 

'WiUianj,  of  Flawcrag,  1 75. 

Sodor,  GUbert,  Bishop  of,  200,  202. 

William,  129. 

Somerville  (Sumerwill,  SymmerweU),  Mr.  John, 

WiUiam,  tenant  of  Bej-n,  13,  1.5. 

xxxii. 

Scrimgeour,  Jolin,  210. 

WiUiam  of,  71,  72. 

Scliaw,  James,  kuiglit,  87. 

Soules,  PLandulph  of,  133. 

ScugaU,  John  of,  Hx.,  29S-.S00,  309. 

Spence  (Spens),  David,  15. 

Selford,  William  of,  92. 

Mr.  Hugh,  Provost  of  the  CoUege  Church 

Senzeor  (Souzoar),  Thomas,  d-n-eller  iu  Bahvard, 

of  St.  Salvator,  15,  22,  249,  292. 

13,  15,  16. 

John,  21,  281. 

Sergant,  Richard,  94. 

John  of,  Xotary,  119. 

Scssion,  Lords  ot,  xU.,  xciii. 

Spinelly,  Cardinal,  Ixxvi 

Alexander  Jlylne,   first  President  of  the, 

S].ittali  (Spittale),  Alexander,Vicarof ,  ISS. 

xciii.,  xciv. 

Andrew,  219,  221. 

Setou  (Seytoune),  John,  130. 

Heury,  291. 

Sir  Christopher,  xlv.,  Ui. 

Eobert,  38. 

Shearer(Scherar),  John,  Archdeaeon  of  Pioss,  1 78. 

Spottiswoode,  John,  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews, 

MicheU,  219,  221. 

Ixxxi.' 

AViUiam,  BaUie  of  Berwick-ou-Tweed,  59, 

Sprj',  AVilliam,  309. 

61. 

Stanhous  (Stauus),  Adam  of,  112. 

Sibbald,  Andrew,  Canon  of  Glasgow,  24.5. 

Johu  of,  108. 

Hemy,  21. 

StanUe,  Alexander,  Dean  of  Guild,  EiUnburgh, 

SiUe,  John,  304. 

129. 

Simon  (Symon),  Physician,  161. 

Steuart,  Alexauder,  cxv. 

son  of  Makbeth,  312. 

Steviu  (.Stewin),  Andrew,  219,  220. 

Simple  (SimpiU),  John,  of  Fouhvod,  219,  221. 

Steward,  the  High,  of  Scotland,  xxxix.,  xliii. 

Thomas,  258. 

Stewart  (Steward),  Adam,  245,  317. 

Simpson  (Simson,  Sj'mson),  Audrew,  Curate  of 

AJan,  296. 

Lenze,  198. 

Alexander,  cxv.,  316. 

Donald,  157. 

Alexauder,   natural    sou  of    King   .James 

James,  Official  of  St.  Andrews,  292. 

IV.,  Ixxui. 

John,  273. 

Archibald,  ciii. 

Siuclair  (Sinclare,  Sincler),  Edward,  123. 

Arthur,  of  Culbeg,  168. 

Henry,  123. 

David,  of  Hartshaw,  136. 

Sir  Oliver,  x. 

John,  brotherof  Robert,  Earl  of  Strathenie, 

■  Eobert,  Bishop  ot  Duukekl,  xx\-ii.,  xxviii.. 

258. 

Ivii.,  Iviii.,  106. 

Lady  Mary,  Countess  of  Mar,  cxix.,  cxx., 

William,  123. 

exxiii.,  cxxiv. 

WiUiam,  Earl  of  Orkuey  and  Caithness,  x. 

MUes,  92. 

Sissor,  Adam,  76. 

Sir  Murdoch,  275,  277. 

Siward,  son  of  Siward  of  Alweth,  94. 

Robert,  159. 

.Sixtus  IV.,  Pope,  305. 

Robert,  son  of  Marjory  Bruce,  xl.,  xliii. 

Skinner,  John  the,  76. 

WiUiam,  94,  243,  245,  248. 

of  Ahveth,  94. 

Walter,  156-159,  278. 

"  Slaitis,  John"  (Earl  of  Mar),  cxxiii. 

Stewarts,  the,  xU. 

Slewman,  John,  218,  220. 

StichiU,  Philip  of,  57. 

Smith  (Smji;h),  Andrew,  Dean  of  Lennox,  213. 

Mr.  Eobert  of,  66. 

SmoUett,  Tobias,  xvi.,  xvii. 

StUielwe,  Richard  of,  109. 

INDEX  OF  PEESONS.                                          429 

Stirling  (Sterliag,  Steriieling,  Striveliug,  Striue- 

Stratherue,   Robert,  Earl  of,   Steward  of  Soot- 

ling,  Strueling),  Ace  of,  56. 

land,  124,  256,  257,  283,  284,  286. 

Sir  Alexander  of,  24,  137,  297. 

Stremistone  (Streminstone),  Thomas,  58,  59. 

Alexauder,  Sheriff  of,  xxxii.,  29,  57,  137, 

Strubieth,  Maurice,  Chaplain  of,  315. 

314. 

Stur,  Robert,  94. 

Mr.  Alexander  of,  137. 

Subald,  Bishop  of  Ostia,  42. 

Alfred,   Abbot  of  the  Church  of,   xl\-iii., 

Siierd,  James,  291. 

xlix.,  40. 

Siilebi,  Roger  of,  142. 

Ancb-ew,  Provoat  of,  lOS. 

Swlis  (Snles),  Randnlph  of,  71,  72,  133,  312. 

Provost  and  Bailies  of,  Ixv.,  cx.,  cxi. 

Sym,  Andrew,  Vicar  of  Cumry,  264. 

Commissary  of,  xxix. 

John,  of  Banchry,  85. 

Chamberlain  of,  cxi. 

Symon,  Bishop  of  Dunblane,  165. 

Dufoc,  Sheriff  of,  250. 

Mr.,  Physician,  161. 

.  Edward,  son  of  Patricli  of,  57. 

of  Tulibody,  161. 

Henry  Clerk,  burgess  of,  109. 

Parson  of  Alweth,  161. 

Henry  of,  son  of  llobert  of,  25. 

Synmerdsburn,  Ralph,  Lord  of,  Rector  of  the 

Hugh  of,  142. 

Chureh  of  Arryngrosk,  4,  5. 

John,  177,  178,  187,  250. 

John,  of  Kere  (Keir),  210. 

John  of,  25,  70,  75,  109. 

T.iiLZEFER,  Thom.is,  307. 

Nicholas,  third  Abbot  of  the  Chureh  of  St. 

Tais,  John,  301,  304. 

Mary  of,  xlix.,  cxxviii.,  42. 

Taitt,  Alexander,  xv. 

Peter,  Clerk  of,  71,  133. 

John,  merchant,  Edinburgh,  xv. 

Riehard,  21,  209-211. 

Tarbat,  Lord,  ix. 

.  Sir  Eichard,  liv.,  185,  209,  211. 

Templeman,  John,  xMi. 

Riehard  of,  132,  133. 

— —  Sir  William,  Superior  of  Cambuskeuneth, 

Mr.  Robert  of,  137. 

xlvii. 

Sheriffof,  Rohert,  141. 

Tennand,  .lohn,  fisherman,  76. 

Thomas    of,    Chancellor   to    Kiug    Alex- 

Philip,  sou  of  John,  76. 

anderlL,  176. 

Tereld,  94. 

Williara  of,  70. 

Thayne,  Alexander,  of  Fordaill,  136. 

William,  of  Keir,  Ixvii. 

Thomas,  servant  to  Osbert,  Bishop  of  Dunblaue, 

AVilliam,  of  Tnlicultry,  85. 

162. 

William,  tirst  Abbot  of  the  Church  of  St. 

SirDavid,  Curate  of  Kilmaronok,  217. 

Mary  of,  xh-iii.,  1,  38,  79,  142. 

John,  Notary,  191. 

Abbot  and  Canons  of,  56,  77,  79,   162. 

Chaplain  of  Netretule,  24. 

Burgesses  of,  75,  76,  137. 

brazier,  76. 

Canons  of,   47,   70,  72,   74,  91,  132,  133, 

Dean,  25. 

312. 

potator,  76. 

Sheriff  of,  61,  62,  64,  65,  2S6,  317. 

brother  of  John  of  Stanhous,  108. 

Story,   Archibald,   Canon    of    Cambuskemieth, 

son  of  Siward  of  Alweth,  94. 

311. 

son  of  Walter  of  Luudin,  50. 

Sti-adhelm,  Andrew  of,  57. 

Thomson  (Thomsone,  Thomsoun),  James,  218. 

Strathachin,    Procurator   of    Darid    Bruse    of 

220. 

Kencet,  88. 

John,  113,  304. 

Strathern,  G[ilbert],  Earl  of,  133. 

John,  burgess  of  Edinbiu-gh,  ISO. 

Stratherne,  Johanua,  Countess  of,  255. 

—  Mr.  Thomas,  xlii. 

Maurice    of,    Archdeacon    of    Dunhlane, 

Thor,  William,  son  of.  56. 

81. 

Thoraldson,  Alexander,  son  of  William,  279. 

430                                          INDEX  OF  PERSONS. 

Tinctor,  ■Vineent,  Prior  of  the  Preaehing  Friars 

Vrry,  Hugh,  75,  76. 

of  Stirling,  122. 

Vualleuo  (Valueuo),  Earl,  73,  75,  312. 

Tiry,  John,  290. 

Tod,  John,  213. 

W. ,  Ch  APLAIN  TO  THB  Bl.SHOP  OF  DUNBLANE,  161. 

Toledo,  Council  of,  xci. 

W.,  Clerk,  161. 

Torphiehen,  William,  Preoeptor  of,  Ixx. 

W.,  son  of  James,  108. 

Knights  of  St.  John  of,  Ixxv. 

son  of  Thorald,  Sheriff  of  StirUng,  175. 

Torry,  Eector  of,  Iv. 

Waldeve.      Vide  Vualleuo. 

Towns,  Peter  of,  56. 

Waleram,  John,  92. 

Treasiirer,  Lord  High,  of  Scotland,  Ixix.,  Ixxi. 

Wales,  (Edward)  Prince  of,  xxxvii. 

Trebrine  (Trebrone),  Andrew  of,  231,  232,  236, 

Walkar,  Thomas,  5S,  60. 

237,  332. 

Wallace  (WaUibus),  James,  197. 

Tripena  (Trippeneth),  Nicholas,  70. 

John  of,  250. 

Richard  of,  25. 

Sir  WilUam,  xxv.,  xxxvi. 

Truant,  Henry,  79. 

Walter,  Chaplaiu  to  King  William  the  Lion,  92, 

Tuch,  John,  Ixii.,  309. 

160. 

Tulialwyn,  Sir  John,  Vicar  of,  162. 

the  High  Steward  of  Scotlaud,  xl.,  xUii., 

Tulibody,  Simon  (Symon)  of,  161. 

200,  202. 

Tullibardine,  John,  Earl  of,  cxvi. 

the  Clerk,  133. 

Tullicultry,  Sir  Thomas  of,  Viear  of  Auchter- 

■  Clerk  to  the  Bishop  of  Glasgow,  177. 

arder  (Hucterardor),  316. 

knight  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  2. 

TuUoeh,  Michael,  1S6. 

brother  of  Provost  of  StirUng,  137. 

Peter,  Notary,  217. 

son  of  Alan,  71,  73,  75,  77,  132,  133,  252, 

TuUoiss,  MichaeU,  223. 

253,  278,  317. 

Tulous,  Robert  of,  Rector  of  Stirling.  298. 

son  of  PhiUp  of  Lundyn,  44,  56,  57. 

Tidybody,  Matthew,  Chaplaiu  of,  161. 

the  Scriptor,  80. 

Tulydaf,  John,  Warden  of  the  Minorite  Friars 

the  Steward,  ChanceUor,  77,  SO,  250,  278. 

of  Stirling,  122. 

Walterson,  John,  burgess  of  Perth,  28. 

Tulylum,  CarmeUte  Friars  of,  xxvii 

Walwod,  WUIiam,  136. 

Turirin,  Mr.,  133. 

Warbeck,  Perkin,  cxxxvu. 

Tusculum,  Ignarus,  Bishop  of,  39. 

Wardlaw,  Andrew  of,  xlvi. 

Twy,  Thomas,  99,  100,  105. 

Henry,  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  29. 

Tyningham,  Dean  of,  151. 

Marion  of,  ■s.Xvi. 

Warwick   (Warewic,  Warwie,  Warwyc),  K.  of. 

Umfravtlle  (Umframvll,  Vmfe.imuille),  Gil- 

176. 

bertof,  44,  lOS,  112,  279. 

Hugh  of,  137. 

Urban,  St,  Pope,  270,  2S4. 

Richardof,  lOS,  137. 

W.  of,  137. 

Valixg  (Valixgum,  Valosiis),  Philip  of,  57, 

Wat,  Baldewin  of,  94. 

73,  75,  92,  144. 

Watson,  Thomas,  of  Stanhous,  113. 

Varia  CapeUa,  .John  of,  Vicar  of  Stobor,  70. 

John,  113. 

Vatingfehill,  Roger,  92. 

WUHam,  291. 

Vchiltre,  John  of,  Armour-bearer,  140,  241. 

Wawane,  George,  Canon  of  Dunblane,  267. 

John  of,  Notary  Public,  32,  33. 

AVebster  (Wobstare),  Malcolm,  298. 

Vepont  (Veteriponte),  William  of,  94,  2S0. 

WedaU  (WadeU,  Weddale),  Henry  of,  Notary, 

Viched,  Robert.      Vkh  Wiehed. 

107. 

Victoria,  Queen,  Ixvii.,  cxxxv.,  cxxxvi. 

John,  Rector  of  Flisk,  and  Prineipal  OfB- 

Vnone,  Clerk,  lOS. 

cial  of  St.  Andrews,  249,  281. 

Vuspac,  150. 

Weir  (Ver,  Were),  John,  273. 

INDEX  OF  PEESONS.                                         431 

Weir,  Ralph  of,  2S0. 

Wilson,  James,  Canon  of  Dnnblane,  264. 

Wemys,  Kobert,  267. 

James,  Prebeudary  of  Glendowane,  122. 

Thomas,  21,  281. 

James,  Notary,  212. 

Werk   (Berkeley),   Walter  of,   Chamberlain  to 

John,  Ixv.,  303,  306. 

King  William  the  Liou,  133. 

John,  of  Gartynclare,  85. 

White  (Qiihit,  Quhite),  Sir  Darid,  x.xiv.,  310. 

Wilton  (Wiltun),  Eobert  of,  133. 

Mr.  Henry,  Eector  of  Fynevin,  2. 

Roger  of,  xxxi.,  29,  93. 

Henry,  Canon  of  Moray,  etc,  261-267. 

Winton,  Earl  of,  liii. 

John,  of  Lumbenny,  261-26.5. 

Wishart  (Wischard,  Wischart),  SS. 

Eobert,  of  Tewhindade,  261-265. 

Johu,  108. 

Whitehead  (Quhiteheid),  Andrew,  207. 

Robert,  Bishop  of  Glasgow,  xxxvii. 

Archibald,  Rector  of  Rothesay,  309. 

Wilham,  112. 

Whiting  (Quhitini;),  John,  son  of  Robert,  bur- 

Witste,  John,  76. 

gess  of  Edinburgh,  124,  125. 

Wiville  W[illiam]  of,  knight,  79. 

Wiched,  Eobert,   Bailie  of  Berwick-on-Tweed, 

Wontoun,  Mr.  Richard  of,  3. 

59,  61. 

Wordye,  Dean  Thomas,  xxxv. 

Wild,  Thomas,  298. 

William,  xxxv. 

WiUiam,  279. 

Wright  (Wricht),  David,  burgess  of  Edinburgh, 

First  Abbot  of  Cambuskenneth,  38. 

127-129. 

the  Lion,  King  of  Scots,  xix.,  xxi.-xxxii., 

George,  130. 

liii.,  26,  29,  44,  57,  65,  72-74,  88,  91, 

Godfrid,  120. 

92,  132,  133,    138,   144,  151,   160,  166, 

Martin,  burgess  of  Edinburgh,  124,  125. 

252,  279,  314,  315. 

Eobert,  309. 

Chaplain  to  King  William  the  Lion,  92-94, 

Wyntoun,  Andrew  of,  Prior  of  St.  Serfs  Inch, 

Chaplain  to  the  King's  Chancellor,  132. 

xviii.,  xl. 

Chaplain  to  the  Countess  of  Buchan,  xxx. 

Cardinal  Presbyter  of  St.  Peter,  42. 

Yeernia.     See  Ireland. 

brother  of  Mure  of  Corntone,  76. 

Yhaliluk,  David,  311. 

Provost  of  Stirlmg,  137. 

Thomas,  311. 

(Walter),  son  of  Alau  Stewart,  Justiciarof 

Ymery  (Ymry),  Thomas,  tenant  of  Conlony,  13, 

Scotland,  317. 

14,  16. 

son  of  James,  137. 

Walter,  tenant  of  Coulony,  13,  14,  16. 

— son  of  Lambur,  94. 

York  (Bainbridge),  Cardinal  of,  Ixxvi. 

son  of  Thor,  5G. 

Young  (Zoung),  John,  117. 

son  of  Thorald,  44,  133,  137,  175,  252. 

Ysaac  (Ysaack).      Vide  Isaac. 

Williamsou,  John,  of  Angous,  259. 

John,  309. 

Zare,  Hugh,  118. 

Wilsou  (Wilsoue,  Wilsoun),  James.  21,  267. 

John  of,  27. 

Prebendary  of  Dunblaue,  173. 

Zoung.      Vide  Y'oung. 

PLACES. 


Aebotishtjde,  291. 

Aberdeeu,  Shire  of,  xxiii.,  xxxvii. 

Unirersity  of,  Ixx.xv. 

Abir,  221. 

Abircorne,  64. 

Airth(Erth,  Harth),  xxiii.,  29,  123,  124. 

AUoa,  Lands  of,  vii. 

Chapel  of,  xxiv.,  lix. 

Altisiodore,  39. 

Alva,  Lands  of,  vii.,  xxiii. 

Alveth  (Alueth,  Alweth),  Church  of  St.  Servan 

of,  .xxiv.,  Ivii.,  23-29,  44,  47. 

Town  of,  25. 

Alway,  Chapel  of,  29-33. 

LorJship  of,  30. 

Ancona,  I.xxv. 

Angus,  Deanery  of,  Ixxxviii. 

Angus  aud  Mearus,  cix.,  cx. 

Ardoch,  221. 

Aningrosk,  Barony  of,  34,  35,  37. 

Cbaplainry  of,  34. 

Church  of,  3-G,  20,  34,  35,  37. 

Church-land  of,  24. 

Lands  of,  vii.,  xxiii.,  xxiv.,  3-23,  34-38. 

Mill  of,  6-20,  23. 

Parish  of,  20. 

• Toivn  of,  35. 

AiTochar,  xvi.,  xvii. 

Arrosia,  xx. 

Athole,  Deanery  of,  Ixxxviii. 

Athray  (Atheray),  61,  62. 

Auchnagufe,  265. 

Auldkrathy  (Auldkathy),  Eectory  of,  208. 

Avignon  (Avinione),  23,  53,  84,  85,  96.  102,  155, 

205,  207,  233,  255. 
Ayr  (Aire),  xlii.,  Kii,  48. 


B.iDYXDETH    (B.i.DEND.\TH,    B^IDIXD.VTH),    Xxiii., 

43,  47,  67-70,  250. 
Balandro,  lands  of,  Ixxix. 
Balcormock  (Balcormok),   xxiii.,  xxiv.,  44,  56, 

57. 
Balkely,  Croft  of,  Ixxix. 
Ballaggane,  220. 
Ballindoch  (Bandoch),  Ixxx. 
Balloch,  221. 
Balrichart,  221. 
Balvaird  (Baleward,  Balward),  Lands  of,  7,  13, 

14,  18,  20. 

MiU  of,  14,  20. 

Castle  of,  38. 

Baudaith,  cxxiv. 
Bannoc  (Banoc),  150. 

Vtred,  150. 

Beton's  MiU,  cxxxi. 

Berwick  (Berwic),  xxiii.,  57-61. 

Beyn  (Benn),  7,  U,  13,  18,  20. 

Birgham,  lii. 

Blackwilly,  cxi. 

Blair  (Blar,  Blare),  Church  of,  47,  65-67. 

BlairnUI,  220. 

Blairquhannane,  220. 

Blairquhes,  220. 

Blau-quhomre,  220. 

Blois,  Ixxv. 

Bonkle,  in  the  Diocese  of  Dunkeld,  156. 

and  Preston,  xciv. 

Bordland  (Borland),  Lands  of,  167,  220. 

Bothkennar  (Buthlieuuer),  61-65. 

Botwricht,  Lands  of,  221. 

Boulogne,  ci. 

Brechin,  Church  of,  Ixxiii,,  Ixxix. 

Buthcadroch,  150,  151. 


INDEX  OF  PLACES. 


433 


Buthlaiie,  xxxi. 

Byniug  i  Benyn,  Bynnyn,  Bynyue),  Town  of,  44, 
48,  68,  111,  250. 


Calent).\r  (Calasthir,  Calentare,  Calentyr, 
Callauder,  Kalentyr),  xxiii.,  32,  33,  40, 
48,  73,  74,  77,  80,  133. 

Caldorvene,  221. 

Callingad,  220. 

Cambus,  cxxiv. 

Canibusbarron  (Cambusbaroune),  123,  124,  150, 
2S6-2SS. 

Cambuskennetli  (Cambuskynneth,  Campiis  Ken- 
nethi,  Kamis  Kenethum),  9,  12,  21,  33, 
34,  44,  48,  90,  117,  120,  123,  132,  136, 
141,  143,  152,  160,  104,  296. 

Abbey  of,    v.,   xii.,  xiii.-xv.,  xviii.-xxvi., 

xxviii.-xli.,  xliii.,  xlv. -xlvii.,  liii. ,  Ivii., 
Iviii.,  Ixi.-lxiii.,  Ixvii.,  Ixix.,  Ixxxiv., 
Ixxxviii.,  Ixxxix.,  xci.-xciii.,  cv.-cix.,  cxi., 
cxiii.,  cxviii.-cxxii.,  201-203,  208,  241, 
264,  289,  292,  295,  298. 

Barony  of,  xxviii.,  cxiv.-cxviii. 

Church   of  St.  Mary   of,   x.k.,  xxi.,  xxx., 

xxxii.,  3,  6,  24,  56,  166,  etc. 

Hood  of,  cxvii.,  exxii.,  exxiv. 

Lands  of,    xiii.,   xix.-xxvi.,    xxxvi.,   xlix., 

cxiii.  -cxvii. 

Parish  of,  294. 

. Town  of,  cviii.,  43,  47. 

Village  of,  xxviii. 

Campsy,  Parish  of,  cviiu 

Cannusmeyn,  221. 

Cardross,  Lordship  of,  cxiii.,  cxviii. -cxxiv. 

Carmel,  Mount,  270. 

Caruok,  150. 

Carstairs,  Vicarage  of,  xcviii. 

Caroune,  Mouth  of,  63. 

Carsy    (Carsin,    Carsyn,    Karsy),    43,    44,    47, 

Fishings  of,  xxiv.,  44,  47,  289. 

Carthusians  (Cartusians),  Place  of  the,  281. 

Castellum  PueUarum,  253. 

Catham,  11. 

Cathehill  (Cathcochill,   Cathol),   7,   11,   13,    18 

20. 
Catir,  Estir,  Middle  (Myddill),  Wester,  220. 
Causchini  (Cushuie),  x.xiii.,  89. 


Clackmannan  (Clackmannane),  29,  30,  33,  40. 

43,  44,  47,  48,  70,  73,  74,  77-87,  9l), 
91,  176,  291.  294,  297. 

County  of,  xxiii.,  cxiv.,  cxviii. 

Fishings  of,  7,  75. 

Land  of,  Ixxi. 

Mill  of,  40,  44,  4S,  73,  74. 

Parish  Churoh  of,  xxii.,  xxiv.,  Iv.,  29,  30, 

40,  4.3,  47,  73,  74,  77-79,  81. 

Provinee  of,  73. 

Rectory  of.  79. 

— - —  Town  of,  44. 

Vicarage  of,  Iv.,  33,  77,  78. 

Claysched,  Lands  of,  Ixxi.K. 

Clyde,  River,  xxiv. 

Cokgoir,  Lands  of,  221. 

CoIIey,  Barony  of,  xxxv. 

Collyne  (CoIIin,  Colling),  xxii.,  xxiii.,  39,  41,  4.3. 

47,  70-72,  74. 
Condland  (Condelani,  Condolan,  Conlony),  Lands 

of,  7,  11,  13,  17-20. 
Corniscorun,  Lands  of,  in  Glenesk,  Ixxx. 
Cowan's  Hospital.      Vide  Stirling. 
Cowgate  (Cougait),  128. 
Craghorth,  150. 
Craigie,  Lands  of,  c.xvii. 
Crail  (Carel,  Carrail,  Crelyn,   Karell,   Karrel). 

44,  47,  4S,  88,  252,  253,  279. 
Crethy  (Crethyn),  in  Marr,  xxiv.,  88-90. 
Crichton,  CoIIegiate  Church  of,  xcvi. 
Crottmagra,  Ixii.,  309. 

Cukestoun,  Ixxx. 

Cukispow  (CukispuII),  xxxiii.,  xxxv.,  cxxiv. 

Culross  (Culueros),  Monastery  of,  7,  10,  19. 

Culthane,  221. 

Cumbernauld,  xxxi.,  xxxii. 

Cupar  in  Angus,  Monastery  of,  liii.,  138,  139. 

Cupar  in  Fife,  77. 

Currie,  Barony  of,  xlvi. 

Cuyl,  Lands  of,  li. 


Dablev  (Davly),  Lands  of,  Ixxx. 

Denside,  Ixxix. 

Douglie  (Duglyn,  Duglin,  Duueglin),  xxi.,  xxiii 

48,  68,  91-94,  250. 
Drumcryn,  220. 

Dryburgh,  Abbey  of,  xcvii.,  cxiii.,  cxix.-cxxii. 
Drymeu  (Drymmane),  Paiish  Church  of   214. 


5G 


434                                           INDEX  OF  PLACES. 

Dumbarton  (Dumbertane),  xxiii.,  181,  223. 

Fetteresso,  Church  of,  Ixxiii. 

Durabodelin  (Dunhodevin),  xxii.,  39,  71. 

Fife,  Shire  of,  xxiii.,  cxiv.,  cxvii. 

Dunbarny  (Dumbery,    Dunberny),    Parish    of. 

Deanery  of,  Ixxxviii. 

262,  265. 

Flasconensis,  Mons,  286. 

Dunblane,    21,   95,    101,    165,    166,    170,  173, 

Flodden,  Field  of,  Ixxiv. 

267. 

Flores,  107. 

Dioceseof,  21,95,  101,  163,  165,  168,  212, 

Forfar,  Shire  of,  xxiii.,  Ixxix.,  Ixxx. 

265. 

Forgan  (Forgound),  94. 

Cathedral  Church  of,  Ix.xii.,  81,  139,  163- 

Forteviot  (Forteuiet),  Church  of,  x.xiii.,  xxiv.. 

166,  170,  173,  265,  266. 

132,  133. 

Dundonald,  xxviii.,  318. 

Forth,  xxi.,  lix.,  cxv.,  cxviii.,  43,  47,  136,  150, 

Dunfermline  (Dunfermeling),  xxxvii.,  xl.,  288. 

278,  289,  291-296,  299. 

Abl)ey  of,  li.,  136,  159. 

Fosterseyt,  18-20. 

Dunglas,  Castle  of,  in  East  Lothian,  cxiii.,  cxxiv. 

Fourgy  (Forgy),  13,  14,  18-20. 

Dunhasny  (Dalhesney),  Lands  of,  Ixxx. 

France,xlii.,  Ixxii.,  Ixxiii.,Ixxvi.-Ixxviii.,  Ixxxiv., 

Dunipace   (Dunypais,    Donypais),    xxiii.,    xxv., 

xcix.,  c. 

Iviii.,   Ix.,    Ixii.,   44,   48,   107-121,   148, 

Fuleche,  xxiii.,  136,  137,  152. 

152. 

Chnrch  of,  Ix.,    112,   114,    116,   149,  150- 

152. 

Garthow,  166. 

Dunkehl,  24,  95,  101,  163,  202,  208,  2G9. 

Garththarne,  221. 

Cathedral  of,  Ixxxviii.,  xcv.,  191,  208. 

Glasgow    (Glasgw),     9,     177,     180,    183,    190, 

192,   196,   203,   204,  208,  213,  215-217, 

253. 

Edinbuegh,    xxiii.,    xxxiii.,    xlvi.,   Ixiii.-lxvii., 

Metropolitan  Chnrch  of,  180,  204. 

Ixix.,  Ixx.,  Ixxvi.,  Ixxxi.,  Ixxxviii.,  cxiv, 

See  of,  Ixix.,  xcviii. 

1,  61,   64,   71,  93,   124-130,  173,   174, 

Glenisla  (GlennOefe,  Glenilef ,  Glenylefe),  Church 

181-184,    186,    188,  210,  218,  222,  227, 

of,  xi.,  xxiv.,  liii.,  lix.,  44-47,  137-141. 

251,  259,  283,   284,  289-291,  295,  316, 

Graysteel,  cvi. 

318. 

Canongate  of,  xvii. 

Parliament  House  in,  Ixix. 

Haddington  (Habinotoune,    Hadinton),  44, 

Shire  of,  xlvi. 

48,  279. 

Tenement  in,  Ixi. 

Herbertsbire   (Harbertschire),  Barony  of,  xxiii.. 

Egglis  (Egglyge,  Et^Ies),  Church  of,  xxiv.,  xxv., 

Lxii.,  113,  115,  117,  121. 

40,  44,  79,  142,  144,  150. 

Hethame  (Heithame),  13,  17-20. 

Town  of,  144. 

Hilweynd  of  Stii-Iing,  299. 

England,  xcii.,  58,  60,  251. 

Holy  Land,  Ixxv. 

Erne,  Bridge  of,  262,  265. 

Holyrood  (Holy  Cross),  Royal  Chapel  of,  193. 

Erth.      VkU  Airth. 

Church  of,  xlix. 

Estir  Catir,  220. 

Holyroodhouse,  Abbey  of,  xix.,  xciv. 

Ethame,  18. 

Hood  (Huid,  hude),  of  Cambuskenneth,  cxvii.. 

cxviii.,  cxxii. 

FALKL.iND,  145,  146,  148,  155. 

Faylayat,  106. 

Inchajfeay,  206. 

Feru,  Parish  Church  of,  195. 

Inchgarvey,  Isle  of,  Lxxvii. 

Ferne,  Barony  of,  I.xxx. 

Inchmahome,    Priory    of,    xcvii.,    cxiii.,    cxix.- 

Fethirneris  (Fetternear),  S9. 

cxxii.,  cxxix. 

INDEX  OF  PLACES. 

43.5 

Inchomeyoth       (Inchemathach,      Incheomath, 

Ladeesmobe.  221. 

luchemyeth),  96,  102,  112,  142. 

Ladyland,  xxiii.,  274-277. 

Innirmethiu,  48. 

Lampurry,  166. 

InverUeillor,  Barony  of,  Ixxx. 

Lanarc,  4. 

Inverkeithing     (Innerkethin,       Inuerkething), 

L.arbert  (Lethberth),  44,  148. 

xxiii.,  41,  73,  74. 

Lateran,  46,  48,  149,  151,  207. 

Italy,  Ixxiii. 

Laudonia,  Archdeaconry  of,  295. 

Lecro  (Lecroth,  Lecropt),  Chureh  of,  xxiv., 

Ivii., 

27,  28,  267-269. 

.Jedburgh,  c. 

Ledereth,  3,  4,  6. 

Jerusalem,  Lxxv. 

Ledersbeg,  221. 
Lennox,  The,  xvi. 

Lenze,  Church  of,  xxxi.,    179,    181,   183, 

184. 

Kalentar  (Kalentvk).      Vkle  Calendar. 

187,  189,  190-199. 

KareU.      Vkle  CraU. 

Church  of  Monyabrun,  179. 

Karsy.      Vkle  Carsy. 

Letharae,  13,  17-20. 

Keltor,  278. 

Linlithgow    (Liulidchu,    Linlithque,    Lyul 

cku. 

Ketlistoun  (Katelistune,   KetUstoun,    Kettelle- 

Lyulinctu),  xxiii.,  Ix.,  ci.,  40,  43,  47 

,  70, 

stun,    Kettleston),    xxiii.,   Ivii.,    40,   43, 

77,  80,  88,  251,  271-274,  278. 

47,  68,  73,  74,  250-252. 

Constabulary  of,  xxiii.,  251. 

Kiliii-ummie,  Castle  of,  xxx\-ii. 

Palace  of,  ix. 

KUmaronok,    Church   of,    xxiv.,   Uii.-lv.,    199- 

Sliire  of,  xxiii.,  Ivii. 

224. 

Lochleven  (Levyn),  St.  Serfs  luch  in,  xvii 

KUsyth,  Teinds  of,  cviu. 

Iv.,  80. 

Kincardine  (Kincardin),  Church  of,  xxiv.,lxxii.. 

Locres,  93. 

44,47,  160-167,  171,  313. 

Logie  (Luggy),  farish  of,  xxix.,  cxv. 

Shire  of,  Ixxix. 

xxxi. 

Kinclaven    (Kincletheuin,    Kinclevin,    Kynele- 

Chamberlain's  lands  of,  cxv. 

thuyne),   Church  of,  xxiv.,    xxxii.,    44, 

Logyn  (Loehin,   Login),   Lands  of,  41,  70, 

71, 

47,  267-271. 

72,  74. 

Kinghorn  (Kiugorne),  144. 

London,  xli.,  Ix.,  Ixxxvi. 

Kinnoull    (Kynnoule),     Barony    of,    Ivi.,    224, 

Public  Eecord  Office,  Ixxxvi, 

229. 

Lothian,  East,  cxiii. 

Church  of,  xxiv.,  Ivi.,  224-249. 

West,  Ixxv. 

Kinross  (Chinross,  Kynross),  250,  312. 

Louchbanc,  107. 

Kintulach,  xxiii.,  179,  253-267. 

Lundeif,  Ixxxviii.,  xciv. 

Kii>pen  (Kipiiaue),  167-175. 

Luudin,  48. 

Church    of,    Ixix.,    Ixxi.,    cx.xviii.,    1G7, 

Luss,  Parish  of,  xvi. 

168. 

Lyous,  49,  52. 

Rectory  of,  Ixxii. 

Kirkiutulach,  xxiii.,  xxxi.,  44,  47,  175-199. 

■  Burgh  of,  xxxi. 

MAL.ut,  xxiii.,  278,  279. 

Church  of,  xxiv.,  xxx. 

Mar,  Earldom  of,  xxiii. 

Kirkis,  Church  of,  143,  146,  150. 

Mare  Akyr  (St.  Mary's  Acre),  15,  18,  20. 

Land  of,  150. 

Mearus,  Ixxiii. 

Kirkton  (Kirketoune),  Chureh  of,  xxiv.,  47,  112, 

MegUle,  259. 

134,  142-160. 

Menteith  (Menteth),  168. 

KnoII,  The,  xxxiii.,  xxxv.,  ci. 

Meuthfen  (Methven),  258. 

KukespiiU,  xxxiii.,  xxxv. 

Merinche,  Lands  of,  220. 

Middlebiirgli,  City  of,  Ixxxi.-lxxxiii. 

Middle  (My.ldill)  Catir,  220. 
Mobbiscroft,  xxiii.,  278. 
ilontaigne,  College  of,  Ixxiii. 
Montrose,  Ix.xii.,  Ixxviii.,  Ixxix.,  Ixx^i. 

Monastery  of,  Ixxviii.-lxxx. 

Mnnyabnm  Lenzie,  179. 

Moiiyniell  (Monimail),  230. 

Mnutli  of  Caroune,  63. 

Murthach,  Island  of,  148. 

Murtoun  (Muretoun),  xxiii.,  cx.xiv.,  274-278. 

Myltoune,  221. 

Naket  L.iND,  cxxiv. 
Nevvbattle,  Church  of,  xlviii. 
Xewburn,  Battle  of,  cxiv. 
Newcastle-on-Tyne,  xxxix. 
Newmanswalls,  Ixxii.,  Ixxix. 
Newton  (Newtoun),  7,  U,  13,  20. 
Nice,  230. 

Northesk,  Water  of,  Ixxix. 
Northswnne,  220. 

OcHlL  HiLLS.  xlvii. 

Ochterhous    (Vchterhous),    Parish    church    of, 

191. 
Opiiiduni  Puellarum  (Edinburgh),  71. 
Orchardhead  (Orchardheid),  202. 
Otterston,  cxvii. 

P.iDUA,  Ixxiii. 

Paradise  (Garden  at  Cambuskenneth),  310. 

Paris,  Ixxxiv.,  lx.xxix.-xci.,  xcix. 

University  of,  Ixxii.,  Ixxxix. 

Park,  Ohl,  of  Stirling,  286-2SS. 

Pentland,  x. 

Perth,  xxiii.,  xli.,  lix.,  cxiv.-cxvi.,   15,  28,  40, 

44,  4S,  G2,  73,  74,  132,    133,  138,  140, 

1.52,  236,  254,  257-259,  262,  265,  270, 

279-2S1,  28.3,  318. 

Parish  Kirk  of,  Ivi.,  28. 

Petcorthy  (Petcorthin,  Petcorthyii),  xxiii.,   44, 

48.  252,  279. 
Petlour,  Ixiii. 

Pettillok  (Petilloch,  Petillok),  9-11,  13,  17-20. 
Pinkie,  Battle  of,  xcvii. 
Plane,  150,  282-286. 
Poictiers  (Pictauia),  50,  51,  54. 


Polmais  (Polmaise  PoIIemase,  Polmase,  Pul- 
mais),  Elwyn  (VVeland),  xi.x.,  xxiv., 
XXXV.,  xlix.,  ci.,  41,  43,  44,  47,  48,  70- 
72,   74,  134,  149,  150,  152,  2S9,  296. 

Pontefract  Castle,  cxxxvii. 

Portnellenbeg,  221. 

Portnellenmore,  221. 

Preston  and  Boucle,  xciv. 

PuImiUe  (Polmilna),  43,  47. 

QuEEXSFEURY,  Ixxvii. 

Redinche,  43,  47. 

Renfrew,  Fishing  in  water  of,  46,  48. 

Toft  in  burgh  ot,  xxiv.,  44,  4S. 

Rescoby,  Barony  of,  Ix.xx. 
Restalrig,  cii. 
Rhodes,  Ixxv.,  Ixxvi. 

Preceptory  of,  lx.xv. 

Ricardstoun,  Lands  of,  xlvi. 
Rome,  Ixxvi.,  ev.,  cvi.,  17,  55,  151. 

Church  of,  Ixxv.,  153. 

Ros,  221. 

Rosline,  x. 

Itossie,  Lands  of.  Ixxviii. 

Rothesay,  The  Castle  of,  141. 

Roxburgh,  Siege  of,  xlvi.,  xlvii. 

Ro}'ston,  cxii. 

Piuddery  Pow,  cxviii. 


St.  Alexander,  Hill  of,  108. 

Church  of,  108. 

St.  Andrews,  xxxv.,  ci.,  4-6,  "J 
88,  90,  95,  96,  98,  99, 
113,  115,  134,  135,  1.39, 
151,  156,  183,  186,  187, 
206,  208,  212,  214,  226, 
239,  242-245,  249,  253, 
292,  314. 

Church  of,  xcvi.,  202. 

Diocese  of,  Ixiii.,  16. 

Priory  of,  xeiv. 

Regality  of,  Ixxx. 

University  of,  Ixxxviii.,  xc 

St.  Catherine,  Altar  of,  Ixii. 

St.  .James,  Hospital  of,  141. 

St.  John,  Monastery  of,  163. 

Altar  of,  xxiv.,  Ixii. 


I,  3 

,  7; 

,  81 

101, 

104, 

105 

142, 

148, 

150 

193, 

195, 

205 

229 

231, 

236 

2S1, 

284, 

287 

INDEX  OF  FLACES.                                           437 

St.  Lawrence,  Altar  of,  xxv.,  Ixii. 

Stirling,  Parish  of,  xxviii.,  xxix. 

.St.  Jlary,  Ixxix. 

Shire  of,  xxiii.,  xxxiii.,  xxxv.,  cvi.,  74,  77. 

Field  of,  Ixxxi. 

80. 

Isle,  xcix. 

St.  Mary's  Vennel,  Ixv.,  306. 

St.  Mary's  Acre  (Mare  Akyr),  15,  18,  20. 

Tenements  in,  Ixv. 

Vennel,  306. 

Stratherne,  254,  255,  257,  258. 

ViUage,  58,  59. 

Deanery  of,  Ixxxviii. 

St.  Nicholas,  Altar  of,  xxiv.,  Ixii.,  309. 

Earldom  of,  xxiii.,  li. 

St.  Ninians,  xxiii.-xxv.,  Ixii.,  156,  157. 

Strogeith,  212. 

Parish  of,  294. 

Strubeith,  315. 

St.  Peter's,  Kome,  17,  55,  151. 

St.  Serfs  Ineh,  in  Lochleven,  x\-iii. 

THYNAGL.iSS,  221. 

St.  Servan,  Spring  of,  xxiii. 

Torbrex,  cvi.,  cxi. 

Chnrch  of,  xxiv. 

Torry,  288. 

Salquhye,  87. 

Torwood  (Torwod),  278. 

Samlhauch,  Lands  of,  Ixxix.,  Ixxxi. 

Trosk,  xxiii. 

Saone,  53. 

Touch,  xxii.,  xxiii. 

Sauchieburn,  exxxi. 

Tulibod}',  .xxiv.,  41,  70,  161,  102,  164-106,  278, 

Sceot,  150. 

289,  295,  312-314. 

Scliakelok,  Lantls  of,  Ixii.,  308. 

Orohard  of,  295. 

Scone,  xliii.,  liii.,  Ivii.,  Ixviii.,  75,  76,  200,  202, 

Tulibotheuyn  (Tulibodevin,  TuUiboyene,  Tuly- 

252. 

bethwyue,  Tidybotheuin,  Tulybotheuyn, 

Selkirk  (Seleschirche),  80. 

Tulybotheyne),  xxii.,  41,  43,  44,  47,  70, 

Shannack  (Shanno),  Lands  of,  Ixxx. 

74. 

Siena.  42. 

Fisliings  of,  44,  47. 

Smythetune,  Lands  of,  li. 

Tullymurthae,  x.xii.,  316,  317. 

Sodor,  Church  of,  202. 

Tidycoultry  (Tulyciiltrane,   Tulycultri),   xxiii., 

Southfield,  Lands  of,  cxvi. 

xxiv.,  44,  47,   101,   102,    164,    165,   313, 

Soiithsonne,  220. 

314,  310. 

SpittalescheUs,  Denside,  Ixxix. 

Church  of,  44,  314,  315. 

Spittaltoune,  220. 

Tulylum,  of  the  Diocese  of  Dunkeld,  1)8,  104, 

StirHug   (Striueling,    Striuelingth),    xxii.-xxiv.. 

106. 

xxxiii.,xxxiv.,  xxxvii.,lix.,Ixiii.,  lxx.,ciii., 

Tweed,  57,  59. 

cvi.-cviii.,  cxi.,  cxvi.,  26,  29,  32,  34,  40- 

Tyburne,  cxxxvii. 

44,  47,  48,  56,  57,  61-65,   70-75,    77, 

Tynuingham,  cxiv.,  79. 

80,  91,  93,  113,  115,  117,  119,  123,  133, 

134,   141-144,    150-154,   160,   161,   170, 

VcHTEKHOUS.      VUU  Ochterhouse. 

178,  225,  227,  251,  252,  255,  257,  274- 

Victoria  Bridge,  Montrose,  Ixxix. 

278,  282-286,  289-291,   294,  297,   298, 

Viterbo,  67,  164. 

314,  317. 

Vthirbannock  (Vtred  Banoc),  150,  299. 

Castle  of,  cix. 

Church  of  St.  Mary  of,  xix.-xxi.,  xlviii.,  25, 

Waird  DiiMSiDE,  cxvii.,  cxxiv. 

26,   29,  42,  43,   56,  57,  70,  71,  74,  79, 

Warynstoun,  Lands  of,  xlvi. 

132,  133,  161,  175,  177. 

Wedall,  3. 

Cowan's     Hospital    in,     xiii.,    cx.,    cxv.- 

Weems,  House  of,  x. 

cxviii. 

Wigtown,  xxxi.,  xxxii. 

Hill  Wynd  in,  lix.,  299. 

. •  Lordship  of,  xxii.,  39,  71,  72,  74. 

YORK,  Ix. 

NOTE  OF  SEVERAL  MISTAKES  IN  THE  ORIGINAL  MANUSCRIPT 
.  REGISTER  OF  CAMBUSKENNETH. 


Regieter. 

13 


Prmt. 

26  Ur 


Fol  of  MS.    Page  of 


73 

S2 

us 

123 


23, 


,,  13, 

,,  13, 

„  17, 

„  9, 


WalteroOlikis/or  Waltero 

Olifard. 
Haatitig/or  Hastingis. 
Heriiico  (or  Hermco)  /or 

Henrico. 
conuersionis/or  conuersa- 

tionis. 
comitibus/or  comite. 
Duubodeuin    Jhr   Tulibo- 

deuin. 
Valing/)r  de  Valoniis. 
sicut/or  sunt. 
servituris/ur  futuris. 
CambuskjTinetli  for  Cam- 

busbaroune. 
Willelmo    de    Bidun   for 

Waltero  de  Bidun. 


99 
IIS 


Print. 

133  line  23,  Comite  de  Dinec  for 
Comite  Uunecano. 

133  „  25,  Waltero  de  Werk  fur 
Waltero  de  Berkeley. 

198     ,,       1,  manibus/jr  manualibus. 

234  „  19,  assumptiones/or  assumpti, 
omnes. 


252 


128 

253 

130 

256 

132 

259 

135 

205 

144 

280 

151 

293 

IS,  WiUelmo  Ludo/or  Waltero 
de  Bidun. 
2,  Eugenio /or  Engelramo. 
19,  grauidam /or  quamdam. 
21,  Drumfergart   for    Drum- 
sergart. 
7,  Dunbery /or  Dunberny. 
25,  Oronestet /or  Restennet. 
5,  Quetht /or  Conuetht? 


PRISTED  BV  T.  AND  A.  CONSTABLE,  PRINTERS  TO  HER  MAJESTT, 
AT  THE  EDINBURGH  CNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


