--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-009.png ---
MONASTICON HIBERNICUM :

A HISTORY
ABBEYS, PRIORIES, AND OTHER RELIGIOUS HOUSES
IN IRELAND;

INTERSPERSED WITH

Memoirs of their several Founders and Benefactors, and of their
Abbots and other Superiors,
TO THE TIME OF THEIR FINAL SUPPRESSION.
LIKEWISE,

AN ACCOUNT OF THE MANNER IN WHICH THE POSSESSIONS BELONGING TO THOSE
FOUNDATIONS WERE DISPOSED OF, AND THE PRESENT STATE OF THEIR RUINS,

COLLECTED FROM

English, Irish, and Foreign Historians, Records, and other Authentic Documents,
and from many Curious and Valuable Manuscripts.
e

WITH

ENGRAVINGS IN GOLD AND COLORS OF THE SEVERAL RELIGIOUS
AND MILITARY ORDERS,

And Maps and Views Jllustrating the Pistory.

RY

MERVYN ARCHDALL, A.M.,
Member of the Royal Irish Academy, and Chaplain to the Right Hon, Francis-Pierpoint Lord Conynghan.

Erited, twith Extensive Hotes,

By THE RicHt Rev. PATRICK F. MORAN, D.D., Lorp Bishop oF Ossory,
AND OTHER DISTINGUISHED ANTIQUARIANS.

THREE VOLUMES.—VOL I.

f - )

DUBLIN:
W. B. KELLY, 8, GRAFTON-STREET, anp 4, LOWER ORMOND-QUAY.

1873.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-011.png ---
CONTENTS OF VOL. I.

PAGE
County ANTRIM Op Bo 50 o. o 1
” ARMAGH 05 O05 oc o . 25
” CARLOW O05 os 50 . . 52
” CAVAN 66
os CLARE 50 - 72
» CORK 00 00 Bo Bo 96
” DERRY oo OD . .- 160
»  DONEGALL 175
” Down 220
” Dusiin 293

Hist of BWlaps and Ilustrations

Accompanying Monasticon, Vol. I.

- ARCHDALL's MaP OF IRELAND.

CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF ST. COLMAN, CLOYNE, AND RouND Tower.

- ProcemMy’s Map oF EIRIN.

THE THREE PATRON SAINTS OF IRELAND.

A-BEeNgDIcTINE Monk.

A BENEDICTINE Nun.

VIEW OF THE ANCIENT EPISCOPAL PALACE, TALLAGHT, IN CounTY DuBLIN,
An AUGUSTINIAN HERMIT.

A CISTERCIAN MONK,

VIEW OF THE CHOIR OF ST. PATRICK’S CATHEDRAL, DuBLIN.

V SOUTH-EAST VIEW OF ST. PATRICK'S CATHEDRAL, DUBLIN.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-044.png ---
26 Ancient Monasteries of Iretand.

Priory of Regular Canons. A.D. 445. St. Patrick, the
great apostle of this kingdom, founded an abbey here in this

Armagh is translated by A/titudo-Mache, as in the ‘Book of Armagh,” some-
times by A/to-Macha, and sometimes simply Macha, or Machi. Out of the high
ground known by this name rose an eminence called Druim Sailech, the ‘Ridge of
Sallow,” rendered Dorsum Salicis in the ‘‘Book of Armagh.” In the note (p)
Archdall gives Eamhuin-Macha as one of the names of Armagh; but, in reality,
this was the name of the entrenchment in the parish of Eglish, now known as the
Navan fort. This was for six hundred years the regal abode of the Ulster sovereigns,
whose line ended in Fergus Focha, who fell at Achalethderg, in A.D. 332. In that
year Eamhain was burned and laid waste, and was never inhabited again. It after-
wards became the property of the church of Armagh. In 577 Tigernach records
Primum periculum Uladh in Emania, in 578 Abreversio Uladh de Emania. In
1145 a limekiln, which was sixty feet every way, was erected opposite Eamhain
Macha, by Gillamacliag, successor of Patrick, and ‘‘by Patrick’s clergy in general.”
Under 1387 the ‘‘ Four Masters” have these two entries: ‘A house was built at
Eamhain Macha by Niall O’Neill, King of Ulster, for the entertainment of the leamed
men of Ireland.

«A house was erected at Eamhain Macha, by Niall O’Neill, for there was not
any house within it for a long time till then.” Dr. Reeves gives (p. 38, 39) the
text of two documents from ‘‘ Primate Sweteman’s Register” on matters connected
with Navan.

2. The ‘‘ Annals of Ulster” refer the foundation of Armagh to A.D. 444: “ A.D.
444 Ardmacha fundata est. Ab urbe condita usque ad hanc urbem fundatam
MCXCIV.”

The ‘‘Annals of the F. M.” refer it to the year 457, at which they say :—‘‘ Ard-
Macha was founded by Saint Patrick, it having been granted to him by Daire, son
of Finnchadh, son of Eoghan, son of Niallan. Twelve men were appointed by
him for building the town. He ordered them, in the first place, to erect an arch-
bishop’s city there, and a church for monks, for nuns, and for the other orders in
general, for he perceived that it would be the head and chief of the churches of
Treland in general.”

3. The following most interesting extract from the ‘‘ Book of Armagh” contains
the history of the earliest religious foundations at Armagh. It will be seen from it
that the so-called abbey was not the first foundation made by St. Patrick, that
honour belonging clearly to the church of the Ferta :—

«There lived in the territory of the Easterns a man both rich and honourable,
whose name was Daire, and Patrick asked of him to grant a place for the exercise
of his religion, and the rich man said to the saint, what place dost thou desire?
I pray of thee [said Patrick] to bestow upon me that eminence which is called the
Sallow Ridge, and there I will build mea place. Notwithstanding, he would not
grant to the saint that high ground, but he gave him another portion in a lower
situation, where is now the Fertce Martyrum, beside Arddmacha; and there Patrick
abode with his disciples. Some time after there came a horseman of Daire, leading
his fine horse to feed upon the grassy ground of the Christians, and Patrick was
offended at the intrusion of the horse on his ground, and said, Daire had done
foolishly in sending a senseless animal to trespass on the little spot which he
granted to God. But the horseman, as one that is deaf, gave no ear; and, as adumb
man that openeth not his mouth, gave no reply; but letting loose the horse there, went
his way for the night. But when, early on the following morning, he came to look
after the horse, he found him already dead, and returning home in sorrow, he said
to his master, behold that Christian hath killed thy horse, because he was dis-
pleased at the trespass upon his ground. And Daire said, then he likewise shall
die; therefore go ye and kill him instantly. But scarcely was the word uttered,
while they were yet going out when a dcath-stroke fell upon Daire. Then said
his wife, it is because of the Christian that this hath come to pass. Let some one
go quickly, and let the saint’s blessing be brought to us, and thou shalt recover;
they also who went forth to slay him are countermanded and recalled. Accord-
ingly, two men went to the Christian, and without stating what had happened

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-045.png ---
The County Armagh. 27

year, or in 457, for Regular Canons of the order of St. Augus-
tin, and dedicated it to the apostles, St. Peter and St. Paul ;4

Isher, Trias Th. p. 293.
[merely] said, Daire is sick; we pray thee let something of thine be carried to him,
if, peradventure, he may be healed. But St. Patrick, knowing what had been done,
said, yes, verily; and he blessed some water, and gave it to them, saying, go ye,
sprinkle your horse with this water, and then take it with you. And they did so,
and the horse came to life again, and they carried the water with them, and Daire
was healed when he was sprinkled with the consecrated water.

“« After this Daire came that he might do honour to the saint, and brought with
him a valuable imported cauldron which held three firkins. And Daire said to the
saint, thou mayest have this cauldron. And Patrick said,Grazacham (i.e., gratias, ago
oragam). Then Daire returned home and said, the man is a fool, who had nota civil
word tosay but Grazacham, in return for the beautiful three-firkin cauldron. More-
over, Daire said to his servants, go and bring me back my cauldron. So theycame and
said to Patrick, we must take away the cauldron. Notwithstanding, on this occasion
also, Patrick said, Grazacham; you may take it away. So they took it away. And
Daire enquired of his servants what the Christian said when they took back the
cauldron, and they replied: he said Grazacham. Then Daire answered and said:
Grazacham when we give, and Grazacham when we take away; surely this Graza-
cham of his must be a good word; therefore, the brazen cauldron shall be restored
to him. And this time Daire came in person, carrying the cauldron to Patrick,
and said to him, thy cauldron shall remain with thee, for thou art an upright and
unswerving man. Moreover, I now grant to thee my whole right in that portion
of ground which thou formerly didst desire, and dwell thou there. And that is
the city which now is called Arddmacha. And they went forth together, both St.
Patrick and Daire, to view the admirable and pleasing gift; and they ascended the
height, and found a roe and a little fawn with her, lying on the spot where the
altar of the northern church in Arddmacha now stands. And St. Patrick’s com-
panions wanted to catch the fawn and kill it; but the saint objected, and would not
permit them; nay, he even took up the fawn himself, and carried it on his
shoulders, and the roe followed him like a pet sheep, until he laid the fawn on
another eminence, at the north side of Armagh, where, according to the statement
of those who are familiar with the ground, miraculous attestations are to be wit-
nessed at this day.”—‘‘ Book of Armagh” (fol. 6 b, b).

Having thus, at length, obtained from Daire the Druim-sailech, which had
been before refused to him, St. Patrick proceeded to build upon it. According
to the ‘‘ Tripartite Life,” our apostle, with his religious community and Daire, went
up the hill to measure it for the building and to consecrate it. ‘*The apex of the
hill being probably enclosed with an earthen rampart, and the slope having like-
wise two entrenched defences, we can conceive a little monastic group of buildings
occupying the level space, consisting of a larger and smaller church, the latter,
which was called the Saéha/, or northern church, situate on the north side, and such
conventual buildings as were usual, consisting of a Zechmor (‘great house’), or
residence ; a Cuscin, or ‘kitchen ;’ an Airegal, or ‘sacristy,’ while the space on
the south side of the great church was devoted to a Reilig, or ‘cemetery.’ Such
was the amount of the primitive establishment. . . The town of Ardmagh con-
sisted, at an early date, of two main departments, the Rath, which was the nucleus,
and the Trians or wards, which were three in number, and formed the outer belt of
habitation. It would be almost impossible, at the present day, to define the
Rath or central enclosure with exactness ; but we may take the outline communi-
cated to Stuart, and printed by him in his appendix, p. 588. According to it the
upper enclosure or entrenchment, commencing on the west, observed pretty
much the course of Callan-street, the circle being continued across Abbey-street,
a little below the Infirmary, and through the Gardens, round to Market-street.
The lower enclosure leaves still a trace where it crossed Abbey-street, at the
Wesleyan Chapel.”—Rceves (op. cit. p. 13, 14).

The edifices within the upper ring were:—

1, The Dambliaec (pronounced Duleck) Mor, or Great Stone Church, probably

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-046.png ---
28 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

it continued, for many ages, one of the most celebrated eccle-
siastical foundations in the world.

occupying part of the present cathedral. It is known by this name in the ‘‘ Annals,”
A.D. 839. ‘‘Ardmacha, with its oratories and great church, burned by the Danes of
Lough Neagh.” Under the 890 and 907, it is called the church (Ecclais). In 995
it was burned, and remained a ruin for one hundred and thirty years, until 1125, when
Cellach, or Celsus, new-roofed it. In 1268, Primate Maelpatrick O’Scannail com-
menced the Tempull Mor, or Great Church of Armagh, which after repeated changes
is now represented by the cathedral, and which since the so-called Reformation has
been occupied by the Protestants. The new Catholic cathedral, crowning the opposite
hill, stands in its superior size and beauty as a t of the second glory
of the Catholic church in Ireland. ‘‘ Great shall be the glory of this last house,
more than of the first, and in this place I will give peace, said the Lord of Hosts.”
—Ag. 2, 10.

2. The Round Tower, or Cloictech. This was situated probably about forty feet
from the north-west angle. There may have been more than one of these edifices
at Armagh. Under the date A.D. 995, it is related that the ‘‘bell towers,” were
struck by lightning. In 1020 the Cloictech, with its bells, was consumed in
the great fire. .. The ‘‘Four Masters” state that in 1121, “A t wind knocked
off the cover of the Cloictech.” After this we have no account of the Round Tower.

3. The Sabhall or Barn. This church, from its position, is styled in the ‘‘Book
of Armagh” Sinistralis, or the northern church, and probably owes its name, as
does Sabhall Patraic, or Saul, to its unusual bearing, north and south. Here, as
early as 750, the ‘‘Book of Armagh” declares that ‘‘the virgins, and penitents, and
married attendants of the church were wont to hear the word of preaching on the
Lord’s Day.” It is referred to in the “Annals” of 1011. The site cannot now be
determined; but Dr. Reeves supposes it to have stood near the extremity of the
north transept of the present cathedral.

4. Duteck Toga, or Stone Church of the Elections, stood on the south side of the
cathedral. The site is doubtful.

5. Teach Screaptra, or House of Writings, was the only building within the rath
which escaped the great fire of 1020.

6. Zhe Abbot's House was within the rath, and anciently stood within a ram
of itsown. It is mentioned in the ‘‘ Annals of Ulster” at 822, at 915, and at 1116, in
which year the Zzach n-Abhadh Mor, or Great House of the Abbot, and twenty
houses about it, were burnt at the beginning of Lent. After it was rebuilt Cardinal
Paparo passed a week here in 1151, in company with Gelasius, the successor of
St. Patrick.

. The Cuicin, or Kitchen, was consumed by the fire of 915.
. The Prison. Dr. Petrie (Round Towers, p. 104) quotes from the ‘‘Leabhar-
na-n-Uidre,” the Yellow Book, which disappeared from the Carcar or Prison at

Armagh.

9. “fhe Conventual buildings were surrounded by a Fidh-nemhedh, or Sacred
Grove, which is mentioned in the Irish of the ‘‘ Tripartite Life,” and is stated in
“« Annals” to have been consumed in the fire of 995.

10. The Reilig, or ‘‘Cemetery,” at first was at the south of the church; in after
time it extended all round. A portion was set apart for royal interments, like that
in the Relig Oran of Iona. It was called Cemeterium Regum, and kings of Ailech
were interred here in 934, 1064, and 1149. Here, it is probable, the remains of
Brian Boru were deposited in 1014. .

11, The Culdces’ House was originally inside the rath. We will speak of it
under its proper heading.

12. The Lis Acidh or ‘Fort of Guests,” is mentioned in the ‘‘Annals” at
1003, 1015, 1115, 1155. It is doubtful whether it was inside the rath.

13. The Gate, or entrance to the rath, is mentioned in the ‘‘Annals” at 1121,
1166. A cross stood outside it. Dr. Reeves assigns the situation of this to the
top of Market-street, where is the eastern entrance of the cathedral premises.

In 1561, according to the ‘‘Four Masters,” the Lord Deputy, Sussex, erected
strong raths and impregnable ramparts round the great church of Armagh.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-047.png ---
County of Armagh. 29

513. Died the abbot St. Duach,t or Dubthach; he was
succeeded by Alell, called also Alild, or Helias; he is par-
ticularly stiled bishop, and was son of Triches, and grandson
of Fiege, of the most noble family of the Dalfiatacii ;5 he
laudably presided over his flock for the space of thirteen years,
and was succeeded by one of the same name and family."

535. Died the last abbot Alild; he was succeeded by a
second St. Duach.*

548. Died the abbot St. Duach.*

578. The abbot St. Fethlin,® who was surnamed Fionn, or
the White, died this year."

598. Died St. Eochod,’ the son of Dermit; he was stiled
both abbot and bishop.”

610. The abbot St. Senach® died, and was succeeded by St.
M‘Lasre.*

623. Died St. M‘Lasre ®

657. Died the abbot and bishop Comyn.?

661. January the roth, died St. Thomian ;!° he was abbot and
bishop.*

* 0’ Flaherty’s Cat. Mss. in Tr. Th. *Act. SS. p. 61. + Jd. “Id. p. 744.
"OFlak. supra. and Act. SS. p. 193. *Act. SS. p.193. "Id. p. $3. *M ‘Geog.
*O’ Flak. sup. Act. SS. p. 53.

* St. Dubtach succeeded Cormac in the See of Armagh, in 497. The “Four
Masters” place his death in 512, He was from Druim-Dearbh, probably the present
Derver, or Darver, in the county of Louth.

5Dal-Fiatach, #.¢., the tribe of Fiatach. This warlike tribe was seated in the

resent county of Down. The ‘Mart. of Donegal,” at 13th Jan., has “ Ailell,
ishop of Ardmacha, A.D. 525.”

6 This St. Feidhlimidh Finn is set down as Primate in the list from the ‘ Psalter
of Cashel.”—See ‘‘Tr. Th.” p. 292.

7There are many saints of this name venerated Jan. 1, 25, 28; April 17.
Colgan (Tr. Th.) refers this saint to Jan. 1.

®St. Senach is omitted by Colgan, in his dissertation, ‘‘ De Hiberniz Primatibus ;”
but he is given in the ‘‘ Psalter of Cashel.” Usher makes him the last of the
third order of holy bishops dignified by the name of saints.

®Mac-Laisre, that is, the son of Laisir. Ware and Colgan think that he is the
person called ‘‘ Terenannus Archipontifex Hiberniz,” in the “‘ Life of St. Laurence,
Archbishop of Canterbury,” by John of Tynmouth. St. Laurence was made
Archbishop of Canterbury in 611. ‘The feast of our Saint is celebrated, according to
the ‘* Martyrology of Donegal,” on the 17th September: ‘‘ Mac Laisre, bishop and
abbot of Ard-Macha, a.D. 662. I think it is he that is of the race of han,
son of Niall, or, it may be, he is of the race of Corbmac Cas, son of Oilioll Olum.”

2St. Thomian (Tomyn, Tomene, or Toimen) Mac-Ronan succeeded in
623. He was the most learned of his countrymen, in an age most fruitful of
learned men. The ‘‘Martyrology of Donegal” refers his feast to roth January.
The ‘‘Annals of Ulster” have, A.D. 660, ‘‘Tommene, Episcopus Ardmachz,
defunctus est.” The ‘Four Masters,” at the same year, have, ‘‘St. Tomene, son of
Ronan, Bishop of Ardmacha, died.” One of the most important ecclesiastical ques-
tions that occupied the attention of the early Irish bishops occurred during the ponti-
ficate of St. Thomian. The Paschal controversy then agitated the entireisland. The
Synod of Magh-lene (A.D. 630) in which the Bishops of Leinster and Munster were
assembled, under the influence of St. Cummian, decided that the Roman usage
should be their guide; and Ven. Bede mentions that, in 635, the Southern Irish

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-048.png ---
30 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

670. This ycar the town was consumed by an accidental
fire.>

687. Another conflagration happened.

695. A synod, consisting of forty-one prelates, was held at
Armagh this year.4

703. Died the abbot Congussa.°

705. Died the abbot St. Flann, or Florence Febhla;" he
was the son of Scanlan!

720. In this year, or in 724, died St. Colman Huamacensis,!2
the learned scribe of Armagh, and one of the biographers of
St. Patricks

725. Died St. Eochad, the son of Colgan, an holy anacho-
rite.»

727. Died St. Ferdomnach, or Dominic, scribe of Armagh
The same year St. Dochuma Bolgan, an holy anachorite,
died!

729. Flathbert, son of Loingseach, in the 7th year of his
reign, abdicated the throne of Ireland, and became a monk in
this abbey, where he died in the year 760.*

vAct. SS. p. 204. eld. Id. p. 473. °Ann. Inisfal. * O’Flah. Act. SS. p. 294.
® Annal. Ulton. “Tr. Th. p. 294. ‘Td. p. 632. ¥ Id.

‘at the admonition of the bishop of the a peatne See,” had already conformed to
the Roman rite. Not so, however, the Northerns. St. Thomian, in order to
secure uniformity, addressed, in conjunction with the Northern bishops and abbots,
a letter to Pope Severinus, in 640. When their letter reached Rome, the Apostolic
See was vacant, and the reply which came was written, as usual in such cases, by
the Roman clergy. This fact is an admirable example of the fidelity with which
the early Irish Church adhered to the statute of St. Patrick in the ‘‘ Book of
Armagh,” that difficult cases should be sent ‘‘to the Apostolic See, that is to say,
to the chair of the Apostle Peter, which holds the authority of the city of Rome.”

11 Flann, or Florence Febhla, succeeded, in the See of Armagh, Segene, who was
successor to St. Thomian. Segene died in 687 or 688. St. Flann-Febhla held the
Synod mentioned in the text under the year 695, but it cannot be stated with any
certainty where it was held. Colgan (Tr. Th. p. 503 2) conjectures that it was
held at Derry or Raphoe; others place it at Tara; others at Leitir, near Birr, on
the confines of ancient Meath and Munster. A copy of the acts of this Synod,
with the subscriptions of the assembled fathers, was in Colgan’s possession, and is
still preserved at Brussels Burgundian Library, No. 2324. Colgan states that these
acts were called Cain Adhamnain, or the Canons of Adamnan, from the illustrious
St. Adamnan, who was present at the council, They are supposed by some to be the
same eight canons called after St. Adamnan, published by Martene (Thesaur- Nov.
Anecd. tom. iv., col. 18), and which are also in a MS. in Marsh’s Library,
Dublin, called ‘‘ Precedents of the See of Armagh,” p. 395. _ Among those present
at this Synod, Colgan mentions the following:—r. Aidus, Episcopus Sleptiensis.
2. Colga, filius Moenaigh, abbas Luscanensis. 3. Mosacer, abbas, 4. Killenus,
filius Subnei, abbas Sagirensis. 5. Mochonna, Antistes Dorensis. 6. Ecbertus
Anglus. This latter was probably the priest who, according to Ven. Bede, ix
Hibernia diutius exulaverat pro Christo, and through whose means the monks
at Hy conformed to Roman Easter and Tonsure in 716, Among the other names
in the acts of Adamnan’s Synod is that of Murchu Mac-U-Macteni, the writer of
a portion of St. Patrick’s Memoirs in the ‘Book of Armagh.”

13 Mentioned in the ‘‘ Vita Tripart.,” part 1, sa’ fine.


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-049.png ---
County of Armagh. 31

749. Died Congus,® alias Oengus, a learned scribe.!

758. St. Feardachrich, the son of Subney, was elccted
‘abbot ;™ he died in the year 768."

778. On Saturday, the 2nd day of August, the town was
totally consumed by lightning?

791. Died the abbot Cudiniscus, the son of Conasac;? as
also Eochod, the ceconomist; he was son of Kiernach.9

793. Died the abbot Dubdaleath, the son of Sinach."

794. Aphiat, the bishop, and Arectach Hua Foelain, the
abbot of Armagh, died in the same night.*

795. Died the abbot Foendelach, the son of Moenach; he
had had a contention first with Dubdaleath, and afterwards
with Gormgal® for the dignity.‘

799. St. Fothad,"® a doctor of this abbey, and celebrated
for his piety and his writings, flourished about this time."

805. The blessed Gormgal, the son of Dinnagaich, abbot of
Armagh, and also of Cluaineoais,” died this year.*

806. The abbot Conmach, the son of Dubdaleth, died
suddenly

808. St. Torbach, abbot and bishop, and also reader of
divinity and a learned scribe, died on the 16th of July, when

\Tr. Th. p. 632. "Id. p. 294. °O'Flah. supr. ° Id. Tr. Th. p. 294. Pid.
qd. 'O'Flah supr.id. "Id. ‘ld. “Jd. “Now called Clounish, in the county of
Monaghan. *O'Flah. supr.id. Id.

13 Under the year 733, the ‘‘ Four Masters” have this:—‘‘Congus, successor of
Patrick, composed this quatrain, to incite Aedh Allan to revenge the profanation
of the church, for he was the spiritual adviser (amchara) of Aedh, so that he said:

Say unto the cold Aedh Allan, that I have been oppressed by a feeble army;
Aedh Roin insulted me last night at Cill-Cunna, of the sweet music.

Aedh Allan collected his forces to Faughart, and, on his march to battle, com-
posed these verses:—

For Cill-Cunna, the church of my confessor, I take this day a
Journey on the road,” &c.

“The list of the Archbishops of Armagh. in the ‘Psalter of Cashel,” omits
Affiath, and gives Aircachtach as archbishop for one year.

18 The succession of the Archbishops of Armagh about this period is involved in
great confusion. Gormghal is not mentioned in list in the ‘‘ Psalter of Cashel,” of
which the fragment is preserved in the Bodleian Library.

16 The “‘ Four Masters” preserve (799) one of the compositions of St. Fothad,
which was composed under the following circumstances:—‘‘ King Aedh Oird-
nidhe assembled a very great army to proceed into Leinster, and devastated
Leinster twice in one month. A full muster of the men of Ireland (except the
Leinstermen), both laity and clergy, was again made by him, [and he marched]
until he reached Dun-Cuair, on the confines of Meath and Leinster. Thither
came Connmach, successor of Patrick, having the clergy of Leath-Chuinn along
with him. It was not pleasing to the clergy to go upon any expedition; they
complained of their grievance to the King, and the King, #.¢., Aedh, said that he

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-050.png ---
32 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

his festival is kept. He was the son of Gorman, of the family
of Kinel-torbaich, z.¢., the O’Kelly’s.*

The abbot Toctech Hua Tigernaich, of Tirimchlair, died
the same year.*

812. Nuadhat, of: Loch Vamha,>™ anachorite, and abbot
and bishop of Armagh, went into Connaught this year, and died
February the 19th.°

814. Died Cumascac, son of Kernaigh, and ceconomist of
Armagh?

825. Died the abbot Flangus M‘Loingseach.°

826. Eogan Monasteriensis succeeded him.

829. Died Subneus, the son of Farnech; he enjoyed his
dignity only two months; he had been abbot of Darinis£®

Kethernac, the son of Dunchan, divinity lecturer and pres-
byter of Armagh, died the same year; he was honoured with
the epithet of THE WISE.»

831. Died Rectgal, the son of Subney, and a presbyter of
Armagh.

832. Died the abbot Artrigius ; he was the son of Con-
chovar.® Farannan succeeded him. And this year the Danes
plundered the town thrice in one month; they carried away
the reliques and all the other treasures, and obliged the abbot
to seek an asylum in Munster!

834. Died the abbot Eogan.™

Colgan says, that Farannan of Rath-mic-malus was chosen

* O'Flah. sup. Tr. Th. ibid. Act. SS. p. 373. *Tr. Th. ibid. Lough Gaun, in the
county of Longford, barony of Granard. °O’Flah. sup. Tr. Th. ibid. Act. SS. p.
359) 373- ‘Zr. Th. ibid. */d. ‘Id. p.295, %O’Flah. supr. Tr. Th. ibid. *Tr.
Th. p. 295. ‘Id. *Jd. ‘Ogygia p. 43. Annal Inisfal. ™O' Flak. supr. Tr. Th. ibid.

would abide by the award of Fothadh-na-Canoine ; on which occasion Fothadh
the decision by which he exempted the clergy of Ireland for ever from
expeditions and hostings, when he said:—

The church of the living God, let her alone, waste her not;

Let her right be apart, as best it ever was.

Every true monk who is of a pure conscience,

For the church to which it is due let him labour like every servant.
Every soldier from that out, who is without [religious] rule or obedience,
Is permitted to aid the great Aedh, son of Niall.

This is the true rule, neither more nor less:

Let every one serve in his vocation without murmur or complaint.”

17 The word Loch-Vamha signifies Lake of the Cave. The situation of this Lake
has not been fully identified, though it must have been well known in the days of
Colgan, who describes it as follows :—‘‘Est in finibus Breffnize occidentalis sive
inferioris, qu Breffne-Hi-Ruairc appellatur, hic lacus e vicina quadam specu,
unde et Loch-uamha, i.e., lacus specus appellatur, exoriens, et in eamdem szpe
prodigiose refluens: quod indigenz observant passim contingere pando illius
regionis Dynastis, eorumque filiis mortis imminet periculum.”—‘‘ Acta SS.” p. 373.

* Artrigius is made by Ware to succeed Mac Longsech in 822, and sit for eleven
years; but Eogan, of Monasterboice, who had the support of Nial Caille, King
of Aileach, appears to have disturbed him in the possession of the see.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-051.png ---
The County Armagh. 33

abbot this year ;" but O'Flaherty says, that there was no
change till the year 848.

835. Farannan, the abbot, happening, with his attending
clergy, to be in the church of Kildare, Fethlimium, the son of
Crimthan, violently entered that abbey, and seizing upon
Farannan, carried him and his clergy into captivity.°

Colgan tells us, that Diermit, being drove from his seat this
year, made a progress into Connaught, to establish there the
law of St. Patrick.?

838. Another change happened at Armagh, Diermit Hua
Tigernaich® being this year chosen abbot in the place of
Farannan ; but O’Flaherty will not agree to this.4

839. The Danes burned the town and all its sacred edifices
to the ground."

841. Died Muredach M‘Ernaigh, ceconomist of Armagh."

844. Died the sage and excellent Ferdomnach,” or Dominic,
divinity lecturer of this church.

848. The abbot Farannan was made captive at Cloncom-
ardy™ by the Danes, and was carried with all his family,
reliques, and books, to their ships at Limerick; and Diermit,
called the wisest of all the doctors in Europe, was chosen to
succeed the unfortunate Farannan."

849. A public convention was celebrated at this town by
Malachy, son of Malruan, King of Ireland, the nobility of
Lethcunn,” and by Madagan, King of Ulster, with the nobles
of that province ; they were accompanied by the abbot Dier-
mit and Fethgna, with the clergy of Armagh, and by Suarlech
of Indedhnen,” with the clergy of Meath.*

850. Armagh was laid waste by the Danes of Linnduachuil,®
on the Sunday after Easter’ But the “Annals of Ulster”
place this event on Easter-day, in 851, and the “Annals of
Inisfall” remove it to the year 852.

852. The abbot Farannan died in his captivity this year, as
did Diermit his successor.*

854. Died Cathasac, the wise and very learned ceconomist
of Armagh ; he was the son of Tigernach.*

Tr. Th. ibid. Id. Id. Tr. Th. "Id. p. 295. ‘Id. *Id. “M'Geog. Act.

SS. p. 295. Usher Ogygia. “The Northern Division of Ireland. *Tr. Th. p. 295.
YId. p.295 "Id. “Id.

The ‘ Annals of Ulster” have, at 834, ‘‘ The changing of abbots in Ardmacha,
viz., Forannan of Rath-Malius, in place of Dermod Ua Tiernaig.”

20S. Ferdomnach is given in the ‘‘Mart. of Tallaght” at 10th June.

| Cloncomardy has been identified by Dr. Reeves as Colman's Well, in the
County Limerick. Todd’s Wars of the Danes, page civ.

33 Indedhnen : this place is in the territory of Bregia, not far from Slane.

% Linnduachuil, or Linn-Uachaille, not Magheralin, on the river Lagan, as was
supposed by O’Donovan, but on the banks of the old Cassan river, near Castle
Bellingham, County Louth. See Todd's Wars of the Danes, page Ixii.

D

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-052.png ---
34 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

860. Died Murgesius, anachorite of Armagh.>

861. Died Moel Patrick, or Patrick, the son of Fianchon ;
he was a learned writer, and a bishop and anachorite, and was
intended for the government of this abbey.*

867. Died Flann,® son of Ferchar; he was ceconomist of
Armagh, and abbot of Linnlere4 *

873. Amlave, at the head of his Danes, entered Armagh,
and plundered and reduced the town to ashes, and desperately
wounded and massacred above a thousand of the unarmed
clergy and people.®

876. Moelcova, the son of Cronnmaclus, and who afterwards
was abbot, and Moctee, anachorite, scribe, and master of the
schools of Armagh, were taken prisoners by the Danes of
Lochcuan.!8

879. Anmire was abbot ; having enjoyed the dignity for the
space of nine months only, he died and was succeeded by
Moelcova, the son of Crumal.®

883. The abbot Moelcova sunk into the grave under the in-
firmities of old age!

889. A tumult happened in this town on Whitsunday be-
tween the people of Kinel-eoguin* and the Ulidians,’ which
was at length appeased by the archbishop Malgibrigid, who
compelled the Ulidians, for their irreverence to the church of
God and to St. Patrick, to give him hostages and 210 oxen;
they hung up four of the delinquents, and the other party con-
sented to give the same satisfaction.”

890. Gluniarm, at the head of the Danes of Dublin, despoiled
this town, partly destroying the great church, and levelling to
the ground divers other edifices, and carrying away captive
710 of the inhabitants."

892. Died the blessed Mocta, anachorite and divinity lec-
turer of Armagh; he had been a disciple of St. Fethgna.°® The
same year died Cathasac, the son of Fergus, a very devout
young man, and coadjutor to the abbot ; and also Comsudius,
the son of Ectgath, a principal presbyter.?

893. The Danes of Loughfoyle ravaged this town.9

>Tr. Th. p. 295. °Act. SS. p. 366. Ud. *O'Flah. sup. Tr. Th.ibid. Now
called the Lough of Strangford. Tr. Th. p. 295. “O’Flah. supr. Tr. Th. id.
‘Tr. Th. p. 296. *The county of Tyrone. ‘The county of Down. ™Tr. Th.
p: 296. "ld. °O'Flah. Tr. Th. ibid. Plbid. Wd.

% Moel-Patrick is supposed by Colgan (Acta Re 366) to be the same as
St. Patricius Ostiarius, who is styled bishop by St. gusius, and abbot of Ar-
magh by the ‘‘ Martyrology of Tallaght.” The interpolator of William of Malmes-
bury speaks of him as having flourished as bishop in Ireland about the year 850.
‘Linnlere, or Lacin-Leire, now Dunleer, in the County Louth. See Todd’s
Wars of the Danes, page xl.
36St. Fethgna is mentioned in the ‘Mart. of Donegal,’ under 12th February :
‘«Fethgna, successor of Patrick, head of the religion of the Gaoidhil, a.p. 872.””

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-053.png ---
The County Armagh. a 35

895. It suffered the same fate from the Danes of Dublin."

896. Died the abbot Cassach.*

898. Died St. Kellach, the son of Sarguss, anachorite of Ar-
magh;* and the same year the barbarians of Lochfoyle
plundered the town."

898-9. Died Breassal, the lecturer in divinity.”

904. Died Cumasach, ceconomist of Armagh; his father
was named Alid, and his mother was Gormlathia, a daughter
of Muredach, King of Ulster.* The same year Cearnachan
M‘Dowlegan committed great ravages and cruelties here; he
took a member of the house and drowned him in Loughkyrre,
a pool beside the west of the town; but soon after Cearnachan
was taken by Neale Glunduffe and drowned in the same
Lough, for thus violating the town dedicated to the apostle
of Ireland.’

907. Cormac M‘Cuillenan, King of Munster, and archbishop,
about this time did bequeath to the abbey 24 ounces of gold.”

914. Armagh was destroyed by fire.*

919. Godfred Hua Himhair, King of the Danes in Dublin,
plundered the town, sparing only the churches, the Colidei,
and the sick ;> but the “Annals of Inisfall” place this event
in the year 921.

922. Died Moctee of the Isle,?” the son of Kernachan, and
presbyter of Armagh.°

924. Died Muredach, the son of Domnald, and coadjutor to
the abbot.4

925. Died the abbot St. Malbrigid,® he was son of Tornan.°

'O’Flah. Tr. Th, ibid. *Annal. Ulton. ‘Tr. Th. ibid. “Annal. Inisfal.*O' Flak.
sup. Tr. Th. ibid. “Ld. and id. ibid. ¥M'Geogh. *Keating. *Tr. Th. p. 296.
Id. °Act. SS. p. 732. *Tr. Th. p. 296. id.

37 Moctee, or Mochta of the Isle, #.¢., Inis-Mochta, now Inishmot, in a parish of
the same name, in the barony of Slane, and county of Meath. The ruins of the
church of Inis-Mochta are still to be seen on a spot of ground containing about two
acres, which was formerly an island, and is now surrounded by low, marshy ground,
which is always flooded in winter. According to O’Clery’s ‘Irish Calendar,” the
feast of this saint was kept here on the 26th of March. St. Mochta of Louth is
venerated on 24th March and roth August.

% The death of this great saint is thus mentioned by the ‘‘Four Masters,”
A.D. 925 :—‘‘St. Maelbrighde, son of Tornan, successor of Patrick, Colum Cille,
and Adamnan, head of the piety of all Ireland,and of the greater part of Europe,
died, at a good old age, on the 22nd of February, in commemoration of whose
death it was said :—

On the eighth of the calends of noble March,
Maelbrighde, most gifted of the brave Gaedhil [died]
Since the Divine Son of God was born

Upon the earthly world in carnal shape,

Five years and twenty, nine hundred,

To the death of Maelbrighde in evil hour.

It was not a year without events ;

Premature the death of the Abbot of Ard-Macha,
Maelbrighde, head of Europe.”

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-054.png ---
36 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

926. The blessed Dubhliter,” of Kil-slepte,and presbyter of
Armagh, was put to death by the Danes of Snamhaighneagh.

931. Amlaff, the son of Godefrid with the Danes of Lough-
cuain, plundered this town on the eve of St. Martin.

933. Conchovar, who was presumptive heir to the throne of
Oileach,* died this year, and was interred here with great
pomp.

936. Died Joseph and Moyle Patrick, esteemed the two
sages of Ireland; they were worthy successors of St. Patrick,
they enjoyed the abbacy five months only.*

943. The Danes of Dublin plundered this town.'

945. Died Cathasach, the son of Guasan; he was lecturer
of this abbey.”

948. Died Finnachta, the son of Ectigern ; he was abbot,
bishop, and lecturer of Louth, and principal proctor for the
church of Armagh, in the southern part of the province.”

950. Died Kelius, the anachorite of Armagh.°

951. Died Moelpatric, the son of Coscan, lecturer of this
abbey.?

954. Died Moenach ; he was lecturer of this abbey and
abbot of Clonard.4

955. Muredach of Mountcuilleand was deposed, and Dub-
daleth, the second abbot of that name, was chosen in his place."

980. Domnall O'Neill, monarch of Ireland, having retired to
this abbey, died therein very penitently.»| And Connang Hua
Flannagan, the archidnach of the hospital, died the same year.*

983. Died Muredacd Hua Flannagan, the professor of this
abbey."

989. The people of Uriell pillaged this town, and set fire,
with effect, to the houses, church, and steeple; Armagh be-
came at this time the most melancholy spectacle in the king-
dom.*

Tr. Th. 81d. Or Aileach, the royal palace of Tyrconneh, in the barony of Inisowen
and county of Donegal. ‘Ty, Th. p. 296. M‘Geoghk. Tr. Th. ibid. O' Flak.
10°’Flah. Tr. Th ibid. ™Tr. Th. ibid Act SS. p. 736 °Tr. Th. ibid. Pld.
fd. "Id. *O’Connor’s Differt. p.258. *Tr. Th. ibid. and p.308. “Id. *M'Geog.

In the ‘‘ Martyrology of Donegal,” under 22nd February, we have :—‘‘ Mael-
brighde, son of Dornan, successor of Patrick and of Colum Cille ; a man full of the
grace of God, and a vessel of the wisdom and knowledge of his time. He was of
the race of Conall Gulban, son of Niall. Saerlaith, daughter of Coulebaith, son of
Baothghel, was his mother.—A.D. 925.”

He was called comharb of St. Patrick, from holding the see of Armagh ; com-
harb of St. Colum Cille from having held that of Derry; and comharb of St.
Adamnan from having governed Raphoe.—See Colgan, ‘Act. SS.” 22nd
February.

%9 Kil-slepte, or Cill-Sleibhe, now Killeavy, near Newry, in the county of Ar-
magh. Snamh-Aigneach, now Carlingford Lough, between the counties of Louth
and Down.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-055.png ---
The County Armagh. 37

994. Died Clerchen, the son of Leran, a presbyter of Ar-
magh.*

995. The town, churches, and towers having been rebuilt,
were destroyed by lightning.

1004. King Brian Borombh, with his army, remained a whole
week in this town, and, on his departure, he left a collar of
gold, weighing 20 ounces, as alms, on the great altar of this
church.®

1006. Died Ermedhac, or Hieremias, a scribe of this abbey.*

1o11. From the feast of All-Saints, this year, to the be-
ginning of May, a fatal sickness raged in this town; at
which time there died Kennfailed of Saul, a bishop and ana-
chorite, Maelbrigid Macangobhann, the lecturer of divinity,
Scholagius, the son of Clerchen, a famous presbyter, and in-
numerable seniors and students of the abbey.”

1012, The Danes reduced the whole town to ashes.*

1013. The bodies of King Brian Borombh, and Murchad,
his son, with the heads of Conaing, his nephew, and of Moth-
lan, prince of the Desies, who fell in the battle of Clontarf,
were brought hither with great funeral pomp from the mon-
astery of Swords. The king was interred on the north side
of the great church, in a stone coffin by itself, and Murchad,
arid the head of Conaing, in another coffin on the south. The
clergy were for twelve nights waking the corpses, with read-
ing of psalms and prayers, and chanting hymns for their souls;
Brian’s other son, Doncha, returning to Kilmainham with
great prey, sent a large treasure, with jewels and other offerings
to the successor of St. Patrick, and to the clergy of Armagh.4

1015. Died Flannagan, the son of Conang, the archidnach.°

1016. The Danes of Dublin, commanded by Sitric, the son
of Amhlaoimh, burned the town this year.

1018. Died Cormgal, the prothonotary of this abbey.e

1020. The whole town was consumed by fire as far as the
greater fortification, in which the library only was destroyed;
but in the three other parts of the city, the great church, and
the church of Toen, that of Sabhall, and the old preaching
church, together with the ancient chair of the masters, the
students’ apartments and books, with many houses and much
riches, were consumed."

1022. Malachy, monarch of Ireland, was interred here with
great funeral honour.!

1027. The holy staff of Jesus was broken.* ®

™7r. Th. p. 297. *Id. *Annal. Inisfal.O’Flah. *Tr. Th. p.632. ld. p. 298.
°M‘Geogh. Tr. Th. ibid and Ann. Inisfal. °Tr.Th.ibid. ‘Ann. Inisfal,
£Ann. Tritton, Ty. Th. ibid. Ann. Ulton. \Tr. Th. ibid. *Annal. omn. sanct.

® The Baculus Fesu, here called St. Patrick’s crozier, is frequently mentioned in
Irish history. St. Fiech's hymn speaks of St. Tassach, who gave the viaticum to

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-056.png ---
38 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1028. Christian, the son of Dubhchuilinn, a principal pres-
byter of Armagh, died at Roscommon!

1033. This year many people of the town were witnesses to
a miracle, viz., blood running from the shrines of St. Peter
and St. Paul.™

1037. Cathald, the son of Roderic, Lord of West Connaught,
came in pilgrimage to Armagh.”

1039. Died Muredach, the archidnach, he was son of
Flannagan?

1040. Died Donchad Hua Hanchanige, the celebrated
professor.P

1041. Died Macbeth, the son of Anmire, the chief antiquary
of Armagh and of all Ircland.4

1042. Died Moelpetrus Hua Hailechain, the divinity lec-
turer and head master of the students.’

1043. Cathald died in his retreat in this abbey.®

1046. Died Moelpatrick Hua Beloige, a man celebrated
for his many virtues, and principal professor of divinity in this
school.*

1049. Dubdaleth, the son of Moelmar, and professor of
divinity, was chosen archbishop, and was succeeded in the
divinity chair by Aid Hua Foirreth."

1053. Died Dolgen, a principal presbyter.” .

1056. June the 18th, died the blessed Aid Hua Foirreth,
the chief professor, aged 75 years.*

1060. Cumuscah O'Eoradan succeeded Dubhdaleithe in the
abbacy.¥

1061, Died the archidnach Conang.*

\Tr. Th ibid. "Id. "Id. Td. Pld. Wd. Fld. “Id. tid. “Wd. “Td. *Td.
yAnnal. Inisfal. *Tr. Th. ibid.

St. Patrick on his death-bed. In the ancient notes to Fiech’s hymn we read of
him ‘‘ Thessechus fuit faber aerarius S. Patricii. Fuit primus qui baculum Jesu
retioso tegumento obcelarit.” The “Annals of Tigernach,” under the year 1027,
ave, ‘*Baculum Jesu sacrilege raptum.” Under 1030 another profanation of the
relic is described. Inthe ‘‘Annals of the Four Masters,” at 1080—1143, it is
mentioned again. St. Bernard in his “Life of St. Malachy,” speaks of it as
adorned with gold and precious stones. Giraldus Cambrensis (Topogr. Hib.,
part III.,c. 34), mentions that in his time the Baculus was transferred from Armagh
to Dublin by the English; and in his * Hib. Expugn.” (lib. II. c. 18), he mentions
that it was William Fitz-Adelm who caused this translation to be made. Campion
in his * History of Ireland,” alludes to the Baculus as being held in great venera-
tion in 1316. The “ Black Book of Christ Church” records its miraculous preser-
vation in an accident that took place in 1461. As late as 1529 it was employed
in administering oaths by the Deputy and Chancellor. In 1538 it was publicly
burned as an instrument of superstition by the so-called Reformers, about the time
when they destroyed the image of our Lady of Trim, and other objects of Catholic
veneration.
Colgan (Appendix ad acta S. Patricii, c. 21, Trias Th. p. 263) has collected all
that the old authorities have written concerning the history of this staff. Sec
“ Book of Obits of the Trinity Church,” Introd., page 11, seqq.


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-057.png ---
The County Armagh. 39

1065. The blessed Dubthach, principal confessor of Ireland
and Scotland, died here.* The same year died Colman Hua
Criochain the professor of divinity.”

1069. Died the archidnach Flannagan, the son of Aid.¢

1070. Died another archidnach, Moelbrigid, the son of
Cathasach.¢

1071. Died Christian Hua Clothocain, professor of divinity
in this school, and principal doctor of all the Irish.°

1074. On the Thursday after the feast of St. Phillip and St.
James, a dreadful fire happened in this town, by which the
citadel, and all the houses, churches, and bells were
destroyed.®

1075. Cumascacius O’Heradain died, having enjoyed the
abbacy three years only.®

1077. Died Colga Hua Heradhain, steward of the poor of
Armagh!

1081. Died M‘Condabhall, a principal presbyter.*

1091. The citadel was consumed from the middle part of it
towards the west.!

1092. The churches, with the citadel, together with a part
of Trien Mor and Trien Saxon, were burned on the 29th of
August.

1093. Another fatal fire happened this year."

1094. The Comarba of St. Patrick made a grand visitation
throughout Ireland, and during his absence the town was
plundered.°

1100. Imar was abbot; he was master to the famous St.
Malachy, who was afterwards archbishop of Armagh.?*!

1102. The blessed Mugron Hua Morgair, father of Maol-
meog, and of Giolla Chriost,4 chief professor of divinity of this
school and of all Europe, died in the monastery of Mungaret,
in the county of Limerick, on the 5th of October."

1103. Muircheartagh, with the people of Leathmoghanughad,
encamped at Armagh, with the Connatians and Methians,
and beseiged the town for a fortnight, and did greatly
damage it.*

“Tr. Th. ibid. “Id. ld. “Id. *Id. *The Annals of Inisfall tell us that this
conflagration happened in the year 1077, and that only part of Ardpatrick (the
citadel) was destroyed. %Tr. Th. ibid. "Id. ‘Id. “Id. Id. “Id. Jd. °Annal.
Inisfal. Tr. Th. ibid. Anal. Inisfal. *Tr. Th. ibid. *Annal. Inisfal.

31 Imhar Hua N Aedhagain, or Ivar O’ Hagan, was one of the teachers of the great
St. Malachy of Armagh. He is thus described by St. Bernard in ‘ Vita S.
Malachize:—‘‘ There was a man in the city of Armagh, and that man was holy,
and of exceedingly austere life, and an inexorable chastener of his body. Havin
a cell near the church he made it his abode, giving himself up to fastings anc
prayers night and day. To this man Malachy repaired, in order to fashion his
jife according to the model of one that had condemned himself to such a burying-
alive.” He died on the 13th August, 1143, when on a pilgrimage to Rome.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-058.png ---
40 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1107. Moelpatrick O’Drugan entered upon the divinity
lecturership of this abbey on the feast of St. Albe.t

1108. Died the archidach Aid; he was the son of Dubdaleth,
the third bishop of Armagh, and, had he lived, would have
been promoted to the comorbship of St. Patrick;" from this
and other instances it appears, that many of the clergy in
Ireland, and in other countries, were married men; and to this
effect Doctor Lynch, the learned author of Cambrensis Eversus,
writes to Roderick O’Flaherty.*

1112, The citadel, with the churches, two streets in Trian
Massain, and a third in Trian Mor, were destroyed by fire ;
from hence it appears, that the town was formerly divided
into four parts:—1. Rath Patrick, ze, the citadel. 2. Trian
Mor, ze. the greater third portion. 3. Trian Massain, ze.,

. 4 Trian Saxon, ze, the third portion of the
Saxons; here the English students resided.* ®

1113. Died Flannagan, the son of Moelisa, who, had he
lived, would have succeeded to the abbacy.”

1116. The abbey, with twenty other buildings, was this year
consumed by fire.*

1121. Two streets in Trian Massain, from the gate of Rathene
to the cross of St. Brigid, were burned ;* and in the month of
December, a great tempest blew down the roof of the
tower.

Tr. Th. ibid, “Id. “O'Flaherty ut supra. *Tr. Th, ibid. Id. p. 300. "Id.
“Id. Id.

™ The assertion made here by our author that the Irish clergy did not practise
celibacy is painfully out of place among his notices of so many saintly bishops and
priests who looked upon chastity as the brightest among the sacerdotal virtues in
which they strove to excel. This is not the place to refute at any length such an
assertion. For our present purpose it is enough to quote a few of the enactments
which were binding in this matter, in the ancient Irish church:—

a. ‘Si quis clericus vel superior gradus, qui uxorem habuit, et post honorem
iteram eam cognoverit, sciat se adulterium commississe.” (Canon in Missal of
Columbanus. )

4, “Si quis autem clericus, aut diaconus vel alicujus gradus, qui laicus fuit in
seculo cum filiis et filiabus, post conversionem suam iterum suam cognoverit
clientelam, et filium iterum de ea genuerit, sciat se adulterium perpetrasse, et non
minus peccasse quam si a juventute sua clericus fuisset et cum puella aliena pec-
casset, quia post votum suum peccavit, post quam se Domino consecravit, et
votum suum iritum fecit, idcirco septem annis in pane et aqua peniteat.” (St.
Columbanus, Liber, de Penitentiarum mensura taxanda.)

¢. “Si clericus aut monachus, post quam se Deo voverit, ad secularem habitum
iterum reversus fuerit, aut uxorem duxerit decem annis peniteat, tribus ex his in
pane et aqua, et nunquam postea in conjugio copuletur. Quod si noluerit, Sancta
Synodus, vel sedes apostolica seperavit eos a communione et convocationibus
Catholicorum.” S¢. Cummian, Penitentiale. See ‘Irish Ecclesiastical Record,”
vol. iv.: “ The Bishop of Argyle and the early Celtic Church,” pag. 473, seqq.

33 7rian means a third portion; but, like our ‘‘quarter” it came to signify ‘‘a
district,” without any reference to proportion. In the case of Armagh, however,
the numerical import of the word was observed, for there were only the 7rian
Mor, or ‘‘Great Ward;” Zrian Masain, or Masan’s Ward; and 7rian Saxan, or

“

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-059.png ---
The County Armagh. 4!

1126, The great church of St. Peter and St. Paul, rebuilt by
Imar Hua Hoedhagain, who was abbot in the year 1100, was
consecrated on the 21st of October; the abbot had a cell
near to the church, where he continued in fasting and prayer
day and night.¢

1132. The blessed Moelbrigid, the son of Dolghen, prin-
cipal presbyter, and the most celebrated elder of all Ireland,
died August the 27th, in the 52nd year of his priesthood, and
80th of his age.4

1133. Died Conang, the archidnach, he was the son of
Dubdal.®

1134. The abbot Imar having undertaken a pilgrimage to
Rome died there; he was succeeded by St. Gilda Macabeus,
or Mochaibeo.!

1136. ‘Died the blessed Moelisa Moelcolumb, a celebrated
antiquary and librarian of this abbey.£

1137. This town was destroyed by lightning.»

1138. The blessed Moelpatrick Hua Drugain, the wisest
doctor of the Irish, and first professor in this house, the most
learned man of all Western Europe, and equally remarkable
for his piety and religion, died on the 2nd of January, in his
pilgrimage, in the abbey of Monainsheigh, in the county of
Tipperary.!. The same year Christian O’Morgair,* bishop of
Clogher, was buried here under the great altar.*

1140. The lecturer O’Kotherny died.!

1142. Cathasach Hua Kirchaorach, professor of divinity,
and the most learned of the Irish, died.™

1149. Macratheus, the benign and venerable elder of the
clergy of Armagh, died this year."

1150. On the 24th of November, fire destroyed that part of
the town which is called Trian-mor, from the middle and
northern part.

1152. Died Fergal Hua Ferchubhuis, some time professor of
divinity in this abbey, and also lecturer in the church of St.
Columba, in Armagh.P

1155. Died Marian O’Moel-chierain, archidnach of Armagh,
a friendly and hospitable man to both the clergy and laity.4

°Tr. Th. ibid. p. 303. “Id. */d. ‘Id. S/d. p. 304. Id. p. 663. 1d. pp.
281,304. “War. Bishops. ‘Annal. Inisfal. ™Tr. Th. p. 305. "Id. p. 306.
°/d. PId. p. 308. 4d.

‘English Ward.” The Zrian Saxan was the region embraced by Upper En-
lish and Abbey streets, and from it English street probably derived its name.
he 7rian Masain seems to have included Market-street, and the adjacent parts

of Thomas and Scotch-streets. The Zrian Mor probably included Irish-street,

Callan-street, and the western region of the town. (Reeves’ Churches of Armagh.)

*Christian, or Gillacreest O’Morgair, was the brother of St. Malachy of

Armagh, and is extolled by St. Bernard, as a wise and holy man.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-060.png ---
42 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1156. Died Turlogh the great, monarch of Ireland; he
founded a new professorship of divinity in this abbey."

1159. Abel and Gilda Muredach, two anachorites of Armagh,
died this year.’

1162. In a synod held in Claonadh * it was decreed that no
person should be admitted professor of divinity in any church
in Ireland, who had not studied at this university."

1164. Part of the town was burnt.”

1166. The whole town, from the cross of St. Columb, on
both sides, to that of St. Owen, and from thence to the cross
at the gate of Rathene, was consumed by fire, the church
dedicated to the Saints Peter and Paul excepted.*

1167. Died Moel Michael O’Dothecain an excellent pres-
bytery

1169. Roderic O’Conchobhair, King of Conaught, to ad-
vance learning in this university, granted to the head master
of the school an additional pension annually of ten oxen,
and bound his successors to fulfill the said grant, on con-
dition that a public school should be there kept open for all
scholars from every part of Ireland and Scotland.”

1173. This town was plundered.*

1174. Florence O'Gorman, head moderator of this school,
and of all the schools in Ireland, a man well skilled in
divinity, and deeply learned in all the sciences, died on the
20th of March, in the 7oth year of his age; he had studied
for twenty-one years in France and England, and governed
the schools of Ireland for the course of twenty years.» On
the 31st of March died the abbot St. Giolla Mochadbeo, in
the 7oth year of his age; he was a faithful servant of Christ.¢
The same year the abbot Conchovar M‘Conchailleadh was
chosen archbishop.4®

1178. Sir John de Courcey plundered this town, and the

*0' Halloran, v. 2, p. 316. "Tr. Th. p. 309. ‘Now called Clane, in the county of
Kildare. “Annal. Inisfal. id. ibid. “Id. *Id. Vd. Ud. p. 110. *Annal. Lnisfal.
bAnnal. Lagenia, and Inisfal. Tr. Th. p. 110. *Annal Inisfal. Tr. Th. ibid.
Act SS. p. 200. 4Tr. Th. p. 210.

35 Primate Conchovar M‘Conchailleadh died at Semene, near Chamberry, on his
return from Rome. In 1854, his saintly successor, Primate Dixon, on his return
from Rome, whither he had gone to assist at the definition of the Immaculate Con-
ception, said Mass at the shrine S. Conchovar, in the Monastery of SS. Peter and
Paul, at Semene. He brought back to Armagh a considerable portion of the holy
confessor’s remains. The hymn sung in praise of S. Conchovar, or, as he is
called, S. Cornelius, begins as follows:—

Ave Pater gloriose,
Salve Preesul pretiose
Quondam Pater Irlandiae
Nunc decus Sabaudiae.
(See Dr. Dixon’s Journey to Rome, &c., 1855.)

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-061.png ---
The County Armagh, 43

archdeacon of the abbey, Thomas O'Corcoran, was barbar-
ously murdered.°

1179. The whole town, with the churches and chapels, and
the reliques of St. Brigid, were consumed by an accidental
fire! Notwithstanding this severe visitation, William Fitz
Adelm did plunder the abbey of St. Patrick’s crosier, and
carried it to Dublin.#

1184. Philip of Worcester, procurator, or chief governor of
the kingdom, with a great army, did ravage this town during
the continued space of six days.»

1188. Died Martin O’Brolaigh, or O’Brolachan, the pro-
fessor of divinity ; he was esteemed to be the most learned
Irishman of his time.!

1189. John de Courcey plundered the town; the same
year it was consumed by fire from cross Brigid to her chapel.*

1195. This abbey, with all the churches, and great part of
the Rath, was destroyed by fire.!

1199. De Courcey again plundered the town, and set on
fire every church and house therein.™

1203. Died the abbot Moelisa O’Dorigh of Tirconnell.®

1206. Hugh de Lacie, the younger, for ten days and nights
plundered the town and abbey, for which he soon felt the
vengeance of the Saints of Ireland.?

1208. On the vigil of St. Brigid, the town was again plun-
dered by de Lacie.P

1373. The King, Edward III., granted to James Bellen a
carrucate of land, with the appurtenances, in the Curragh,
near Dundalk, part of the possessions of this abbey then
seized in the King’s hands, the said abbot and convent being
mere Irish, and spending their rents and profits for the sup-
port and entertainment of the Irish; the said Bellen to hold
the same during life, if they continued so long in the King’s
hands.9

1375. Nicholas was abbot, when an inquisition was taken
concerning the said seizure, and the jury finding that the
abbot and convent were good and faithful subjects, the lands
were restored."

1397. Died the abbot Nicholas O’Luchecan.*

1539. Patrick O’Hagan was abbot. By an_ inquisition
taken this year, the abbot was found to be seized of the site
of the abbey ; twelve gardens within the town ; the third-part
of the townland of Dromcote ; the sixth-part of the townland

eAnnal. Inisfal. ‘Id. ibid. Annal. Inisfal. *Annal. Inisfal. »War. Annals.
‘Tr, Th. p. 310. ¥Annal, Inisfal. Wd. 1d. “Tr. Th. p. 501. °Annal. Inisfal.
M‘Geg. PAnnal. Inisfal. “Harris Collect. v. 3. "Harris Collect. v. 3. *War
Ass, vol. 34.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-062.png ---
44 Ancient Monasteries of [reland.

of Tyrnarnunagell ; the fourth-part of the townland of Tul-
laghloyst ; the fourth-part of the townland of Enaghboy ; the
third-part of the townland of Aghanoyce ; the third-part of
the townland of Tullaghelmayne ; and the sixth part of the
townland of Downalloghe; all near the town of Armagh ; and
a parcel of land called Knock Ederyn, lying near to the abbey;
these were the mensal lands belonging thereto. He was seized
also of the townlands of Ballyleanmore, Clawdoughe, Kille-
meky, Ballyleanbegge, Dromvolly, the third part of Ancagh,
in the parish of Clonkarney ; Ballyneydarragh, Drountee,
Lourgowergh, Ballyvically, Downlyr, Cavanaghan, Prosna-
whyghe, in the parish of Clonkoughrose ; Crecanmore, Fallee,
Correcleigh, Aghagoran, Tassaagh, Tearrarlee, Crewroe, in the
parish of Tueaghy, all in the same county.

The lands of Cloghan, Corraghe, Cloghum, Tullough
O’Sarran, Aughan O'’Cloyghy, Crcssereen, Moulegournagh,
near Armagh, towards Clonall ; and all the tithes of the said
lands, and of ten shillings Irish money, annually at the feast
of All Saints, out of each of the townlands above mentioned ;
and the abbot and his convent, with all their servants and
officers, had yearly on the feast of St. Philip and St. James,
an entertainment provided them out of all the aforesaid lands.
The abbot was also seized of a grange, containing the two
townlands of Corheenan, in the parish of Tynan, and the
townland of Clonarb, in the said parish ; and the advowson of
the church, and a townland belonging thereto, called Mauger-
grene, in the parish of Clankan, and the annual rent of twenty-
one shillings and fourpence out of Daughleernhan, in the said
parish, on the feast of All Saints.t

James O’Donelly was the last prior, for an inquisition taken
the first of November, in the first year of Queen Elizabeth,
1557, finds that he had surrendered the abbey, being then
seized of the site thereof, whereon there was a large church,
some stone chambers, a dormitory, with cellars beneath it, an
hall, a storehouse, a great court, a cemetery, garden and
orchard. A parcel of land called Garry, Templemurry, and
Garrynenamus; a parcel containing acres in Knockadrain,
Dromcoote, Lurgaboyourah, Aghamoote, the grange of the
townland of Lurgaboy in Clanconnaghy, townland of Drom-
nemuickee, Tallynemalloroogh, Mullinesillagh, grange of
Bally M‘Cally in Clanconnoghy, Broaghucclogh. Leatery,
Inclonconnoghy, Lurgalachtnemingle, Tullaghbofin, grange of
Sessiaghneogrechanphy, Carnevanaghran, townland of Riesky-
roddeh, Foallee, Fullynory, Tyranegargill, Aghanore, Knock-

"King, p. 233.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-063.png ---
The County Armagh. 45

enbog, Lurgaboylighragh, Seskinultagh, Agheter Toyl, alias
Knock Toyl, Cornegillagh, Broaghcullen, Dromenecheghy,
townland of Shancaragh, Lismore, Dromentee, Cavenaghgroah,
Tulloghboreagh, Drumlirk in Mullatmesilligh, Carnasinagher,
Knockeddershrogh de Foalle cum Knocknegressegh, Tullagh-
losky, Tullyclinane, Aghagonnell, Knockatreely, Carrigenare,
Aghavallagh, Coolaghill and the grange, alias Aghacarragh;
grange of Tobbersuawght, Doonlish, alias Portsuisin, Mullagh-
dromerbeh ; grange of Odenegreanan, Rieskenefedoge, An-
naghboy, Dunollogh, Tyregarve, Lurgaboy, Knockanroe,
Knocknespedoge, Ballymaccally, Knockancrimmar, Dromen-
echeir, Cloonrecleigh, Ballendarragh, Lisreagh, Dromentee,
Annaghnullogs, Cavenaghroah, Clanconnoghy, Donebanevan,
Carnvannaghan, Taghabugg, Tullytrassenmore, Tullytrassen-
beg, Lisnegree ; grange of Aghnecloigh, Corcarnan, Natingon-
tagheighteragh, Nortingortinowtragh, Ballyloyanbeg. Lissech-
ackagh in Clancarny, Armagh, Knochsheely, Aghnecloigh,
Toorenebabbouny, Damwolly, Carneshikan, Lisnenarme, Mul-
laghfalskagmore, Tullanecask, Moyneforfoge, Leggegaranroe,
Grange in Clancarny, Cloonequoigger, Lismore, Aghteebrian-
roe, Cavannecranny, Kilmacrhugh, Carrigduffe. Grange of
Annagh, Barebane, Cavanehanlone, Teadanarde, Knocne-
carnan, Lanedarge, Leggegarnaroe, Clonekah, Lisbane.

Part of Mullodromart, Knochnemurrane, Contrasnagh,
Mullahnefermore, Mullatnirmore ; grange of Knocknegarvan-
boy, Cravanecreuroeeyhtrah, Mullarlogko, Cavanecruroe-
ontrah, Odenmore; grange of Kilmachugh, Lanebeg, Aghis-
terkynbeg, Breaghfunshogy ; grange of Crewroe, Tassahowtragh,
Annagh, Clonskaulane, Aghnegloghfyn, Cargaghontragh ;
grange of Lurgushanhill, Lurgakeile, Knocktamogh, Knock-
braddogh, Tassaghevihrah, Crosseduffe, Mullaghfintullagh,
Leghahowig, Carricknebreek, Drummorne, Ballintassa, and
grange of Ball, in Toughaggy, Mullaghaghmegoorane, Alter-
cormock, Knockanenyn, Gortreih, Knocktomoggy, Lisneke-
noyll, Clonecally, Knocknerane, Ballyloganmore, Lugnelolliah,
Aghinegooran, Ballyloganbeg, Tawenlentragh, Knockinerogie,
Toorecladdagh, Cabanekeragh, Lisdooreghy, alias Slutoorclag-
han, Lobbendemphy, Tully Ivinbeg, Tooreneurghygh,
Knockecraudy, Crosscreene; grange of Knockonummer,
Knockandally, Anaghagh, Sessioghmore ; grange of Aghne-
cloigh, Stroighnebrack, Knocketeemore, Clonebar, Altiloyfin,
Tannagh, Grangeballaghmarramacquoid, Cladagh, Cabane-
kaulone, Legagaranroe, Tuwysueban, Lissneu, Killspurtane,
Deryederlawole, Ballyboyan, Litterlonn, Clancarny, Derido-
rogh, Cronoghill, Cowtragh, Geengeaghbeg; grange of Mag-
haragreenan, Fallin, Knockacapple, Cortinman; grange of

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-064.png ---
46 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Cloghnancorragh, Grangeaghmore; grange of Corturobe,
Kilmachugh, Mullaghtuirbeg; grange of Cloghan, Knocka-
carney, Tyrarly, Taghaboy, Cloghancorragh; grange of
Tyrarly, Dromawell, Cloghcorragh, Aghteeconchor, Dromcogh,
Dromdoiffe, Mullaghnecrewrocderge; grange of Aghinegoo-
ran, Lurgeshankill, Merimichael, Luggemonyn, Knocknegap-
pull, Lisbarran; grange of Tullyfaran, Grangeoghmore and
Grange, Knockmeevy, Drumnckunshen, Altooglass, Dromagh-
emeclee, Coolonan, Lissedawell, Tullybronyduffe; grange of
Croscreen, Tully Ivinmar, Greanmore and Grange, Tannagh-
nemingell, Knockelough, Knockelough, Knockneinlough,
Tannaghgarve, Boleregh, Corcleagh and the Grange, Litter-
loane, Knockneglibeg, Amisnegananagh, Drumnott, Teve-
doone, Conjeitragh, Kilnagospagh, Leaghteedawly, Cavan,
Amnineganagh in the Fews, Monemore, Garvaghymore, Alte-
neynan, Cavangroagh.

The abbot was also seized of all the tithes growing and
accruing from the said lands, and Sessiogh, Lurgaboy, Bally-
vanran, and Knoetanty in Clanchoncy. He was also seized
of the lands of Dromarge, alias Dooghmuinterdogan, Cool-
cummery, Jengooda, Tinenesken, Balliboe, Cavan, Tullyasnech,
Tiretragh, Tirenesagart, and Down."

By an inquisition taken the first year of King James, 1603,
it appears that the abbot was also scized of a third part of a
quarter of land near Newton, in the county of Tyrone,
called the Grange, containing a ploughland of the yearly value
of one shilling; that he was also seized of a carrucate of land
at the Curragh, by the rent of twelve pence yearly, payable to
the heirs of Theobald de Verdon, to wit, to Thomas Furneval,
who married Joan, the daughter of the said Theobald.”

This abbey, and all the possessions thereunto belonging,
were granted, in May, 1612, to Sir Toby Caulfield, Knight, at
the rent of five pounds Irish.*

Priory of the Culdei.® The Culdei, or Colidei, were secular

"King, p. 252. “1d. p. 333. *Lodye, vol. 3. p. 86. 1.

The word Culdaeus, whence the English Cu/dee, was first used by Hector
Boece, as an equivalent for the Irish word Célé-De, which is composed of Célé—
friend, servant—and De, the genitive of Dia, God. It represents the Latin expres-
sion servus Dei, which was in general use to designate a person who followed the
monastic life. According to Dr. Reeves it was not a distinctive name borne
uniformly by any one order, but was a term of various application borne both by
tegulars and by seculars. There were establishments of Culdces at Clonmacnoise,
Clondalkin, Monahincha, Devenish, Clones, Pubble, and Scattery. The Culdees

assed from Ireland into Scotland, then into York, and to the Isle of Bardsey in
Wales. At Armagh they served in the cathedral at the choir and_altar, until the
introduction of the canons regular in 1126 diminished their influence and import-
ance. It was at that date that their prior became precentor in the cathedral. He

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-065.png ---
The County Antrim. 47

priests, and served in the choir of the cathedral of Armagh;
their president was called the prior of the college of the Culdei,
and was as a precentor to the said church; upon a vacancy a
prior was elected by the whole college of the Culdei, but he
received his confirmation from the archbishop»

A.D. 779. Died Kernach, called the prior of Armagh; he
seems to have been brother to St. Feardachrich, the abbot of
the monastery of St. Peter and St. Paul, who died in the year
768.2

863. Died the prior Kethernach, the son of Farnech.*

gig. On the 1oth of November, Godfred Hua Himhair,
King of the Danes of Dublin, plundered this town, but he
spared the college of the Colidei.”

982. Died the prior Muredach, he was the son of
Muregan.°

1oo1. Died the prior Trener.4

1052. Died the prior Gilda Patrick, he was the son of
Domnald.*

1063. Died the prior Madagan Hua Kelechain!

1089. Died the prior Gilda Patrich Hua Kelechain.&

By an inquisition taken in the 33rd year of King Henry
VIIL., it appears that this house was called the priory of the
Colidei of Armagh, and that the religious therein were incor-
porated by the name of the prior and Colidei of Armagh ;
that the prior was then seized of seven ballyboes or townlands
in the county, viz., Cannadisse, Lisleagh, Fnnogsegurt, Agha-
villic, Lisvonnowe, Killenure, and Maghocarrell.

ACRES, ACRES. | ACRES.

Fennenoaghan ... 5/|Lissegall ... | Brughnesegart ...

Rosmore ooo} Molloghdromgallon .. 20' lying in the townland of

Mulloghchonghan 20] lying in Ballone- Mullaghmore

honarmore Brodonaghan ... 20
lying in Ballynchone._
beg
ACRES. In ARMAGH.
Aghtern, alias Clarragh «4 house in possession of James Berkeley.

in the townland of Farene-

Lannigley, alias Giltneglogh, lying
4 ” ” Robert Jordan.
koogan

7 War. Works, vol. ii. p. 265. *Tr. Th. p. 294. O'Flaherty sup. *Tr. Th. p. 295.
Yd, “Id. “fd. p.297. °Tr. Th. p. 299. tld. "ld. p. 299.

was generally beneficed, and there exists in primate Mey’s register an account of a
decision of the year 1448, to the effect that the priory of the Colidei, being a simple
office, and without cure, was not incompatible with a benefice.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-066.png ---
48 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

ACRES, In ARMAGH.

Lissaghkerrell. near Monaskellig 3 house in possession of Donald Savage.
Lackmullack oo +. 4 A messuage ,, Pat. Oge O’Heyre-.
Golworth, near Cavanakagh ... 60 es aD Elis Crawley.
Tawmaghiillen, lying in Mullagh- A shop adjacent ,,  Thady Crawley.

nocrovagh oe
In le Bend, in Ballyhurclain «. 20 A stable a Same.
Rectory of Mullaghbrack eo A messuage ,, Robert Moore.
Rectory and vicarage of 24 town-

lands of the church of Te oaghy, Messuage__,, B. M‘Rory.

alias Derenoose mo
Rectory of Tynan oo as a Manus M ‘Garrey.
Rectory af, Soumericany, alias » ” Cael O’Monaghan.
Vicarage of Leballyeglisse oD Acowhouse,&c. ,, | Thady Crawley.
ett a towne us thet A tenement, &c. ,, | H. Oge M‘Codden
Recor of Clonfeacle, in said A messuage ,, John Davis.
Rectory of Spoctane, i in county of A messuage with a D. M‘Crawle

Armagh ... curtilage y
All the tithes in the seven town-

lands of Kilnefegart, alias 6p ” John Rudworth.

Fieghth ... “ss ;
Rectory of Tomachbryn oD ” ” Percy Williams.

Three messuages near the Franciscan
friary.

Within the precincts of the priory, an hall, unum magnum,
atrium, Anglicé, a great backside, and a messuage built
therein, and another backside and messuage.®

By another inquisition, taken March 24th, 1625, it appears
that the prior, with his brethren, had totally forsaken the
priory, and were all dead about twenty-five years before the
holding of this inquisition; that Sir Toby Caulfield, Lord
Charlemount, had, about the year 1620 received, as seneschal
to Henry, then archbishop of Armagh, the rents of the said
Ballyboes, and that John Symons, clerk, had, from the feast
of All Saints, 1623, to the day of the taking of this inquisition,
received the profits of the said ballyboes, and of the tenements
in the town of Armagh ; that the rent of the seven townlands
was £46, and that Symons had expended part thereof in
erecting some stalls in the choir of the cathedral.'*

*King, p. 133. ‘King, p. 134-

37In 1619, August Ist, there was a royal letter to grant these lands for a choir
at Armagh. On 7th April, 1627, King Charles granted a charter founding the
college of King Charles in the cathedral church of Armagh; and this body of vicars
choral adopted the old name and called themselves Collideans. In 1634, a new
charter was granted to remedy some defccts in the former one; wand, in 1722,
George I. issued a supplemental charter in their favour. The vicar’s holdings in
the city of Armagh represent the original site of the old Culdee priory. They are
near the cathedral ground on the south-east.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-069.png ---
The County Armagh. 49

Temple Brigid® is said to have been founded in this town by
St. Patrick.

Temple Fartagh, or the church of the Miracles, was founded
without the town by the same saint, for St. Lupita, his eldest
sister, who was buried here;!' and in the beginning of the last
century, her body was found buried deeply under the rubbish
of her ancient nunnery, in a standing posture; two crosses
were also discovered closely guarding the body before and be-

ind.™

January 9, 1618, King James granted the monasteries of
pemple Fartagh, and Temple Breed, to Francis Annesley,

sq.”

Dominican Friary. Porter, in his annals tells us, that
there was one at Armagh; which is more than probable, other-
wise the primate Scanlain, who was of that order, would not
have made his foundation for the friars minor.°

“War. Mon, ‘Usher. Tr. Th. p. 19. War. Mon. ™Vard. p. 184. "Lodge,
vol. si. p. 274. Burke, p. 339.

®® This little abbey church of St. Brigid is a very ancient foundation. It stood
outside the rath, and quite close to the site of the present Catholic church. The
“* Annals of Ulster” and the ‘‘ Four Masters,” at 1085, record the death of Gormgael
Loighseagh, coarb of the Regles Brighde at Armagh. In 1179 the “Annals”
record a wide-spread conflagration which spared the church of St. Brigid, though
it consumed the greater part of the city. In 1189, Armagh was bumed from St.
Brigid’s cross to the Regles Brighde. At the time of the dissolution of religious
houses St. Brigid’s was a nunnery, and in inquisitions and patents it is always
coupled with Temple-Fertagh. An inquisition of 1612 finds that it was a nunnery,
and that after the dissolution it was occupied by a certain singer who resided in
said monastery, place, or house called Zemplebreed. (UI. Inq. Armagh, No.3, Jac. 1.)
In 1616, it was granted to Francis Edgeworth, assignee of John Eyres. In 1619,
it was passed by patent to Sir Francis Annesley, in whose family, as Earls of
Anglesey, it was transmitted, till in 1799 the assignment of a lease was converted
into a fee by Leonard Dobbin.
°° Na Ferta, or the graves, was the first spot granted by Daire to St. Patrick on
his arrival in Armagh, and was the site of the first church there erected by the
saint. The word Feria of itself signifies sepudchres or miracles; but that it has
the former meaning here is plain from a passage in the ‘‘ Book of Armagh.”
focelin renders this name Festum Miraculorum, which interpretation, adopted
yy Ussher and Colgan, has passed into our author’s text. The designation
Ferta Martyrum is derived from the relics of the holy martyrs placed there by
St. Patrick. At 1078 the ‘* Annals of Innisfallen ” record the death of “ Dubtach
Na Sochaind, sage priest of Na Ferta, at Armagh.” On September 25, 1430,
Primate Swayne wrote from Termonfechin to David M‘Gillade, Prior of the
Culdees of Armagh, directing him to procure redress for the Abbess of Na Ferta,
whose rights had been invaded by certain persons, At the dissolution of religious
houses the possessions of this convent passed, with so much other ecclesiastical
roperty, to the Annesley family, and in the last century, by purchase, into other
Pans The place where this nunnery stood is now traversed by Dobbin-street.
“In Dr. Reeves’ opinion there is not a shadow of authority for the existence of
a Dominican friary at A: h. ‘* The Four Masters,” he observes (Op. Cit. p. 32.)
“* At the year 1264, relate that the archbishop of Armagh, Maelpatrick O’Scannail,
brought the friars minors to Armagh; and, according to tradition, it was
MacDonnell Galloglegh that commenced the erection of the monastery. Here pro-
z

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-070.png ---
50 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Franciscan Friary™ The friars of the order of St. Francis
were brought into this town A.D. 1261,P and Patrick Scanlain,
who was then primate, built a house for them two years after ;4
though Wadding, the Franciscan, as quoted by Allemande,
assures us, that it was founded in the year 1291, by O'Donnell."

Michael, the divinity lecturer, was elected archbishop in

1303.*

A.D. 1353. Gormlagh, the daughter of J. O’Donnell, and
formerly wife of Donald O'Neil, prince of Ulster, dying on
the 14th of April, was buried in this monastery.*

The Franciscans of the strict observance began to reform
this friary in 1518," but it was not then perfected. In 1580,
Walter M‘Cuard was guardian,” and in 1583, Solomon M‘Conny
was guardian, in whose time the reformation was completed.*

Clonfeakle. St. Lugud, or Lugaid,“ the son of Tailchan,

PAnn. Ulton. War. Mss. vol. 34. *Allemande. *War, Bishops, p. 71. ‘King,
2p. 309. “War. Mss. vol. xxxiv. “King, p. 309. *ld.

bably lies the secret of this preference. This MacDonnell was chief of O’Neill’s
gallowglasses, and the building of the house being his work, it is likely that his
choice, or the will of O’Neill, whose family was always attached to the Franciscans,
turned the scale in their favour.”

“ At 1266, the “ Annalists” record “ Maelpatrick O’Scannail, primate of Armagh,
brought the friars minor to Armagh, and afterwards cut a broad and deep trench
around the church.” In 1357, thé guardian of this house appealed to the Pope at
Avignon against the acts of the primate, Richard Fitz-Ralph. In 1442, Nimeas
O'Lochlen received from the primate permission to preach indulgences throughout
Ireland. In 1450, primate Mey sojourned in this house. In 1455, the diocese
was laid under an interdict, but a relaxation was granted by the primate, in
favour of McCrener, the guardian. In 1518, the convent was obtained for the
Franciscans of the strict observance. In 1565, the convent was destroyed, and the
friars retired to places of security. ‘They were discovered by one Donald, and the
consequence was that friars Roger M‘Congail, Conatius Macuarta, and Fergal
Bardeus, were stripped and flogged through the principal streets.

On the 3rd July, 1620, the pseudo-primate, Hampton, received a patent in which
the site and precinct of the Franciscan monastery was granted to the see. The
ruins of the building may yet be traced within the demesne.

The author makes no mention of the church dedicated to St. Columba, which
stood in Armagh. Dr. Reeves gives the following particulars connected with it.
The “ Annals of Ulster,” at 1010, state that ‘‘ Donadhach, of the church of Colum.
cille, in Armagh, fell asleep in Christ.” The “ Four Masters,” at 1152, record the
death of ‘‘Ferghall Ha Fercubhais, lecturer of Armagh for a time, and of the
regles (or abbey church) of Columkille, in Armagh, for a time. In 1614, temple
Columkilly is mentioned as in the street called Bore-netrian-Sassenach, and a
northern limit of the premises of St. Peter and St. Paul's abbey. In Bogue’s map
of 1760, the site of St. Columba’s church is laid down as due north of the meeting-
house, at the opposite side of A bbey-street.

“ The St. Lugaid referred to in the text is mentioned in “ Adamnan's Life of St.
Columba,” as residing, at the time of that saint's death, in the monastery of Cluain-
finchoil, “‘ meadow of the white-hazel.” Colgan identified this place with Cluain-
fiacul, Clonfeakle. But Clonfeakle is called in the “ A ” Cluain-fiachna.
meadow or plain of St. Fiachna. Jocelin calls this church C/uain-facail in his
“Life of St. Patrick;” but in the taxation of 1306, and in the registries of the
archbishops Sweteman, Swayne, Mey, Octavianan, and Dowdall it is called by
various forms of the name Cluain-Fiachna. The ‘‘ Annals of the Four Masters,

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-071.png ---
The County Armagh. St

was abbot of Cluainefiacul, that is, the church of the Tooth,
so named from a tooth of St. Patrick which was said to have
been preserved here. St. Lugud was a very aged man in the
year 5809

Clonfeakle is now a parish church, about five miles from
Armagh.”

Kilmore. St. Mochtee, who afterwards built Louth, founded
Kilmoreaedhain, in the territory of Huadmeth ; the church is
dedicated to St. Aedan.*

Kilmore is now a parish church, three miles east of Ar-
magh.>

Kilslere. \Wadding, the Franciscan, calls this Killare, and
says it was the principal monastery belonging to the third
order of Franciscans in Ireland. Thomas Ornay, was made
perpetual commissary of it in the year 1457.°

Killevy. At the foot of the mountain of Slieu Gullen,® in
the barony of Orior.

St. Darerca,“ otherwise called Monenna, sister to St. Patrick,
was abbess of Kilsleve, or Belsleibhe; she died A.D. 517, or
518, and her ‘feast is held on the 6th of July. Others say,

17r. Th. p.8. Act. SS. p. 453. Usher, p. 496. *Liber visit. * Act. SS. p.
731. Lid. visit. © Allemande. * Usher, p. 526, Act. SS. p. 190, 606, 718.

at 1003, record the death of “ Eochaidh da Flannagain, airchinneach of the Lis-
aeidheadh of Ardmacha, and of Cluan-Fiachna, the most distinguished historian of
the Irish.” And at 1069, the death of Aedh, son of Dubhghall, vice-abbot of
Cluan-Fiachna. It is also mentioned at 1252. The ancient parish church stood
in the townland of Tullydowey, in a curve of the river Blackwater, on the
Tyrone side.

This mountain took its name from Cuilean, an artificer, who lived in the
reign of Conchobbar Mac Nessa, King of Ulster, and by whom the celebrated
Cuchellain was fostered.

4 Colgan, in his ‘‘ Life of St. Darerca” (22nd March), remarks tbat Ussher (De
Primordiis Ecclesiar. Britannar, p. 705-6), confounds the St. Darerca who was St.
Patrick's sister, with St. Darerca, otherwise St. Moninna, abbess of Kilsleve. The
former is honoured on the 22nd March, the latter on the 6th of July. St. Mon
inna, according to the ancient Life, written by Conchubhranus, and used by
Ussher, founded seven churches in Scotland: one called Chilnecase,in Galloway ;
another on the summit of the mountain of Dundenenal, in Landonia ; the third on
the mountains of Dunbreten; the fourth at the Castle of Strivelin ; the fifth at
Dun-Eden, now Edinburgh ; the sixth on the mountain of Dun-Pelder ; and the
seventh at Lanfortin, near Dundee, where she died. The ruins of the church at
Killevy are still visible. The ‘Four Masters” have the following entries regard-
ing this establishment : In A.D. 654 “ Coincenn, of Cill-Sleibhthe, died.” A.D.
921, *Dinbhleter, of Cill-Sleibhthe, priest of Ard-Macha was martyred by the
foreigners of Snamh-Aighneach” (now Carlingford Lough). “A.D. 1029, Donn-
Chadh Na Donnegain, Lord of Feammhagh ; and Cinaedh, son of Angeirrce, Lord
of Cenailli, mutually fell by each other at Cill-Sleibhe.” ‘‘ A.D. 1146, a great
wind-storm occurred on the 3rd day of December, which caused a great destruction
of woods throughout Ireland ; it prostrated sixty trees at Doire-Choluim-Chille, and
killed and smothered many persons in the Church : it also killed other people at
Cill-Sleibhe.” ‘‘ A.D. 1150, Cailleach. of Cill-Sleibhe, a pious good senior died,
after good penance, at an advanced age.”

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-072.png ---
52 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

that this nunnery was built by St. Monenna about the year
630, after she had quitted Faugher, in the county of Louth.*

St. Conchenna, sister to St. Lugad of Clonfeacle, was abbess
of this nunnery ; she died A.D. 654.!

Kilsleve is now a parish church in the diocess of Armagh.®

Inquisition 4th November, 3rd King James, finds, that
Alicia Nigen M‘Donchey O’Hanlon was the last prioress, and
roth March, 34th King Henry VIII. she was seized of the
townlands and the tithes of Agheyelloge, alias Aghyloge,
Ballytolloche, Clonynlym, alias Clonelome, Ballylurgakeill,
Aghetidy and Aghedemoyll, alias Aghadavell ; also of the
tithes of the twelve townlands of Camlogh (Dromeherime and
Tollyvonney only excepted) ; also of the four townlands of
the Moyry, the four townlands of Faddum,; also the six
townlands of Cohill; the seven townlands of Killin; and the
townlands or places known by the name of Ballinageragh,
Ballinlat, Ballynedowlargoegh, Carrickbraddagh, Dromenty,
Teucrome, Carricksticken, Clogh O’Cominslawnohill, Corre-
gillereen, Moyfanner, Mauclawne, Latebrigett, Aghadonoman,
Ballekeill, Charchill, Leballimore, Corickegallyogh, the two
Sturgans, Lisliagh, Aghnuckshane, and Carigedilane. All
the said lands were in this county, and of the annual value
besides reprises, of 40s. Irish money.

Stradhailloyse. \Nadding says, that it is in the diocess of
Armagh, and that a monastery for conventual franciscans was
founded there, A.D., 1282, and that a provincial chapter of the
order was held therein in the year 1315.!

Tahellen® In Hy-meith-tire* St. Patrick founded Tegtalain,
and madeSt. Killian bishop of it;! his feast is held on May 27th."

This church was burnt A.D. 670."

“Usher. * Act. SS. p. 606, “Visitation Book. ‘Wading, quoted by Allemande.
* Now the barony of Orior, ' Tr. Th. p. 184. ™ Act. SS. p. 331. ® Tr. Th. 633.

* Teg-Talain, or Tigh-Talain, i.e. domus Talani, derives its name from S. Tel-
Janus, son of Tegan, son of Colgan, chief of that region, or from S, Tolanus, son of
Donnchadh. e

““Martyrology of Donegal” mentions, under the 27th May,
“ Cillin, Bishop of Tigh-Talain in Oirghialla,”

COUNTY OF CARLOW.

1 From the period of the Norman invasion to the days of Henry the Eighth, Car-
low was, in a military point of view, perhaps, the most important county in Ireland.
Through its rich valleys lay the main road which connected the English settlements
in Munster with the seat of the Government.in Dublin. The bridge at Leighlin,
in the centre of the county, was the only passage across the river Barrow, enabling
the Norman colony around the capital to communicate with the counties of Kil-

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-087.png ---
County of Cavan. 67

yearly rent of three-pence ; a reversion of the same, together
with the hospitals of Dromlomman and Mounterconaght, with
other lands, was granted to him for 60 years, from the 23rd
of April, 1605.°

Cavan' is a market town and borough, sending members to
parliament, and gives name to the barony and county.

Monastery of the Virgin Mary ; was founded in the year
1300, by Giolla-Jiosa-Ruadh, (z.¢. the servant of Christ) O’Reilly,
dynast of Breffiny,? for friars of the order of St. Dominick ;4 but
the same sept of the O’Reillys, about the year 1393, expelled
the Dominicans, and gave the house to the conventual Fran-
ciscans.’ 1468, This monastery, together with Bally-Reilly,
O’Reilly’s mansion seat, was burnt by the English under the
Lord Dep. John Tiptoft, Earl of Worcester.* The friars of
the strict observance had reformed this monastery before the
year 1499; and provincial chapters of the order were held
here in the years 1521, 1539, and 1556.'

John, son of Cahal O’Reilly, reformed this friary in 1502.

Owen O'Neile, the famous general of the Irish army, dying
by poison, as some suppose, at Cloughoughter in this county,
November the 16th, 1649, was buried in this abbey ;¥ of which
there are not now the least remains.

Domnachmore ;? The festival of St. Ere of Domnachmore,
in Maglughat,* is celebrated on the 27th of October.** This
place is totally unknown.

Lodge, vol. 1., p.316. PThe ancient name of the County of Cavan. War. mon.
War. MSS., vol. 34. Harris tabl. "Burke, p. 281. ™Annal. Four Masters.
*War. MSS. vol. 34. Ud. “Annal Four Masters. “Carte, vol. 2., p. 83. *A ter.
ritory in this county. **Vard, p. 159.

1 The town of Cavan is situated in the ancient parish of Urney,and from a period
of remote antiquity was the seat of the O'Reillys. The name Urney points to
some great sanctuary which was frequented here, and the Franciscan Convent
which was known by the name A‘a-due, probably occupied the site of the ancient
sanctuary. It is from this town that the county Cavan derives its name. In an-
cient times, as appears from Ptolemy, this district was occupied by the Erdini,
in Irish, Zrnaighe ; and the river Erne, as also the lake £rze still retains the
memory of this early people. The present county of Cavan was subsequentl
known as East or Upper Breffny, and sometimes, too. from the name of its chief-
tains, was called Breffny-O’Reilly. In Latin it was generally styled Zriburna,
i.e. **Tir Briuin”, the land of the descendants of Bryan, King of Connaught.
It holds a prominent place in the various wars of Ireland, and on account of its
many natural fastnesses was one of the last districts of Ireland to lose the inde-
pendence of its native possessors. At the time of the suppression of the reli-
gious houses, eight abbeys and priories were returned from this county. Scarcely
a trace of their ruins can now be seen, and in some instances it is only conjecture
that points to their former sites.

2 Domnachmore—In the martyrology of Donegal, on the 27th of October, we
find the entry: ‘‘ Earc, Bishop of Domhnach—Mor Maighe-Luadhat, in the
north of Ui-Faelain. This may be Earc, bishop, son of Fergna, son of Folachta,
who is of the race of Braesal Breac, from whom the O’Traighi are descended.”
In the Martyrology of St. Aengus he is called ‘* Ere of Domhnach-mor Maincch,”
and the gloss adds: “4, ¢, in Magh Luadhat in the north of Uibh Faelan,”

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-088.png ---
68 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Dromlomman.—There was an hospital here, of which King
James made a lease to Sir Edward Moore, at the rent of
2s.6a@% See Ballylynch.

Drumlane, or Drumlahan} in the barony of Belturbet.
There was here a celebrated monastery, which was dedicated
to the Virgin Mary. It was founded before the year 550, in
which year St. Maidoc was born ;* to whom some have erro-
neously given this foundation.

Dubensius Hua Forchelluigh was abbot here, and died in
the year 1025.*

In the 13th of Queen Elizabeth, this monastery was granted
to Hugh O'Reilly of the Brenie, and head of his sept, for the
term of 21 years, at the rent of £8 145. 8d. Irish ; by an inqui-
sition taken in the 27th year of that Queen, Hugh appeared
to be in arrear eleven years and an half.¢

YLodge, vol. 1.5 p. 316. "Act, SS. p. 216, 222, 223. “id. ~. 216. °King, p. 203.

3 Drumlane gives name toa parish in the north of the county of Cavan, for-
merly the head of a rural deanery and still remarkable for the ruins of its an-
cient church and round tower. St. Aidan, é. ¢: Moedoc of Ferns, is its patron,
but his life speaks of the monastery of Drumlane as existing there before his
birth (Colgan, Acta SS., p. 208). e O’Farrellys were the heredi Comharbs
or successors of St. Mogue in this monastery and Evenachs of Drumlane till the
suppression of religious houses in Henry the Eighth’s reign. The following
entries from our annals give all that is known regarding this monastery :

In 1025 Duibhinsi Faircheallaigh, Abbot of Drumlane, died, and another mem-
ber of the same family; Conaing O’Fearch ‘igh Airchinneach of Drumlane, and
Comharb of St. Maedoc, died in 1059.

In the year of Christ 1261, a great depredation was committed by Hugh O’Conor
in Breffny, and he advanced to Drui: where a part of his army was defeated
and many were slain.

In 1314 the O’Reilly’s were defeated at Drumlahan by Rory, the son of Cathal
O'Conor.

Int 343 yom MacDuibhne, Archdeacon of Drumlahan died.

In 13} ‘urray O’Farrelly, Comharé of St. Maedoc and Archdeacon of Breffny,
died after a victory over the world and the Devil.

In 1391 Tiernan O’Rorke, with a small body of troops, repaired to Drumlahan
to meet O'Reilly, and gained avictory there at Belagh-na-Chrionaigh, 3. e. ‘‘the road
of the withered trees.”

In 1407 John, the son of Teige O’Rorke, heir to the lordship of Breffny, died in
Moyling and was interred in Drumlane.

In 1418 Richard, the son of ThomasO’Reilly, Lord of East Breffny, was drowned
in Lough Sheelin, and with him were also drowned his son, Owen Reilly and Philip
Mac Gilla-Isa, Deacon of Drumlane and Vicar of Eanachgarbh, and many other
distinguished persons.

In 1484 John O’Farrelly, a canon of the family (%. ¢. monastery) of Drumlane,
and Bryan O’Farrelly, a priest who had commenced building an anchorite’s cell
at the great church of Drumlane, died.

In 1490 the Canon MacTiernan of Drumlane died.

In 1512 Hugh O’Mael-Mocherige, Comharb of Drumlane, was drowned. This
name Mocherige is translated by O’Donovan ‘‘ Chief of the early rising” ; it is now
represented by O’Mulmogherry, and in some places has been changed into its
English equivalent of ‘‘ Early.” For a drawing and many particulars connected
with the Round Tower and old Church of Drumlane, see Ulster Fournal of Archaol.,
vol. 5., pag. 116, seqq.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-089.png ---
County of Cavan. 69

The church yard of this priory has been for many years a
famous burial place, and there is a round tower remaining in it.

Killachad. An abbey was founded here for canons regular
by St. Tigernach, a different person from the St. Tigernach
of Clunes.4

A. D. 800. This monastery was destroyed by fire.®

805. St. Tigernach, the founder, died November 4th.!

St. Macerco of Killachad, his feast is celebrated on the 28th
of November, but we cannot find the time when he flourished.¢

826. Died the abbot Abner.*

843. The Danes of Dublin plundered this abbey, at which
time Nuad, the son of Segene, one of the religious belonging
to it, obtained the crown of martyrdom.!

844. Died Robhertach, or Robert, a scribe of this abbey.*

869. Died Dubthachus, another scribe.!

873. Died Robhertach O’Kearta, who was also a scribe.™

919. Died the abbot Cellach, the son of Congal."

937- The Abbey was plundered this year,° and in two years
after it suffered the same from Ceallachan, King of Cashel,
accompanied by the Danes of Waterford.P

1030. Died Malodharius, the blind, the professor of divinity
in this monastery.4

After the departure of King Henry IT. from this kingdom, the
English plundered this abbey and many other religious houses.*

Kilmore in the 6th century, St. Columb founded the

44ct, SS. p. 796. *Tr. Th. index, *Act. SS. p.796. *Vard. Vita Rumoldi,
hAnnal. Ulton. ‘Act. SS.~.373. Tr. Th. p. 633. *Act. SS. p. 334. \Act. SS. p. 334.
™ld, "Id. °Tr. Th. p. 633. PAnn. Inisfal. 4Tr. Th. p. 633. *Annal. Inisfal.

* Kilmore, The feast of St. Fedlimidh the patron of the see of Kilmore is
celebrated on the 9th of August. Lynch in his MS. History of the Irish Bisho)
thus speaks of this Saint: “S. Fedhlimidus saeculo sexto Kilmorae floruit frater g
Dermicii Innis-clochranensis Abbatis : eum conjicio in Regesto Clochorensi Clu-
ainensem Episcopum dici, Cluainae nimirum illius ad Emilacum sitae quam nos
Cluneis (Clones) dicimus ubi Fedhlimidus cum S. Tigernacho primo illius sedis-
Episcopo sepultus esse traditur. Ejus obitum ad 9. Augusti Martyrologia
nostra referunt.” (fol. 191.) In the Martyrology of Donegal on the 9th
of August we find the heading in Latin, ‘‘ Movemdecem Sancti Kilmorenses,
quae Cathedralis Sedes est, uno die coluntur,” and amongst these saints is re-
gistered ‘‘Feidhlimidh of Kill-mor Dithruibh: Deidi, daughter of Trena, son
of Dubhthach hua Lughair, was his mother.” All this seems to make it
sufficiently clear that the church which gave name to the see of Kilmore was
known in early times as Kilmore Dithruibh. Dr. Reeves, indeed, in a note to the
Martyrology of Donegal, at 8th of August, says that it is “‘a serious blunder” to identify
Killmor-dithruibh with Kilmore in the County Cavan, and he refers to his notes on
Adamnan, page 99, for the proofs of his assertion. All these proofs however are
reduced to a mere conjecture of O'Donovan in Annals of F. M. page 328. Such
conjecture when unsupported by any evidence can have no weight against the
statement of our Martyrologies, and against the constant tradition of the see itself,
which venerates its patron on the 9th of August. Colgan also in his note 108 to
the Life of St. Columbkille expressly states that “A's/l-mor Dithruibh est sedes
Episcopalis in regione Breffniae, seu comitatu de Cavan.” (77. 7h. page 381.)

The word Dithruibh is supposed to mean a wilderness or solitude, and this

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-090.png ---
70 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

abbey of Cella magna deathreib; we hear no more of it as an
abbey ; it is now a bishop's see in the barony of Loughtee.*

Lough Oughter, in the barony of Loughtee.

About the festival of Christmas, in the year 1237, or in
1249, Claros M‘Moylin O’Moillchonry, archdeacon of Elphin,
brought the white canons of the order of Premonstre from
Trinity Island in Lough Kee, in the county of Roscommon,
to Lough Oughter in the Brenie, Cathall O'Reilly making
a grant of the ground ;" the abbey was dedicated to the

Holy Trinity.®
"Tr. Th. p, 381. ‘Annal. Four Masters. “M'Geog.

epithet was added to Kilmore to distinguish it from another church of the same name,
which from its position on the river Shannon was called Xi/more-na-Sinna “ Kilmore
of the Shannon.” The monastery of A7i/more- Dithruibh was one of those founded by
St. Columbkille before his mission to Scotland, and mention is made by Adamnan of
a miraculous manifestation which was there made to him (lib. i., cap. §0. Reeves’s
‘* Adamnan,” page 99.) In the life of St, Munna it is also related that St, Columb-
kille presided over that monastery, and St. Munna lived for some time there as one
of his disciples : “ Venit B, Munnaad scholam S, Columbae, qui tunc erat magister
in loco qui dicitur Scotice Ceallmor Dithraimh, id est, Cella magna remota, et ibi
S. Munna legit apud virum sapientem Columbam . . . Et mansit ibi B. Munna
ad tempus cum S. Columba vivens satis religiose.” (Colgan * Tr,'7h. page 469.)
Among the nineteen saints mentioned in the Martyrology of Donegal on the gth of
August we find the “ Four sons of Dioman of Kil-mor-Dithruibh.” The “ Annals
of Ulster” (ad an. 734) and the ‘‘ Four Masters” (ad an. 730) record the death of
St. Flann, son of Conaing, A6bof of Kilmore- Ditibh. The death of Crunnmael, Bishop
and Abbot of Cid-mor-Eimhire, is registered in the year 765, and again at 807
(vecte 812) we find the death of Flaithbheartach, 4d60t of Cillmor-Emhir. In 872 it
is also stated that C#//-mor-maighe-Emhir was plundered by the Danes. (F. M. ad
an. 827). O'Donovan conjectures that this was Kilmore near Armagh, but Lynch
in his AfS. History expressly identifies Kilmore-Emhir with Kilmore of the County
Cavan : “‘ Kilmoria (he thus writes) quondam Ai/moria Emeri dicta in Comitatus
Cavanensis regione quae Brefnia orientalis dicitur, sita est.” (fol. 191.) Lynch also
commemorates a second Bishop Fedhlimidh who held this see and died in the
year 841. The other Bishops of Kilmore mentioned by our Annalists are, Hugh
O’Finn who died at Inish-Cloghran, an island of Lough Ree, in 1136, Murchertach
O'Maelmocherge who died in 1149, and Tuathial O’Conaictaig, who was present at
the synod of Kells in 1152, and died, according to the “ Four Masters,” in 1179.
Florence or Flann O’Conaictaig, who died in 1231, was the first Bishop of this see
known to Ware. For the subsequent History of the Diocese of Kilmore, see
drish Ecclesiastical Record, vol. 2, page 485.

*The Abbey gave name to an island of Lough Oughter in which it was sit-
uated, and which is still called ‘‘ Trinity Island.” The ruins of the Abbey may
still be seen there, and its cemetery is the principal burial-place of that dis-
trict. Opposite Trinity Island, on the main land, is the townland of S/anore,
formerly Snalore, which was the site of a famous Abbey in the early ages of our
church. The Irish form of the name was Snamh Luthir, and Archdall makes
mention of it when treating of the county Sligo. Dr. O’Donovan, however (An.
F.M.ad an. 731,) and Reeves sufficiently expose this error of our author. The mon-
astery of Slanore was founded by St. Columban, son of Eochaieo, who died about
the year 640. His memory is honoured in our Martyrologies on September 6th
at Rosglanda, now Donaghmore, in the county of Tyrone, as well as in Snamh-
luthir. The festival of St. Comaigh, sister of Columban, was also kept in this
latter church on the 7th of May. This monastery was rendered famous in the
sixth century by two great miracles performed there. The first is mentioned in

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-091.png ---
County of Cavan. 71

Queen Elizabeth, February Ist, 1570, granted the abbey,
with all its possessions, to Hugh O'Reilly of the Brenie,
head of his sept, for the term of 21 years, at the rent of
fifty-five shillings and eight-pence, Irish money; but by an
inquisition taken in the 27th of the same reign, the said
Hugh was found to be eleven years and an half in arrear.”

Mounterconaght, in the barony of Castleraghen. There
was an endowed hospital here; King James granted a lease
of it, for the term of 21 years, to Sir Edward Moore, at
the rent of fifteen-pence’ See Ballylinch.

Inquisition 9th of September, 1590, finds that the following
Hospitals in this county were endowed with lands, called
Tearmonlands, as follow :—Annagha, one pole or cartron of
land, annual value 12¢.; Annaghgalve, half a cartron of land,
annual value 6¢.; Balliclamy Phillip, three cartrons of land,
annual value 3s.; Ballientemple, two cartrons of land, annual
value 2s.; Ballimachinghe, three acres, annual value 3a. ;
Casheltarra, three cartrons of land, annual value 3s. 9@.;
Castlerahin, two cartrons of land, annual value 2s.; Cavan,
monastery, half a cartron of land, annual value 3s. 4d. ;
Clona, one acre of land, annual value td.; Clonkyaghvoy,
four cartrons of land, annual value 4s.; Cloonosa, two cart-
rons of land, annual value 8s.; Crosserboghe, four cartrons
of land, annual value 4s.; Dromgowne, two cartrons of land,
annual value 2s.; Dromkeman, one cartron of land, annual
value 12d.; Drombane, thirty-two cartrons of land, annual
value, besides reprises, 32s.; Dronge, one cartron and half of
land, annual value 1s. 6¢.; Dronnegrasse, one cartron of land,
annual value 12d. ; Dynn, eight cartrons of land, annual value
8s.; Inneskin, two cartrons of land, annual value 2s.; Kil-
brode, half a cartron of land, annual value 6¢.; Kilconny,
one cartron of land, annual value 12d¢.; Kildallan, two
cartrons of land, annual value 2s.; Kildromfeart, eight cart-
rons of land, annual value 8s.; Kileynagh, one cartron of
land, annual value 12d.; Kilfert, two cartrons of land, annual
value 2s.; Kilinekeire, two cartrons of land, annual value 2s. ;

"King, p. 203. "Lodge, vol. 1. p. 316.

the Life of St.Fechin of Fore: “on a certain day St. Fechin came to the place,
called Snam-luthir in the district of Caerbre-Gabhra: and meeting there St.
Colman, son of Eochaidh, who had been for a long time blind, he applied to
his eye the water with which he had washed his hands, and the blessing of
sight was immediately restored to the blind man.” (Acta SS. page 136.) The
second miracle was performed by St. Ruadhan of Lorrha: “St. Ruadhan coming
to the city called Snam-Luthir in the district Gabhra Carbre, the body of the
lately deceased King of that district was being borne on a chariot towards the
city, and the whole ple were weeping around him. Then Ruadhan, moved
to compassion, prayed to the Lord, and the King rose up living and offered that
city and people to’St. Ruadhan.” (Acta Bolland, April, vol. 2, page 383.)

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-092.png ---
72 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Killisertdenyn, six cartrons of land, annual value 6s.; Kil-
more, six cartrons of land, annual value 6s.; Knockabridy,
half a cartron of land, annual value 6¢.; Largan, two cartrons
of land, annual value 2s.; Larganboye, half a cartron of land,
annual value 6d. ; Larra, three cartrons of land, annual value
3s.; Lawye, two cartrons and three quarters of land, annual
value 2s. 9d. ; Magheriehullagh, three cartrons of land, annual
value 3s.; Markil, two cartrons of land, annual value 2s.:
Moybolge, three cartrons of land, annual value 3s. ; Monter-
connaght, half a cartron of land, annual value 6¢.; Rahaura,
one cartron of land, annual value 12d.; Ramtavin, two
cartrons of land, annual value 2s.; Seaneroe, one cartron of
land, annual value 12¢.; Templedowa, one cartron of land,
annual value 12d.; Templeport, four cartrons of land, annual
value 4s.; Tomregin, six cartrons of land, annual value 6s.;
Tonaghmore, near Kilmore, three cartrons of land, annual
value 3s.; Urney, three cartrons of land, annual value 35.

COUNTY OF CLARE.

Beagh; in the barony of Burren; there was a monastery
here of the third order of Franciscan Friars” The Abbey of
Beagh and the townland of Abbey Beaghan are mentioned in
the records.

Ceannindis, or Keannindse, is the name of a hill in Dal-
cassia, now the county of Clare.* St. Comgall, who was
abbot of Gleanussen, in the King’s County, founded a church
here; he died before the year 569.>

Clare? on the river Fergus, where it falls into the river
Shannon, in the barony of Islands.

An abbey was founded near to this town, under the invo-
cation of St. Peter and St. Paul, for canons regular following
the rule of St. Augustin, by Donald O’Brien the Great, King
of Limerick; he appointed Donatus abbot, and richly en-

*War. mon. *Mss. notes on Vard. Act. SS. p. 417.

' Beagh, or Beatha. This abbey was situated in the present townland of Beatha,
which lies north of the Abbey of Corcumroe, in the barony of Burren, and bounded
on the other side by the bay of Kinvara.

* Clare abbey was situated midway between the towns of Ennis and Clare. The

ruins, still in pretty good preservation, may be seen within a few perches of the
Ennis railway station.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-093.png ---
County of Clare. 73

dowed the abbey. This charter was dated at Limerick in
1195, and witnessed by M., archbishop of Cashell, D., bishop
of Killaloe, A., bishop of Fenabore, and B., bishop of
Limerick.*

A great battle was fought here in the year 1278, by Donell,
son of Teige Caoluiske O’Brien, accompanied by the two
septs of O'Coilen, with the tribe of Fearmaic and Owney,
against Mahon O’Brien, who was defeated with a great
slaughter.¢

Thady, bishop of Killaloe, exemplified King Donald’s
ancient charter in this monastery on 18th July, 1461.°

In 1543, King Henry VIII. granted the abbey to the baron
of Ibrachan,‘ together with a moiety of the rectories of Kil-
chriest, Kilmoyle, Kilmacdevan, Kilberverragh, Ballinregdan,
Ballylogheran, and Ballylegford& This abbey was granted
in Fee to Donough, Earl of Thomond, January roth, 1620,
and a new grant was made, September Ist, 1661, to Henry,
Earl of Thomond.

Corcumroe,'* a small village in the barony of Burren, it was
thrice plundered by Rotheric O'Connor and Dermot O’Brien,
in the year 1088.*

A.D. 1194. Donald, King of Limerick, founded a sump-
tuous monastery here for Cistertian Monks, and dedicated it
to the Virgin Mary;! others say that Donagh Carbrac, his
son, was the founder, in the year 1200. This abbey was also
called the abbey of the Fruitful Rock, and was a daughter of
that of Suire; it was afterwards made subject to the celebrated
abbey of Furnes, in Lancashire; the cell of Kilsonna, alias

°King, p. 203. *Annal. Munst, *King, p.203. ‘Cox, vol.t.p.276. "Auditor
Gen. Office, “Rolls. ‘Wascalledanciently Corcamruadh. *Ann, Munst. ‘Liber
rubr, de Kilken,

3 The Abbey of Corcumroe was situated in the townland of Abbey, and parish
of Abbey, in the barony of Burren, about eighteen miles north-west from the town
of Ennis, and about five miles from the town of Ballyvoughan.

This abbey, though situated in the present barony of Burren, is always called
the Abbey of Corcumroe, i.¢., the abbey of the territory of Corcumroe, which
comprised the entire of the diocese of Kilfenora. It gives name to the townland
and parish of Abbey, in the barony of Burren.

In the Casthreim Toirdhealbaig la wars of Thomond), at the year 1267, it is
called the Abbey of Burren. Its church, which was built in a beautiful style, is
still in good preservation. Its chancel contains a monument to the memory of
Peter O’Loughlin the last prince of Burren, and a tomb having a full-size figure of
Conor na Sudaine O'Brien, King of Thomond, who was killed by O’Loughlen of
Burren, in the year 1267, in the battle of Sudain in Gleann-Aragach (now Glen-
araga), at Beal-an-Chlogaid, at the head of Pouldoody, and interred in this Abbey.
See “‘Annals of the Four Masters,” A.D. 1514, #.a. See a sketch of this Abbey,
and of the monument of Conor O’Brien, King of Thomond, in the ‘‘ Dublin Penny
Journal” for 1834, p. 341, where it is erroneously called the tomb of ‘‘ Donogh

Brien.’

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-094.png ---
74 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Kilshanny, was some time after annexed to this house.™ The
founder died the same year."

1267. Donogh O’Brien, King of Thomond, was killed in
the battle that was fought at Siudaine;° he was solemnly in-
terred in this abbey, where a grand monument was erected
to his memory, the remains of which are to be seen at this day.P

1317. A dreadful battle was fought near this town, in which
many of the principal of the O’Briens fell; amongst the
slain were Teige and Mortogh Garbh, sons of Brien Ruadh,
King of Thomond.4

1418. The abbot John was made bishop of Kilmacduagh."

This abbey, with eleven quarters of land in Corcumroe and
Glanemanagh, was granted to Richard Harding.*

Inquisition 6th December, 25th Queen Elizabeth, finds that
Donogh M‘Murghe O’Brien, of Dromolan, in this county,
died seized of this abbey and all its possessions, annual value,
besides reprises, 40s. Irish money.

Ennis,** on the river Fergus, in the barony of Islands, is a
market and a borough town.

1240. About this time Donagh Carbrac O’Brien built a
very noble and beautiful monastery here for Conventual
Franciscan Friars."

1305. The “Annals of Inisfall” inform us, that this monas-
tery was built or repaired this year by Terlagh, the son of
Taigh Caoluiske O'Brien, who presented the friars with holy
crosses, embroidered vestments, and other needle work, cowls,
and every necessary furniture, beautiful book-cases, and blue

inted windows.”

1306. Died Cumheadha more Mac Nemarra. He was
interred with his King in this monastery.* This year Dermot,

™ War.mon. ®Lodge. vol. 1. p.251. °In the barony of Burren. ?Collectanen, No. 4
p.600. Ud. p.605. "War. Bishops, p. 648. "Auditor Gen. Office. *Wasanci called
‘Inis Cluanruada. “War, Mss. vol. 34, p. 159. War. mon. “The use y stained
glass in our abbeys, shows that the fine arts were at that time cultivated in this kingdom.
*Annal Inisfal.

4The Abbey of Ennis, or /nis Cluanramhfada, now a Protestant Church, was
situated in that part of the present town of Ennis called Church-street. Of the
history and splendour of this famous Abbey, as well as of. the other ecclesiastical
foundations now in ruins around Ennis, much might be written. Among them
may be noticed the ruins of the parish churches of Dromcliff, and Dura, and
Kilbrikane, all of undoubted antiquity. In an ancient manuscript in the Library
of Trinity College, Dublin, class a. 2-8, may be found an old poem ascribed to St.
Breacan Arand, whose first proper name was Breasal, son of Eochaidhe Ball Dearg,
King of Cashel. who was contempora with St. Patrick. In this poem we are
told that the King made an offering of his son Breasal to St. Patrick and to God ;
that St. Patrick then baptized him, and called him Breacan; that he kept him as
his own disciple, till finally prepared to receive ordination, and that Patrick him-
self gave him orders, after which he became the famous St. Breacan of Kil-
breakane, and in this poem he relates the circumstances under which he founded
the churches of Dura and Kilbrikane, near Ennis. See **Book of Lecain,” fol.
214, 4. 4, and MS. H. 2-8, T.C.D. See note at /usislact.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-095.png ---
County of Clare. 75

the son of Doncha, son of Brien-roe, at the head of a powerful
army of Irish and English, entered the town, and did burn
and destroy every house in it.’

1311. About this time Donogh, King of Thomond, be-
stowed the entire revenues of his principality towards the
support of the poor friars of this monastery, and for enlarging
and beautifying their house.*

1313. Dermot O’Brien, prince of Thomond, was buried in
this monastery in the habit of a Franciscan Friar.*

1343. Moriertach O’Brien, the son of Theodoric, prince of
Thomond, died June the 5th, and was buried here; and the
same year Matthew M‘Comara, called the Blind, who built
the refectory and sacristy of the monastery, was buried here
in the habit of the order.°

1350. Pope Clement VI. granted several indulgences to this
monastery ;? and Theodoric, the son of Donogh O’Brien, was
interred therein?

1364. Dermot O’Brien, late prince of Thomond, died on
the vigil of the Conversion of St. Paul, at Ardrachan, in
the county of Galway, but he had his sepulture in this
monastery.‘

1370. Matthew O’Brien, prince of Thomond, dying on the
feast of St. Philip and St. James, was also interred here.

1375. This year King Edward III., moved with compassion
for the poverty of this house, and the scarcity of provisions in
this part of the country, granted a licence, dated at Limerick,
August the 22nd, to the guardian and friars, to enter into the
English pale, and purchase provisiohs of every kind.» And
he also granted a licence to Marian Currydany, a brother of
the house to go to the city of Argentine, in Almania, and
there-to study in the schools.!

This friary was reformed by the Franciscans of the strict
observance.*

In a rental of the crown, in the year 1577, in the office of
the auditor general, the crown was then in possession of the
site of this monastery, a mill on the river Fergus, an eel and
salmon weir, with some houses and gardens in the village.

On the Ist of June, 1621, it was granted to William
Donegan, Esq.!

Many of the ancient ornaments of this building still remain,
this with other similar instances must argue the refined taste
of our ancestors. It is now the parish church.®

yAnnal Inisfal, *Collect. vol. 1. p. 614. *Ann. Inisfal. Ann. Nenaght. King,
. 316. “Ud. *Allemande. °King ut sup. Ud. *King ut sup. “Harris Coll. vol. 3.
‘King, p.139. “War. Mss. vol. 34, p. 159. Rolls.
K me Protestant Church of the parish is erected in the nave of the old Franciscan
‘y:

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-096.png ---
76 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Enniskerry® There are two islands of this name, about
three miles from the mainland of the barony of Ibrichan.

St. Senan of Iniscathy, built an abbey on Inifcaorach, in
the territory of Hybreccain,™ in Thomond."

Finish; an island in the river Shannon, where it receives
the river Fergus.

St. Brigid, the daughter of Conchraid, of the family of
Mactalius, presided over an abbey of nuns in the island of
Inisfidhe, or Cluainfidhe, in the sth century, in the time of St.
Senan.°

Gleanchaoin® This valley is in Hy Luigdheach in Munster,
at the bounds of the see of Killaloe. St. Patrick built an
abbey here.P

This place is now unknown.

Glancholuimchille® St. Columb founded this abbey; it is
now a parish church in the diocess of Kilfenora.4

Inchycronane,” is an island in the river Shannon. Donald
O’Brien, King of Limerick, founded an abbey in the island
of Inifcronane, for regular canons, about the year 1190.

This abbey, and a moiety of the tithes of the parish of
Inchycronane, were granted to Donogh, Earl of Thomond,

™ The barony of Ibrichan, Act. SS. p. §40. Act. SS. ~.541. Tr, Th. p. 612.
PAct. SS. p. 207. %Tr. Tr. ~. 495.

© The abbey (or church of Enniskerry) was situated on the Island of Jnis Caerach,
now Anglicised Enniskerry, and Mutton Island. There are two islands of the
name situated in the parish of Kilmurry and barony of Ibrikane, a short distance
from the mainland, off that part of the western coast of Clare, which from its
rocky and dangerous character is called Mal-bay>

In the Irish Lives of St. Senan it is called /nis Caerach-Ceoil, and St. Senan is
stated to have founded a church upon it, and to have left a party of his clerics
there. The ruins of an ancient church and round tower still mark the P , and
are popularly supposed to have been the remains of the primitive church founded
there by St. Senan of Inisscattery. The island contains about 210 statute acres
of land. See “ Ordnance Map of the County of Clare,” sheet 33.

This is the island of Fid-Jnnis, insula sylvae, situated in the mouth of the
Fergus. It is certainly the Fid-/#nés on which St. Senan built a church, accord-
ing to the ‘Ancient Life of St. Senanus,” published by Colgan; but there is
neither church nor graveyard on it at present, nor does any tradition survive of the
former existence of either. The only ruin at present on this island is a small
fi ent of a castle. This castle is mentioned in the College List as the Castle
of Finnis, belonging to Brian na Farraire O'Brien Sce ‘‘ Ordnance Survey
Papers,” R.I.A.

Gleanchaoin, now Glanquin, in the parish of Killenaboy, and barony of Inchi-
quin, a small distance to the north-east of the town of Corofin. The place is
pointed out on the “‘ Ordnance Map of the County of Clare,” sheet ro.

®Glancholuimchille, or Gleann-Choluim-Chille, i.e., Vallis Columbae Cillae.
The two townlands of this name, North and South, are situated on the east side
of the parish of Carran, in the diocese of Kilfenora, and in the barony of Burren,
on the north-east side of the county of Clare. The Ordnance Map marks the

weyard of St. Columkill’s church in ruins, Vide Reeves’ “ Adamnan's Life of
Gotan Cille,” p. 283, #. 23.

10 In the Irish Life of St. Senan, this island is mentioned: /is mor an Forrus
Tuascert, 3.¢., Inishmore in Jorrus North.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-097.png ---
County of Clare. 77

January 19th, 1620, and again in fee to Henry, Earl of
Thomond, September tst, 1661."

Inchmore; an island in Loughrea in the river Shannon.

St. Senan, the great Saint of Iniscathy, built an abbey at
Inismor, and placed St. Liberius, one of his disciples, over it.*
His memory is still celebrated in the island.‘

Inisanlaot." Turlogh, son of Teige Caoluisge, son of
Conor na Suidaine O’Brien, King of Thomond, ‘built a
magnificent abbey here, in which he was buried in the year

1305."

Iniscunla, in Hy Sedna, an ancient territory in this
county; St. Senan built a church here, and placed over it
the Saints Finan and Finnen.”

This church is now unknown.

Iniskeltair;* an island in Loughderg, in the rivet Shannon,
and on the borders of the counties of Clare and Galway.

FRolls. *Act. SS. p. 539. ‘War. Mon. “Annal. Inisfal. “Act. SS. p. §34-

"In the Ordnance Survey Papers in the Royal Irish Academy, Inisanlaoi is
identified as the place now called Ennis, It was also called Jnis Cluain-Ramh-
fota, i. ¢., the lawn, meadow, or insulated holm of the long rowing, now Clonroad,
a townland on the river Fergus, in the parish of Drumcliff, adjoining the town of
Ennis.”—See ‘* Annals of the Four Masters,” A.D. 1408, note x.

There is good reason, however, to think, that these were formerly two distinct
places, namely, Inis-an-laoi, the island where the town of Ennis now stands, and
Inis Cluain Ramh-foda, or the island holm of Clonroad, and that each was a
fortified town or residence. We lear this from the following entries in the ‘‘ An-
nals of Innisfallen ”: —

“ A.D. 1284. The castle of Ennis was built by Torlagh Mac Taige Caoluisge
[O'Brien], and it was he that made the first building of stone-work in Mur-Jnse
(wall or fortification) on the west side.”

“A.D. 1284. Torlagh More O’Brien, with a great hosting about him, came to
attack Torlough, son of Brian Roe O'Brien, to his house, or Fort, at Ennis, and
they are the town and brought a great prey and booty out of it to Cluain-
Ramh-foda (Clonroad), and expelled Torlogh Oge, son of Bryan Ruadh, out
of the country.”

“ 1306. Turlagh, son of Teige Caoluisge, son of Conor na Suidane O’Brien,
died, and was buried in the monastery which himself built and whitewashed with
lime at Inse-an Laoighe.”

We learn from the Cathreim Thoirdhealbhaig, or wars of Turlough O’Brien,
that Donough Cairbreach O'Brien was the first who erected a fortress of earth
at this place, According to tradition he had also a stone castle here which stood
near the bridge of Clonroad, and this seems to be confirmed by a passage in these
Annals at the year 1553, where it is stated that Donnell and Turlough O'Brien
made a nocturnal incursion into Cluain-Ramh-fohda (now Clonroad), against
their brother, Donough More, and burned that town, and slew many persons ;
and that Donough went into a tower which was in the town to defend himself.”—
“Annals of the Four Masters,” A.D. 1408, #. x. For further notes of the
monastery of Jnis an lacigh, see Ennis.

41 Inis Caelltrach (the Island of the Churches), so called from the great number
of churches and religious houses situated in it. This island was celebrated as a
spot of considerable sanctity, and resorted to as a place of pilgrimage by the
faithful ; hence it was called Holy Island, and is still known by that name. The
island is situated in the river Shannon, above the tidal put of the river, and
near the town of Scariff, which commands a view of Loch Dearg. It contains
about twenty acres of land, and still preserves the remains of seven churches

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-098.png ---
78 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

St. Camin founded an abbey here, which was afterwards
a church, and still retains his name; he died in the year
653, and was buried in his own church; his feast is observed
on the 25th of March.*

St. Stellan, the abbot, died May the 24th, about three
years before St. Camin”

St. Coelan, a monk of this abbey, flourished about the end
of the 7th, or beginning of the 8th century. He wrote a
life of St. Brigid in Latin verse, in which he expressly tells
us, that this abbey was a convent of Benedictines.

Keltra est conventus rité virorum
Prudentum, sacro Benedicti dogmate florens.*

A. D. 834. This island was ravaged by the Danes, and
the same year it was destroyed with fire by Tomar, a Danish
commander from Limerick.*

1027. The great Brien Borombh, monarch of Ireland,
erected the church of Iniskeltair about this time.>

1040. Corcran was abbot of Iniskeltair; he was the most
celebrated ecclesiastic of the West of Europe, both for re-
ligion and learning, and died this year at Lismore.*

1043. Died St. Amnichad ; he was a disciple of the abbot
Corcran ; his feast is held January 30th?

1315. Brien O’Brien, brother to Donogh, King of Thom-
ond, was constrained to take shelter in this island.*

There yet remains here a fine round tower, with seven small
churches, which bespeak, in miniature, an elegance of taste.‘
This island is remarkable for the great resort of pilgrims
on certain festivals.

Inislua,® was called anciently Inisluaidhe, an island in the

Usher. Act, SS. p.746 747. TAct.SS.p..7. _*Tr. Th. £.594,598. *M'Geogh.
"Keating. *Act. SS. p. 206. “Calendar. Collect. vol. 1, 616. *O’Halloran,
p 81.

and a round tower, the principal church of the island is Zeampal Caimin, i. ¢.,
the on of St. Caimin,” who was a disciple of St. Senan. He died in the
ear je

"a we certainly a mistake to assert that ‘St. Senan of Carcabaiscini founded

a monastery here before the coming of St. Patrick into Munster,” for it fs admitted

by all historians that St. Senan of Inisscattery was yet unborn when St. Patrick

was preaching the Gospel in Munster, and the Irish life of St. Senanand the Tri-
artite life of St. Patrick agree that St. Patrick, when preaching to the men of

‘unster on Cruach Patraig.in the county of Limerick in the fourth year of his mis-
sion in Ireland, prophesied the coming of St. Senan, who was then (we are told)
in his mother’s womb.

O'Donovan notices this mistake in the Ordnance Survey Papers in the following
words :—‘‘ Inislua, it is one of the islands of the Shannon between Limerick an
Inisscattery. Archdall, following some foolish authorities, says (at Inislua) that
Senan founded a monastery there before Saint Patrick arrived in Munster. Har-
tis’ position, although not so absurd, is equally wrong,” &c. The same observa-
tions apply to Archdall's notice of Inisscattery. See Ordnance Survey Papers of
the County of Clare Royal Irish Academy, vol. i., p. 69, n. 13.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-099.png ---
County of Clare. 79

river Shannon, between Limerick and the island of Inis
Scattery.®

St. Senan of Corca Baiscin founded a monastery here
before the coming of St. Patrick into Munster,» and St.
Moronoc, called the Penitentiary of Inisluaidhe, had a cell
here at the time of St. Senan’s death!

Inisegananagh, or the island of Canons, in the river Shan-
non, near the principality of Thomond; Donald O’Brien,
King of Limerick, in the 12th century, founded, or rebuilt, a
priory here, for canons regular following the rule of St.
Augustin.

In a rental of the crown estate in the year 1577, the crown
was then seized, in right of this abbey, of the farm of the
island, viz., four acres of arable, fourteen of mountain and pas-
ture, and the site of the said abbey, containing half an acre,
a church, &c., three other islands called Inishorlth, Iniskeirke,
and Inistubred, near the said island of Canons; the land
called Iniskedragh, not far from the river of Galway, con-
taining thirteen acres of mountain; also two parts of the
tithes of the rectory of Kildysirt Murhull, and the vicarage of
Kilchrist in Thomond.!

The moiety of the said abbey of canons and that of Clare,
and the moiety of the churches of Kilchrist, Killonyle, alias
Killennoyle, Kilmadovane, alias Kiluichdowen, Killoveragh,
Ballymacegan, alias Ballymacregan, Ballyloghbran, and Bally-
loghfadela, and the chapel of Killowe, with all their tithes
and profits; and the tithes of the demesne and lands of the
said abbey were granted, in fee, to Donough, Earl of Thomond,
June 20th, 1605, and confirmed to him March 8th, 1609; they
were again granted in fee to Henry Earl of Thomond, Sep-
tember Ist, 1661."

Inisscattery, >“ a rich and beautiful little island in the mouth
of the river Shannon.

8Act. SS. p. 540. O'Halloran’s Hist. vol. 2. p. 44. ‘Act. SS. p. 540.

*War. Mon. ‘Auditor Gen. Office. ™Rolls, “Was anciently called Iniscatty,
Iniscathuigh, and Cathiana.

4 The island of jn1Ip Cotas (Lats Cahy ), now called Scattery Island and Inis-
scattery, is situated in the river Shannon, near the town of Kilrush, about two
miles Lom the shore, and is remarkable for the remains of several churches and
around tower of great antiquity. A church was founded here by St. Senan, a
bishop, about the year 540. See “ Lanigan’s Ecclesiastical History of Ireland,” vol.
ii., pp. 2-7. It continued to be the seat of a bishop till about this period (1188),
when it seems to have been united to the see of Limerick. Ussher, however,
who thought that it owed its origin to Saint Patrick, informs us that its possessions
were divided between the sees of Limerick, Killaloe, and Ardfert: ‘‘ Atque hic
notandum, Patricium in metropoli Armachana successore relicto, ad alias ecclesias
constituendas animum adjecisse ; in quibus sedes ilia episcopalis fuit in Sinei
(SHANAN) fluminis alveo /nis Catti et eodem sensu in provinciali Romano /nsula
Cathag appellata. Is episcopatus inter Limericensem, Laonensem, et Ardfer-

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-100.png ---
80 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

St. Senan of Corca Baiscin founded an abbey here before
the arrival of St. Patrick in Munster, as some report;° but
others say that St. Patrick himself was the founder, and that
he placed St. SenanP here: he had eleven churches for his
monks, and no women were permitted to land on the island
before the coming of the Danes into this country.1_ The pre-
lates of this noble and ancient church are sometimes called by
our ecclesiastical historians bishops, and at other times abbots;
in process of time it became a priory of regular canons.’

A.D. 538. St. Kieran, who was called the son of the Car-
penter, having left the island of Arran, came hither, and was
made providore for the strangers by St. Senan.*

544. St. Senan died on the Ist of March, and was buried in
this abbey;* his festival is observed on the 8th of that month,"
and a superb monument was erected to his memory.”

°O'Halloran, vol. 2. p. 44. Usher, p. 454. 0'Halloran, vol. 2, p. 236.
TAct. SS. p. "42. “Usher. *Act. SS. p. 502, 542. “Vard. p. 159. “O'Halloran sup.

tensem hodie uivisus.” Primordia, p.873. See also ‘ Annals of the Four Masters”
at the year 1188, note n.

The bell of St. Senan mentioned above is that so beautifully described in the fifth
chapter of St. Odran’s Irish Life of St. Senan. It properly belonged to the
ancient church called Cei// 7-Senain (Senan’s Church), situated in the townland of
Fuidismaigh, north-west of the town of Kilrush. This venerable relic of the Apostle
of Jniscathaig was auciently known as_ Clog-na-neal (i. ¢. the bell of the clouds),
because it was believed to have descended on the clouds from heaven to St. Senan,
but it is now more commonly known as Clog-an-Oir (or the golden bell), because
(as this old life states) it resembled gold in its appearance.

This so-called C/og-an-Oir (or golden bell) of St. Senan, so long venerated in
the west of Clare, may be now seen inthe Museum of the Royal Irish Academy,
but it does not warrant the derivation of the name in its present appearance. It
is now more of a silver colour, but it may be possible that the gold and crystal
ornamentations have fallen off while the bell itself lay hidden in the earth.

This old life mentions the round tower of unis Cathaigh, too, and in such a way
as to leave no doubt of its period and origin, as well as of the use made of it in
St. Senan’s time (say about the year 540). As this passage has never been pub-
lished, and as it seems to bear so directly on the “Origin and use of the Round
Towers,” it may not be out of place to give it here :

“Ro tagaid pe Seandn a n-mnmyp catarg peatc v-ceampéolt no cigid
pagalca. Vo Biod ag Seandn an-aon ndtv peargaro bpdtamp acar Tpocan
TAHene anoro etle maille pe mopreippiup eapbog 4 n-inmip catarg. Ro
innpioth For pe Seandn a n-innip catarg clogar 1onna paid ceao ocer cuig
Cpoigte Veag afi doipoe, ronnur apn m-bert v0 élég ab-pogur 04 B4pin 50
B-cloincig op fead Copncabairgin mile fuaim an éLlorg 1onnur 50 m- biod-
toobuine apa vednnad on gaé ceall va b-puil a §-Copncabairginn on can
Tpa 00 bead Seapdn Fons Loce LeanbBuna 04 Véannad a n-innip Catdrg.”

«St. Senan built seven churches or religious houses in /unis Cathaigh. Senan
used to have sixty friars in one church, and thirty priests, together with seven
Bishops, in another church in /unis Cathaigh. Senan, too, built a Cty, (belfry)
in Jnnis Cathaigh, which was one hundred and fifteen feet in height, so that
when ‘a bell was placed in it near to its top, the sound of the bell used to be
heard all over Corcabhaisgin, so that sacrifice used to be made in every church in
Corcabhaisgin at the same time that Senan and his followers were engaged in
offering it in Jnnis Cathaigh.” Vita Senani, chap. vi.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-101.png ---
County of Clare. 81

This Saint’s bell is still religiously preserved in the west
part of this country, and many of the common people believe
at this day, that to swear by it falsely would be immediately
followed by convulsions and death.*

St. Odian was the immediate successor to St. Senany

792. Died Olchabhar, the son of Flann, he was airchen-
nach, or ethnarch, of this abbey;? his feast is held on the 27th
of October.*

816. The Danes plundered the island this year, put the
monks to the sword, and defaced the monument of the saint.>

835. About this time the same barbarians again sailed up
the Shannon and destroyed this monastery.°

861. Died the abbot Aidan.4

g08. Cormac M‘Cuillenan, the learned and pious arch-
bishop of Cashel, and King of Munster, was slain in battle at
Moyalbe, not far from Leighlin. Flaithbeartach, the son of
Ionmuinein, was then abbot of this monastery, and was the
great fomentor of this war in which the good monarch lost his
life ;° in his will Cormac bequeathed to this abbey three ounces
of gold, and to the abbot his choicest sacred vestments.‘

The abbot; for his concern in Cormac’s melancholy fate,
was closely imprisoned for two years, and then ordered to a
severe penance in this monastery;® afterwards he so far
recovered his power and influence, that, on the death of
Dubhlachtna, who had succeeded King Cormac, he was
elected to fill the throne of Munster.®

914. Some Danes landed at Waterford, but they were
defeated by Flaithbeartach, who in the annals is called Prince
of Idrona.!

944. Flaithbeartach died this year.«

950. The Danes were become so powerful about this time,
that they made this island a place of arms.!

958. Died Noyman of Iniscahy.™

972. A Danish chieftain, Mark, the son of Harold, sailed
round Ireland, and committed great devastations on this
island, taking much treasure and many captives."

975. Brien, King of Munster, with Domhnall, King of
Ionmhuinein, recovered this island from the Danes, by defeat-
ing Iomhar, the Norman, and his two sons, Amhlaibh and
Duibheheann; 800 of the Danes, with Mark and histwosons, who
fled thither for safety some time before, were slain in this battle.°

994. Died Colla, the abbot and doctor of Inis Scatty.P

20'Halloran sup., p. 188. Act, SS. p. §42. "Id. *Calendar. O'Halloran,
vol. 2, p. 156. ‘Id. p. 159. “Act. SS. p. 542. *Keating, War. Bishops, p. 502.
"Jd, O'Halloran, vol. 2, p. 189. “Keating. Act. SS. p. $42. Collectan, vol. 1,

p. 471. ‘Annal. Inisfal. *Collectan, vol. 1, p. 471. 10'Halloran, vol. 2, p. 227,
@M'Geogh, *Annal, Munst. Act. SS. p. 542. Id. PAct. SS. p. 542.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-102.png ---
82 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1050. Died Hua Schula, the ethnarch of this abbey.4

1057. Diarmoid M’Maoilnambo, with the Danes of Dublin,
plundered this island, but they were overtaken and defeated
by Donogh, the son of Brien."

1081. Died the abbot O’Burgus.*

1176. This abbey was again plundered by the Danes of
Limerick.

1179. William Hoel, an English Knight, wasted the whole
island, not even sparing the churches."

1188. Died Aid O’Beachain, bishop of Inis Scatty.”

Richard de London was guardian of this abbey, but the date
is not recorded.*

1290. Thomas le Chapelin was guardian after Richard. He
was guardian also in the year 1295.”

April 24, and 20 Queen Elizabeth, this abbey, with the
church-yard, 24 acres of land, an house, a castle built of stone,
and three cottages in the island; and the several customs
following ; from every boat of oysters coming to the city of
Limerick, once a year, 1000 oysters, and from every herring
boat, 500 herrings, once a year. Also ten cottages, one church
in ruins, 20 acres of wood and stony ground in the said island,
called Beachwood, with all the tithes, &c., were granted to
the mayor and citizens of Limerick, and their successors for
ever, in free soccage, not in capite; at the annual rent of
34. 125. 8a.Y

The monument of St. Senan is still to be seen here, with
the remains of eleven small churches and several cells ; in the
stone that closes the top of the altar window of the great
church is the head of the Saint, with his mitre, boldly executed,
and but little defaced ; an ancient round tower of 120 feet in
height, and in complete repair, graces the scene.* This island
is remarkable for the resort of pilgrims on certain festivals.

Inistimon,® in the barony of Corcumroe, St. Luchtighern
was abbot of Inistimensis, or Inistornensis.*

9Act. SS. p. 542. *Annal. Munst. *Act. SS. p. 542. *Annal. Munst. “Act.
SS. p. $42. “ld. *King, p. 244. Id. Aud. Gen. "Smith's Kerry, p. 227.
O'Halloran, intr. p. 81, 85, 136. *Act. SS. p. 72.

8 This is the picturesque little town celebrated as the ‘* City of the Cascades,”
situated in the parish of Kilmanaheen, in the barony of Corcomroe about sixteen
miles West by North from the town of Ennis, and within two miles of the village
of Lahinch.

No trace now remains of the ancient abbey of Ennistymon over which St.
Luchtigern presided, but it is probably represented by the ruin of the old church
still to be seen in the burial ground of Ennistymon, the architecture and style of
which belong to a more recent period. 5

No recollection of Saint Luchtigern survives in this place, nor can we find even
a traditional remembrance of himself or his church, though the names of his con-
temporary saints, namely, St. Manchin of Killmanaheen, St. Lonan of Kill-es-
pug-onnan, St. Muchan of Kill-Muchanna, and St. MacCrehy of Kilmi-creby, are

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-103.png ---
County of Clare. 83

Kilarragh ;* there was an hospital or monastery here, of
which we have no further account, than that it was endowed

still remembered with veneration in and around Ennistymon. There are, however,
substantial proofs to show that St. Luchtigern was (as abbot or otherwise) con-
nected not only with Ennistymon and Corcomroe, but in an especial manner with
all Thomond or North Munster, and to justify us in assuming that as his principal
church was at 7uam Fionnlocha (now Tomfinnlough church in the present barony
of Upper Bunratty in the county of Clare), he resigned the apostleship of Ennis-
tymon to his contemporary St. Mainchin, the disciple and bosom friend of S¢.
MacCreiche of Corcomroe, who is still venerated as patron saint of the parish of
Cill Mainchinne or Kilmanaheen, in and near to which the town of Ennistymon
is situated.

The feast of St. Luchtigern is commemorated in the martyrology of Donegal
at 29th April, where, on the authority of the twelfth chapter of the Life of St.
MacCreiche of Corcomroe, he is made abbot of Zuaim-Fionnlocha in Tradraighe.

From this ancient life we learn that St. AfacCreiche belonged, by birth and
family, to the territory of Corcomroe, that he was the contemporary and bosom
friend of St. Ailbhe of Jmlinch Fubhair (now Emly in the county of Tipperary),
whose‘death is recorded in the ‘‘Annals of the Four Masters,” at the year 541, and
that St. Luchtigern was at this time connected with Ennistymon and Corcomroe.

The twelfth chapter of this life, where S¢. Luchtigern is mentioned gives a curious
and interesting account of a predatory excursion made into Corcomroe by the high
king of Connaught, namely, Aedh, son of Eochaidh (probably Aedh, son of Eochaidh
Tirmcharna, whose death is recorded by the “ Four Masters,” at the year A.D. 574).
in which he is said to have plundered the people of Corcomroe of all their cattle
and other moveable property. The people of Corcomroe thus oppressed, sent
messengers to request their kinsman S¢. AacCreiche, who was then staying with his
master, St. Aslbhe at Imliuch Fubhair (Emly in Tipperary), to come to their relief.
The messengers having reached Jm/iuch Fubhair related their unhappy tale to Sf.
MacCreiche, and besought St. Ailbhe to advise him to go with them toa place
called Carn Mic Tail (in Corcomroe) to meet the men of Corcomroe who were to
assemble there. .S¢. Ai/bhe consented, and AfacCreiche came with them, accom-
panied by his faithful disciple S¢. Afanchin, and made his way direct from Jmliuch
Jubhair (in Tipperary) to St. Luchtigern, to Innis Toma Fionntocha (i.e. the
Island of the Tumulus of the bright lake, now Zom/innlough, in the barony of
Upper Bunratty in the county of Clare, about two miles north-west of the village
of Six-mile-Bridge, where the ruin of St. Luchtigern’s old church may be still seen
near the bright lake, /inz/ough, which gives name to the townland of Finnlough,
and to the parish of Zom/innlough, in which it is situated), and here, we are told, he
remained from Saturday evening till the following Tuesday with St. Luchtigern.
MacCreiche related the object of his mission to S¢. Luchtigern, saying to him: ‘* You
(Luchtigern) ought to come with me to the relief of the men of Corcomroe, for it is
not more incumbent on me to do good to them than it is upon you.” ‘‘ True indeed
(said S¢. Luchtigern), and I shall go.” After awhile they set out from 7uaimfionn-
locha, namely, St. MacCreiche and his disciple St. Afainchin, accompanied by St.
Luchtis and one disciple (whose name is not given) and came direct to Carn-
Mic Tail, in Corcomroe, where they found the states and tribes of Corcomroe,
assembled to receive them.

After some deliberation, and having made all due preparation for the expedition,
the men of Corcomroe. led by St. MacCreiche and St. Mainchin, and accompanied
by St. Luchtigern and his disciple, went forth to demand the surrender of the spoils
of Corcomroe, and coming to where the plunder was all collected, we are told that

16 The church or cell of Cill Carthach gives name to the townland of Kilcar-
ragh, west of the ancient episcopal town of Kilfenora, in which it was situated.
It stood a few yards west of the old Cathedral Church of Kilfenora, to which it is
supposed to have been a cell or hospital. No trace now remains of the church
but a few stones to indicate the site, which is pointed out on the Ordnance Map of
Clare, sheet 16. See Kilfenora.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-104.png ---
84 ; Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

with a quarter of land adjoining thereto ; which at the dissolu-
tion was granted to John King.

bAuditor Gen. Office.

St. Mainchin went around the cattle outside having St. Luchiigern’s staff (crozier)
in his hand, and carrying with him the Cuiteach Fuait (or bell) of St. MacCreiche,
which he is stated to have brought off the altar of St. Peter in Rome, thus taking
a formal possession of the spoils (in the name of the ecclesiastical heads of the then
kingdom of Corcomroe) and keeping the cattle, &c., in regular charge till they
reached Magh Aoi, in Crauchan in Connaught, where the king resided.

Having reached Magh Aoi, we are told that the druids of the king of Connaught
came out against the clerics to prove the superior power of their druidic arts, and
were defeated and subdued by S¢, AfacCreiche.

After this S¢. MacCreiche and the men of Corcomroe went up to the palace
(Dunn) of the king to request the surrender of their spoils, but the haughty king,
purning the intercession of the miserable old cleric St. MacCreiche (now eight score
and seven years old), refused to admit him into his presence, nor was the answer
he sent out favourable or complimentary, adds the tale.

St. MacCreiche, now feeble and weary, insulted and disheartened, returns into the
broad plains of AMagh Aoi to spend the night amongst the plundered spoils of Cor-
comroe on the open field, and soon he was seized with a violent fit of thirst. ‘‘ If it

leaseth God,” said he, ‘‘great as my thirst is now, may the king’s thirst be greater
fore morning, though abundant drinks are now in his house.” This was verified,
for soon the king became so afflicted with a fit of unnatural thirst that all the drinks
in his palace could give him no relief, and thus in the dead of night he asked
to be brought out to S¢. MacCreiche, where, for sake of one drink of water, he bowed
in obedience to him, and bound himself and all his race, and every king who should
succeed him in the sovereignty of Connaught, in perpetual allegiance to St.
MacCreiche and to his Comarés to the end of time, and promising that neither him-
self nor any future king of Connaught would ever again ask or demand the tributes
of Corcomroe, and with these conditions he surrendered the spoils of Corcomroe to
St. MacCreiche to be restored to their proper owners.

After this St. MacCreiche struck the ground with his staff (crozier) in presence
of the king, a beautiful spring of pure clear water burst forth on the spot, and the
king drank of it and was cured of his thirst, and this well is still known as St.
MacCreiche's holy well on the plain of Afagh Aoi, at Cruachan, in Connaught.

The states and people of Corcomroe now assembled to vote their thanks to St.
MacCreiche, and unanimously agreed to acclaim him spiritual head and chief of the
territory of Corcomroe, and bound themselves to pay a tribute to maintain himself
and his Comarbs to the end of time, and requested him to found a church with them
in order that they may remain under his protection and the protection of his Comard
and of his bell to the end of time. S¢, MacCreiche consented and established his
church in his native territory of Corcomroe.

The ruins of St. AfacCresche’s church. to which this legend refers, may be seen to
the present day in the churchyard of Kilmacrehy, in the parish of Kilmacrehy, in
the barony of Corcomroe, to which it gives name. This old ruin is situated about
four miles west from the town of Ennistymon, on the north side of Liscannor bay, on
the western coast of Clare. The style and architectural features of this old ruin indicate
its high antiquity, and several portions of arches and mouldings are yet to be seen,
some imbedded in the walls and others scattered through the burial grounds and used as
headstones over many of the graves. Here, too, was a holy well dedicated to St.
MacCreiche, much frequented of old, but now very rarely visited, owing probably to
the ter celebrity of St. Bridget's well, which is quite near and much resorted to
by the peasantry,

St. MacCreiche founded several churches in the county of Clare, but the only
one named after himself was the Ci// MacCrieche, or Cillmacrehy above mentioned.

He was founder of the church of Cil/-Mainchinne, i.e., St. Mainchin's church,
now Kilmanaheen, which gives name to the parish of Kilmanaheen. It wassituated
in the burial ground of Kilmanaheen, in the present townland of Newtown, now

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-105.png ---
County of Clare. 85

Kilfarboy ;" in the barony of Ibrichan; is now a parish
church,

The monastery of Kilfobrick was founded A.D. 741.2 We
find that Cormac, bishop and scribe of Kilfobrick, died A.D,

837
*Conrys MSS. Act. SS. p. 360.

occupied by Matthew Slattery, Esq., of Newtown House, a small distance west of
the castle of Ennistymon on the same spot where once stood the Dun or palace of
Baoth Bronach, king of Corcomroe, who made an offering of himself and his family
and of his own palace, together with all his lands, &c., to St. AfacCreiche, for the
glory of God and the good of his own soul. St. MacCreiche here placed St. Mainchin

is disciple, who, it will be remembered, was chief actor in recovering the spoils of
Corcomroe, and who is said in this old life to have carried MacCreiche’s bell, the
Cuitech Fuait, and the staff of St. Luchtigern, on that occasion. In the absence of any
evidence to the contrary, it is not (I believe) too much to assume that on handing
over his staff (crozier) to S¢. Mainchin on this occasion, St. Luchtigern resigned to
him the abbotship of his church and town of Ennistymon, over which St. Mainchin
afterwards presided, and where he is still venerated as patron Saint of that parish.
St. MacCreiche at an earlier period founded two old churches near the present
village of Inagh, on the new road from Ennis to Ennistymon, and about seven miles
from the latter place, these were called Ci// sean botha and Teampull na-n-glas
aighne, hence it is called Zempull na-h-aighne, or church of Inagh. The ruined
walls of this last-mentioned church may be still traced in the churchyard of Inagh,
The former was a little west of it.

17 The monastery or church of Kilfarboy was situated in the parish of Kilfarboy

(to which it gives name), in the barony of Ibrikane, five miles south-south-west
rom Ennistymon, near Miltown Malbay. No trace now remains of the original
abbey, but the site is marked by the ruin of a more modem structure in the
churchyard or burial ground of Kilfarboy, which is pointed out on the Ordnance
Map of Clare, sheets 23 and 31, and described in the Ordnance Survey Papers, in
the Royal Irish Academy, vol. 1, page 334

According to Archdall and other writers, the monastery of Kilfarboy or
Kilfobric was founded A.D. 741, but there is good reason to suppose it was at
least a century older. St. Lachtain, patron of the parish of Kilfarboy, is comme-
morated in the Félire Aenguish, at 19th March, and at the same day the following
notice of him is given in O'Clery’s Calendar: “ Laécain mac coinbén abb achao
upd n-orpargid acar 6 bealaé feabpat anno ‘comin: 622. Lachtain, son of
Torben, abbot of Achad uir in Ossory, and of Bealach Feabrath, A.D. 622.”

Colgan gives a short life of this Saint at 19th March, but neither Colgan nor
O'Clery have attempted to identify Bealach Feabrath, where St. Lachtain is said
to have founded his church. O'Donovan, in his edition of the “‘Annals of the Four
Masters,” at the year 622, n. g, appears to think that Bealach Fobrath is the place
now called Ballagharay or Ballaghawry, a townland situated in the west of the
parish of Kilbolane, barony of Orbraighe, or Orrery, and county of Cork, but this
conjecture is highly improbable. Bealach Feabrath was the name of the moun-
tain pass (or road) which led from the place now called Miltown Malbay to the
territory of Corcomroe through that part of Hy-Breacain or Ibrikane, anciently
known as Bealach Feabrath where St. Lachtain built his church, Cill-Feabrath
or Kilfobric, anglicised Kilfarboy, which gave name to the townland and parish
of Kilfarboy, where his name is still venerated as patron of the parish. As St.
Lachtain died in the year A.D. 622, there can be no doubt that his church of
Kilfarboy must have been founded before that date, which makes it at least a
century older than the period assigned to it by Archdall.

The name of St. Lachtain is still vividly remembered in Kilfarboy, and all over
the west of Clare, and the peasantry still invoke his aid and protection in strife
and danger, and among them we find such phrases as the following :

When a strong or powerful person oppresses or afflicts a weak or helpless
person, the injured will say: ‘‘ Luigim fo spare 06 acc Fagbaim Laccain naomhca

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-106.png ---
86 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.
Kilfenora ; in the barony of Corcumroe. The annals

‘na O101E ap—‘ I bow to the grace of God, but I leave the blessed St. Lachtain
to avenge it.” When one neighbour visits another in sickness or in trouble the first
salutation is: ‘010 aca Muipe sacar Laccain Leat, aca cao ca oft 4 poop mo
épore,” &c. _‘‘ May God and the blessed Virgin and St. Lachtain assist you, my
dear friend, and what is the matter with you?” and as terms of applause and ap-
probation they have: Laécatn Leac and Laécain Leac fead, #¢., Lachtain

with you, and Lactain be your arm, meaning, success attend you, and more
strength to you, &c.

Archdall gives a list of obits from the ‘Annals of the Four Masters,” as bee
longing to this place, in his MS. additions preserved in the Library of the Royal
Irish Academy, which appears to support Dr. O’Donovan’s opinion that Archdall
confounded Kilfarboy, Ci// Feabrath, in the county of Clare, with Cill Foibrighe,
or Kilfoibric, now Kilbrew, near Ashbourne, in the county of Meath, and it may
be also confounded with Bealach Adbhra, in Muscraigh, in the county of Cork,
another of St. Lachtain’s churches. See ‘‘ Annals of the Four Masters,” A.D.
622, p. 245, A.D. 737, n. f. 768, n.’k. 836, n. g.

In the Ordnance Survey Papers of the countyZof Clare in the Royal Irish
Academy, vol. i., p. 331-4, we find the following notice of the parish and church
of Kilfarboy :—

The parish of Kilfarboy, in the barony of Ibricken and county of Clare, is bounded
on the north by the parish of Kilmannaheen, in the barony of Corcomroe, on the
east by the parish of Cloony, in Corcomroe barony, and the parish of Eidh-
neach, in the barony of Inchiquin ; on the south by the parish of Kilmurry, in the
barony of Ibricken, and on the west by the Atlantic Ocean. See Engraved Map
of Down Survey.

The name of this parish is of ecclesiastical origin, but whether the component
parts are radically correct is more than I am at present prepared to decide. The
present form of the name is that by which it is known within the memory of the
oldest inhabitant, and it is also by that name the parish is set down in the book of
Regal Visitation. The name as it is spoken would | be spelled thus, Ci// Fearbaigh,
i.e, the Church of Saint Fearbach, but of this Fearéack no historical account has
reached us.

There is a tradition in the district that this church is called A‘l-Frarabuidhe
from a number of (yellow men) Spaniards who were drowned at Spanish Point,
near it, having been buried here many yearsago, That the Spaniards were drowned
and buried here is a fact, but whether the peasantry in striving to account for the
origin of the name of the church have not pressed this circumstance into their
assistance, is a matter that may be surmised. A‘i/-Fearbuidhe would literally
mean the Church of the Yellow Men; but Ceill Feab-Rath, as it is written in
**O'Clery’s Calendar,” would mean the Church of the Healing or Sanctifying
Graces, and this was the name by which the place was known for centuries before
the advent of the Spaniards or ‘‘ Yellow Men.”

Archdall seems to think that this is the Ci// Foibrie mentioned by Colgan
{A. A. S. S. p. 360), of which Cormack was Bishop, whose death is placed by
the same authority in the year 837.

He may or may not be right in this, but he has no proof that Ci Foibric was
situated in the ancient district of Ui-Bracain. ‘‘There is no recollection of Cité
Foibric or of St. Cormac here, neither is there of any other saint, but of Saint
Lachtain, whose festival is still observed in the parish on the 19th day of March,
the same as in Achad-Uir in Ossory, and whose well is situated within the church-
yard, and still much frequented by devotees” and invalids, on Sundays and

"hursdays, nor are those visitors niggardly of their presents to the shrine of the
saint, for nothing is seen about the well but old memorials of their affection
and devoted piety.

The old Church of Kilfarboy stands in the townland of Kilfarboy, to which
it gives its name, measuring 65 feet 9 inches in length, and 17 feet in breadth ;
the walls in good preservation, excepting the west gable, which is down to the
height of the side walls. There is a pointed doorway in the south side, at


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-107.png ---
County of Clare. 87

Munster tell us, that Morogh O’Brien burnt the abbey of
Kilfenora,’® and slew many people therein, A.D. 1055.

Killaloe;* the seat of a bishop, and situated on the
western banks of the river Shannon, near the noted cataragt.
St. Molualobhair, the grandson of Eocha Bailldearg, King of
North Munster, founded an abbey here about the beginning
of the 6th century.! He was succeeded by his disciple St.
Flannan, who about the year 639 was consecrated bishop of
the place; from this time we hear no more of it as an
abbey#

1 Killaloe was anciently the resort of many pilgrims.

*Was called anciently Kildalua. ‘Collectan. vol. 1, p. 439. *%War. Bish. p. §90.

the distance of 14 feet from the west gable, 6 feet 4 inches high, and 3
feet 6 inches wide, built up in front, with well cut stones, and having a holy
water font inserted iri the wall on the right hand side as one goes in. Six feet
3 inches from the east gable, in the same side, is a pointed window, 7 feet high
and 3 feet wide, inside, q feet from the ground outside where it measures 4¢ feet
in height, and 6} inches in breadth at top, and 7} inches at bottom, having its
sides perforated for iron bars. There is a pointed window in the east gable,
measuring 6 feet 9 inches in height on the inside, and 3 feet in breadth, and 4 feet
10 inches in height, and 7 inches in breadth on the outside. The sides perforated
for the reception of iron bars. The walls are built for the most part of, long thin
quarry stones.—Ordnance Survey of Clare, vol. 1, pp. 331-4.

8 This was the cathedral church of the ancient episcopal city of Kilfenora, dedi-
cated to St. Fechen, patron of the diocese. It was situated about four and a half
miles north-north-east from the town of Ennistymon, in the barony of Corcomroe.
This ancient church is now represented by the Protestant church of Kilfenora, and
the seven stone crosses that marked the sanctuary of the cathedral have all disap-
peared but two, and it appears hopeless to seek their history. One of them, how-
ever, may be still seen on the demesne of Clansford, at Killaloe. It was removed
thither in the year 1821 by the Right Rev. Dr. Mant, Protestant bishop of the
united dioceses of Killaloe and Kilfenora, and placed in the beautiful demesne of
Clansford, with a Latin inscription indicating its history :—

Quam spectas crucem,
In agro Fenaborensi vetustate collapsam,
Ne penitus ee ‘situque abolesceret
i

ic
Apud sedem Laonensem
Erigi curavit
Antiquitatis Ecclesiasticae studiosus
R. M.S. T. P.
Utriusque Dioceseos Episcopus.
A.D. MDCCCXXI.
A few yards west of Kilfenora was Kilcarragh, a monastery or hospital endowed
with one quarter of land; the site is marked on the Ordnance Map of Clare,
sheet 16.

19The following notice of the parish of Killaloe is found in the Ordnance Survey
of Clare, vol ii. p. 339-

“« This parish is bounded on the north by the parishes of O'Gonnello and Kilno ;
on the west by that of Killokennedy ; on the south by Kiltennaanlea, and on the
east by the Shannon, which separates it from the county of Tipperary.

‘« The name of this parish is in all the ancient Irish authorities written Ci// da lua
which means the church of St. Da/ua, Molua or Luanus, a famous saint who flourished
towards the egd of the sixth century. Ledwich, indeed, contends that Cid/ /o /ua is the
true name, and that it means the church upon or near the water, In this, however, he

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-108.png ---
88 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Kilnagallech;® on the shore of the river Shannon and two
miles and an half N. W. of Inis Scattery.

St. Senan gave the veil to the daughters of Nateus in Kil-
cochaille, now called Kilnacaillech, or the Church of the Nuns,
not far from Inis Scattery."

Killoen;*! in the barony of Islands. About the year 1190
Donald O’Brien, King of Limerick, founded an abbey here

bAct. SS. p. $40.

opposes the whole stream of Irish history, for every authority states that Xi/ da /ua,
means the church of St. Molua, the /eper. On this subject a few observations are
here called for:

““Was Ledwich certain that Killaloe means the church near the water? He
could not have been, because he was not master of the Irish e, and even if
he were, he could not be certain that his interpretation was correct, for Lua, though

iven in the Irish vocabularies ‘without authority’ as one of the primitive words
for water, is not to be found in composition in any Irish book or is. or entering
into the names of places in any part of Ireland ; and even if Zua were found in the
names of places as signifying wafer, it could not be certain that it meant water
when placed after the term C#// a church. * * * A * * .

St. Molua was succeeded by St. Flannan, who was consecrated bishop of the

Place about the year 639, and from that period forward Killaloe is mentioned in
irish history as the seat of a bishop. ‘or the history of Killaloe, see Harris’s
** Ware,” and ‘‘ Annals of the Four Masters,” transcribed into the first volume of
the “Clare Extracts,” pp. 335, 336, 338, 340, 341, 342, 343, 344, 345, & 346,

The well of St. Flannan, who became patron of the diocese is situated in
the east corner of Killaloe town, and N. W. of the Cathedral. His memory was
formerly celebrated at it on the 18th of December, but now it is visited on any
day the pilgrims think proper.

mediately to the north of the Cathedral there is a small stone-roofed church,
or Duirtheach, not unlike St. Columkille’s house at Kells, or St. Kevin’s kitchen
at Glendalough. It measures on the outside 36 feet 4 inches in length, and
35 feet in breadth. The doorway is placed in the west gable, but I could not
ascertain its original height, as the ground is several feet raised. It is 4 feet 8
inches in width at the point where the arch springs. The height from the present
level of the ground to the vertex of the arch is 6 feet. This doorway is semicir-
cular at the top, and consists of four concentric circles not unlike the doorway of
the church of Rahen, in the King’s County ; of Incha Gaill, in Lough Corrib ; and
of St. Caimin’s church on Inis Cealtra.

In the very sharp gable over this doorway is placed near the top a round-headed
window, which afforded light to the upper story. The roof is of stone, and seems
to have been very firmly constructed, but it is now much broken and overgrown
with grass and small ash trees, P

The little choir of this Duirtheach is now destroyed, but its breadth can be as-
certained from stones projecting from the east gable. The choir arch is not unlike
in form that in St. Kevin’s kitchen, but not so high, being only 8 feet 6 inches high
from the present level of the ground. Over this little choir arch, near the top of
the gable is placed a rectilineally-pointed window, not unlike those found in many
of the round towers.—Ordnance Survey of Clare, Royal Irish Academy, vol ii.,

9.
Li Bhs church of Kilnagallegh is the church anciently called Crl/-Leochaille, and
appears to be that which is now called Aii/-na g-Caillech, e.i. Cella Sanctimonialium
4. e. Church of the Nuns, situated not far from St. Senan’s church of /nis Cathaigh,
in the country of Corcabaischin.
The Irish lives of St. Senan record his visit to this church the day previous to
his death, and his bequest of a relic to them for their protection.
% This abbey was situated in the parish of Killowne (or Clareabpey), in the
barony of Islands, about two and a half miles south by west from Ennis, on the old

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-109.png ---
County of Clare. 89

for nuns following the rule of St. Augustin, and dedicated it
to St. John the Baptist Slaney, the daughter of Donogh
Carbreach, King of Thomond, was abbess of this nunnery,
and died A. D. 1260; she was pre-eminent in devotion, alms
deeds, and hospitality to all the women then in Munster.«

Kilshanny,;* In the barony of Corcumroe. The cell of
Kilshanny, alias Kilfonna, was annexed to the abbey of Cor-
cumroe.

This monastery, with all its appurtenances, mills and
fisheries, was granted to Robert Hickman.

Quin,® called also Quint, or Quinchy, is in the barony of
Bunratty, five miles east of Ennis.

‘War. mon. *Annal. Innisfal, Lodge, vol. 1, p. 251. ‘Rolls.

road to Kildysart. The ruin is still in pretty good preservation, and handsomely
situated near the north-eastern extremity of the beautiful lake of Killowne, in the
eae demesne of Killowne (New Hall), the seat of W. E. A. Mac-

nnell, 7

Near this abbey is a celebrated holy well, dedicated to St. John, on the eve of
whose festival it is much resorted to by the pious people of the surrounding country
as a place of pilgrimage and devotion to St. John.

Inquisition 15th May, II. King James, finds that King Henry VIIL, Ist July,
xxxv. of his reign, ited to Morrogh, Earl of Thomond, this abbey, with
three quarters and a quarter of land in this county, with all the appurte-
nances, viz., all the tithes in the parish of Killowne and Kilnekelly, worth
413 45. annual rent. Two parts of the tithes of Inishe and Clonrawde, containing
4 quarters of land ; 2 parts of the tithes between Bothes Clares; 2 parts of the
tithes in Kilmihil and Kilchreishe ; 2 parts of Mourghy, and the rectory thereof,
containing 4 quarters of land ; 2 parts of the tithes of Rathkerney, and 2 parts of
the tithes of 2 quarters of land near the noulet of Awne O’Gorna, in Ballyussin.
Ch-Remem,.—Archdall’s MS. Additions, Royal Irish Academy.

33 This monastery was situated in the parish of Killshanny, in the barony of Cor-
comroe, about two and a half miles north from Ennistymon, on the road to Kilfe-
nora. It was built by Donald More O’Brien, King of Thomond, about the year
1194, under the invocation of St. Augustine, for Cistercians, and endowed with
certain lands and privileges. St. Augustine is still venerated as the patron of the
parish. The ruins are yet in good preservation, and traditionally venerated by the
people of the surrounding country. There is a holy well at no great distance on
the south side, dedicated to St. Augustine, where a patron is still held on the 28th
of August, the feast of that saint.

The traditional history of the bells of St. Augustine, which were preserved here
till very recently, constitutes, perhaps, the most interesting part of the modern
history of this place. It was generally believed that to swear falsely by the bell
of St. Augustine was immediately followed by some remarkable manifestation of
the guilt of the person who had done so, and tradition has it that some persons
guilty of having sworn falsely upon Clog naomh Augustin (or St. Augustine’s

), were known to rise from their bed on the following day with their mouth or
face painfully distorted. This bell was preserved by a poor family in the village
of Kilshanny, who were known as the hereditary keepers of St. Augustine’s bell,
and who, b: fe, were considered to be entitled to a certain fee for the use of
the bell and for the proper administration of the oath. Within a recent period
the bells have been removed by some agency, not well known, and may be now
seen in the collection of antiquities in the British Museum.

For a further account of these bells, see ‘‘ Kilkenny Archaeological Journal” for
the year 1852-3, p. 61-2, &c., &c.

3 This ificent abbey was situated in the ancient territary of Clann Coillean,
or Mac Namaras of Thomond (who were its founders), in the present barony of

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-110.png ---
90 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

An abbey was founded here early, which was consumed
by fire A. D. 1278.™

The monastery of Quin, for Franciscan Friars, was founded
in 1402, by Sioda Cam M‘Namarra ;™™ but Father Wadding
places it in the year 1350, yet at the same time he declares,
that he thinks it was more ancient."

Pope Eugene IV. granted a licence in 1433 to M‘Namarro
to place the friars of the strict observance in this monastery ;
which, as Wadding observes, was the first house of the
Franciscan order in Ireland that admitted of that reformation.°
The same year Macon Dall M‘Namarra, Lord of Clancoilean,
erected this monastery, being a beautiful strong building of
black marble ; his tomb is still remaining.P

This monastery, with all the manors, advowsons, &c. of
Daveunwall, Icharve, Dounagoar, and divers others, with
the site of all the hereditaments thereof, was granted to
Sir Tirlagh O’Brien of Inishdyman, in fee, December 14th,
1583.4

The Roman Catholics repaired this monastery in 1604.7

Bishop Pococke thus describes its present state.* “Quin is
one of the finest and most entire monasteries that I have
seen in Ireland; it is situated on a fine stream, with an ascent
of several steps to the church ; at the entrance, one is surprised
with the view of the high altar entire, and of an altar on each
side of the arch of the chancel. To the south is a chapel,
with three or four altars in it, and a very fine Gothic figure, in
relief, of some saint; on the north side of the chancel is a fine
monument of the family of the M‘Namarras of Rance, erected
by the founder; on a stone by the high altar the name of
Kennedye appears in large letters; in the middle, between
the body and the chancel, is a fine tower built on the two
gable ends. The cloister is in the usual form, with couplets
of pillars, but is particular, in having buttresses round it by

™M'Geogh. ™™Ann. Four Masters. As quoted by Allemande. °Id. ?War.
MSS., vol. 34, p. 165. “Rolls. *Cox, vol. 2, p. 10. *Fournal.

Bunratty, about five Irish miles to the east of Ennis. The ruin is still in good
preservation, and is one of the most imposing and magnificent remains of monastic
antiquity in Ireland. It is beautifully situated on a gentle slope over a small clear
stream which, in its original course, was supposed to mark the extent of the monastic
sanctuary at one side. ,

The possession of this stream appears to have been much contested in times of
war. In the Catthreim Toirdhealbhaigh, or Wars of Thomond, we find a glowing
description of a battle fought here between the Earl De Clare and the sons of
Brian Roe O’Brien, in which the Earl is said to have taken possession of the
church of Cuiache (Quin), and to have used it as a shelter and citadel for his forces,
so that the sons of Brian Roe O’Brien had to burn the church to the ground in
order to secure the defeat of the Gud/ (foreigner).

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-111.png ---
County of Clare. gI

way of ornament; there are apartments on three sides of it
the refectory, the dormitory, and another grand room to the
north of the chancel, with a vaulted room under them all; to
the north of the large room is a closet, which leads through
a private way to a very strong round tower, the walls of
which are near ten feet thick. In the front of the monastery
isa building, which seems to have been an apartment for
strangers, and to the south-west are two other buildings.”

Quin ; inquisition 24th April, 4th King James, finds that
the half of a quarter of land called Keave, containing sixteen
acres, and lying on the west side of the river and jabbey of
Quin, was parcel of the demesne of the said abbey, and a mill
in the town of Quin, with the water-course, was also a parcel
thereof; the whole of the annual value of 3s. besides reprises,

Rossbeenchoir;** near the western ocean; St. Cocca, nurse
to St. Kieran, was abbess of a nunnery here,‘ which is now
wholly unknown. .

Shraduffe,* or Templedisert: on the 12th of March, 1611, the
site of this abbey, and the possessions thereunto belonging,

tAct, SS. p. 461.

The “Annals of the Four Masters” notice this battle at the year 1278 in the fol-
lowing words :—" The victory of Cuinche (Quin) was gained by Donough, son of
Brian Roe and the other sons of O’Brien over the Earl of Clare. They bumed
the church of Cuincke over the heads of his people, and caused an indescribable
destruction of them, both by buming and killing;” and the editor adds (foot note n)
«The church here referred to, was an ancient Irish one, dedicated to St. Finghin.
The great abbey of this place was not erected till the year 1402, or, according to
Ware, till 1433. See Harris's edition of ‘ Ware’s Antiquities,’ p. 280.”

34 The “Annals of Innisfallen” notice this monastery as follows :—A.D, 500,
the monastery of Rosbeanchair, in the county of Clare, was founded by St. Con-
chadh. The same year a monastery was founded at /nés/ua, in the lower Shan-
non, in the county of Clare, by St. Caimin.”

3A visit to the spot would have supplied abundant evidence of the former existence
of the religious house, concerning which the author had such scanty information.

Templedisert, or the church of Dysert, is situated in the parish of Dysert (to which
it gives name), in the barony of Inchiquin, about five miles north-west from the town
of Ennis, on the road to Corofin. The ecclesiastical remains of this place consist of
a beautiful old church or monastery in ruins ; the doorway of this ruin has been
considered one of the best specimens of monastic architecture in Ireland, and stands
unshaken to the present day. It also contains the remains of a round tower
between thirty-five and forty feet high, and a large cross of hewn stone bearing the
effigy of the Patron Saint of the parish, namely, St. Monawl, whose altar of sculp-
tured stone is still preserved at this ruin, and whose name and festival are still ven-
erated in the parish of Dysert. An accurate sketch of the doorway of the ancient
venerable ruin may be seen in the ‘‘ Dublin Penny Journal,” 1832-3, page 148,
from the drawings of the late lamented Dr. Petrie.

In the Petrie Collection of Ecclesiastical Antiquities, in the Museum of the
Royal Irish Academy, may be seen part of the ancient crozierof St. Monawl in two

jieces, regarding which we find the following notice in Miss Petrie’s handwriting in
er father’s Catalogue of Antiquities :— No. 913-914. Crozier of St. Nael or Mona-
lach, patron Saint of Dysert O’Dea ; it had been preserved in the church until pur-
by my father from an old woman who belonged to the neighbourhood of Dysert
O’Dea, and who belonged to the family of the Zrrenachs or hereditary keepers.”

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-112.png ---
92 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

were granted, in fee, to Sir Edward Fisher, Knt.". This is
the only information we have that there was a religious
house here.

"Rolls.

This place is now commonly called Dysert O’Dea from its having been the terri-
torial residence of the ancient Dalcasian sept of that name, (who were chiefs of the
Cinel Fearmaic in Thomond, and whose castle stands in ruins at a short distance to
the north-west of the old church, but it was also called Disert Tola, i.e., St. Tola’s
desert. Laniganin his Ecclesiastical History of Ireland, vol. iii., p. 171, and p.
173, notes 105, 106, 107, in his notice of St. Tola and Disert Tola, appears to
mistake the person and the place. He says :—‘‘ This Saint (Tola) was of the illus-
pee family of Ga/engi in the Queen’s County,” and places Disert Tola in the King’s

‘ounty.

The copy of O’Clery’s Book of Genealogies of the Saints of Erin, preserved in
the College of St. Isidore, in Rome, shows that he was not of the family of the
“ Galengi” of Leinster, but a Munsterman, and a kindred branch of the Dalcais, at
the head of whose territory Disert-Tola is situated. This book gives his genealogy
as follows :—‘‘ Tula, of Disert-Tula, son of Donchadh, son of Earbroinn, son
of Garbann, son of Senach, son of Muireadach, son of Failglinn, son of Broccan,
son of Carbmac, son of Taidg, son of Cian, son of Oilioll Olum,” &c.

This is sufficient to establish Dr. Lanigan’s error as to the family of St. Tola.
To identify the Place called Disert Tola we have only to consult the proper autho-
tities. The following note from the Félire Aenguis in the Leabrha Breac at the
Feast of St. Tola is conclusive enough on the subject :—

“Tola the pious from Disiurt Tola in the upper part of Dal g-Cais, and from Enach
Dairen in Uibh Failge.” Felire Aenguis, 30th March.

The following extracts from the ‘‘ Annals of the Four Masters,” at the year
A.D. 1589, confirm this Passages and leave no doubt as to the position and
antiquity of Disert-Tula or Disert O’Dea :—A.D. 1589. ‘t Dermot Oge, the son of
Dermot, son of Denis, son of Dermot, son of Conor, Bishop of Limerick, son of
Morough an Dana, O'Dea, died and was buried in his own town of Disert Tola, in
the cantred of Kinel-Fearmaic,-in the upper part of Dal g-Cais.”

The Conor O'Dea, Bishop of Limerick, above-mentioned, ‘‘ succeeded in the year
1400, resigned the see in 1420, and died in 1434. See Harris’s edition of Ware’s
Bishops p. 507, where this bishop is mentioned under the name of Cornelius O'Dea.”

O’Dea's castle stands in ruins a short distance to the north-west of
St. Tola’s church. This castle is mentioned in the description of the county of
Clare, written in 1585, and now preserved in the Manuscript Library of Trinity
College, Dublin, E. 2, 14, as the residence of Donell Mael O’Dea. See ‘‘Annals of
the Four Masters,” A.D. 1589, n. z. and A.D. 1598 n. w.

This place has been celebrated in history as the scene of the memorable battle of
Dysert O’Dea, fought on the roth May, 1318, by the Dal g-Cais of Thomond against
Richard De Clare and his army. This battle forms one of the finest episodes in the
Caithreim Toirdhealbhaigh, or History of the wars of Thomond, written by Magrath,
the Historian of Thomond, who was alive when the battle was fought, and probably
an eye-witness of what he has so eloquently described.

In this batt!e of Dysart O’Dea, Richard De Clare was slain by Conor O’Dea,
and his son fell at the same time by the hand of Feidhlim O’Conor of Corcomroe,
and four of his bravest knights, namely, Sir Henry De Capel, Sir Thomas De Naas,
Sir James De Cantelon (Condon), Sir John De Cantclon and other noble chiefs,
and the flower of his army, fell by the broad blades of the Dal g-Cais, and
the remnant of De Clare's army, dispirited at the fall of their leaders, gave
way on all sides and were pursued by the Dalcassian troops to the castle
of Bunratty, the stronghold and residence of De Clare. When the news of
the death of her husband and son reached De Clare’s wife at Bunratty, we are in-
formed that she abandoned the castle, set fire to the place, and took a final farewell
of the country, and that none of her descendants ever came back to claim it, and
since the memorable battle of Dysert O’Dea we find no mention of the name of
De Clare in the Annals of Thomond.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-113.png ---
County of Clare. 93

Six-Mile-Bridge,™ called in Irish Abhuinn O’Gearna, from
the river Gearna, which runs from. thence to the Shannon.
There was a chapel, or vicarial house, near to this town,
which did belong to the Dominicans of Limerick, but of this
there are now no remains.”

Tomgrany,*™ Three or four miles east of Lough Derg. An
abbey was founded here early.

A.D. 735. Died the abbot St. Manchin

747. Died the abbot Conell.?

791. Died the abbot Cathnia O’Guary.*

886. The abbey was plundered.»

949. It received the same treatment.°

964. Cormac O’Killeen, a man famous for his learning and
good works, died this year; he was abbot of Tuaimgrene

~ Burke, p. 213. * Was called anciently Tuaimgraine. % Act. SS. 0. 332.
*"M-Geogh. *Id. » Tr. Th. p. 634. °id. A

“This important battle,” says O'Donoghue in his Memoir of the O’Briens, ‘‘was
fought on the roth May, 1318, besides establishing on a secure basis thenceforward
the power of the O’Briens as sovereigns of Thomond, and expelling from its bor-
ders the issue of Thomas De Clare, who, to the weakness of a title depending merely
on the sword, had added the crime of murder, conceived in perfidy, if not sacrilege.”
We are informed that, ‘previous to the banquet from which Brian Roe was hastily
dragged to be torn between horses, by Thomas De Clare, he and Brien had, in
token of greater confidence, partaken of the same holy sacrament, the consecrated
host being divided in two parts for the purpose.” —See the celebrated Remonstrance
on Pope John XXII, from O'Neil, in ‘‘Fordun’s Scottish Chron.,” Lib. 12,
p. 26.
So great was the resentment of the Dal g-Cais against the De Clares, that the
body of Richard, the father, was cut into minute pieces. Pembridge confirms
this statement, but adds that the remains were interred in the church of the Friars
Minors in Limerick. See ‘‘O’Donoghoe’s Memoir of the O’Briens,” Chap. ix.,
pp. 127-128, n.22.—See Cathreim Toirdhealbhaig (Wars of Thomond) A.D. 1318.
36 This abbey was situated on the river O’Gamey in the present town of Six-Mile-
Bridge, situated partly in the parish of Kilfentenan, barony of Bunratty, but chiefly
in the parish of Kilfinaghty, barony of Tulla, six Irish miles N. W. by West from
Limerick on the old road to Ennis.
Abhan O’g-Cearnaigh, now the river O’Garney, which gives name to this village
(called in Insh ‘‘Droicheat Abhain O'g-Cearnaigh,” or the bridge of the O'Gammey
river), rises near Broadford in Glenomra, flows through the village of Six-Mile-Bridge,
and discharges itself into the Shannon at Bunratty. This river was originally called
the Rait, gen. Raite, hence Bunraitte or Bunratty, and derived its present name of
O'Garney from the territory of Ui-g-Cearnaigh through which it flows.
See “Annals of the Four Masters,” A.D. 1564, p. 1600. n. 0. and Ordnance Map
of Clare, sheet 52.
37 A.D, 1026. Conall Ua Cillene, successor of Cronan of Tuaim Greine, was abbot.
A.D, 1031. Mac Dealbhaeth, successor of Cronan of Tuaim Greine, died.
A.D. 1093. Ailill Ua Niallain, Tanist, abbot of Cluain Mic Nois,died. The
successor of Cronan of Tuaim Greine, and the successor of Colman of Cill Mic Duach.

A.D. 1098. Macraith Ua Flathen, successor of Ciaran, and Cronan of Tuaim
Greine, died on his pilgrimage at Acha-bo ; he was of the tribe of Ui Fiachrach-
Fella.

The following unpublished notice of the history of the parish and church of
Tomgrany is found in the Ordnance Survey of Clare, in the Library of the Royal
Trish Academy :—

“‘This parish is situated near the N. E, extremity of the county of Clare, and

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-114.png ---
94 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

and of Roscommon, he was also both abbot and bishop of
Clonmacnois; and built the church and steeple of this
abbey.4

1002. Died the abbot Dungal, he was the son of Beoan.¢

1027. Brien Borombh, the famous monarch of Ireland,
repaired the steeple about this time!

1078. Died the abbot Cormac Hua Beain.®

1084. O’Ruark of Breffiny reduced this abbey to ashes,

4 Act. SS. p. 107, 360. ld. p. 257. ' Keating. Act, SS. p. 361.

is bounded on the west and north by the parish of Feakle ; on the east by the
parishes of Moyno and Ogonnello ; on the south by part of the latter and Kilno,
and on the west by the parish of Feakle.

“The name of this parish is written in all the ancient Irish authorities 7uaim
Greine, and explained in the ‘ Yellow Book of Lecan,’ and in the ‘ Lismore MS.’
as signifying the fmulus of Grian, the daughter of Bord na Binne, who was
drowned in Lough Greine. The same legend is vividly remembered in the country,
but horribly deformed. The lady Grian, who was also called Gille Greinne, or
Candor Solis, i. e. the Brightness of the Sun, was a far-famed beauty who flourished
here at a period unknown to chronology, but like Venus, she was of unnatural
origin, and when told of this she became sad and cheerless, and at once
determined on self-destruction. She cast herself into a lake in S/iabh Echtghe,
in which she was immediately drowned. When her fair body floated it was
carried by the stream flowing from this lake in a south-eastern direction and cast
up on the land upon the margin of a wood called by posterity from that circum-
stance Daire Greine, i. e. Roberetum Gryncae, where it was found by her friends,
who interred it at a place not far distant, and raised over it a ‘umulus,
to which they and posterity gave, and continue to give, the name of
Tuaim Greine, i. e.the tumulus of Grian. This is the local explanation of the
word, and it is as true as any other legend etymology and conjecture could invent
to account for it.

“ The only other explanation which could be offered, is to suppose that Zuaim
Greine signifies the mount of the sux, and that it received that appellation from a
colony of Heliolators or Grionalators formerly established in this wild district; unless
we suppose that it simply means sun-mount, i.e, the sunny hill, or human sepul-
ture, and this latter is Tikely to be as true as any other, as we have millions of nice
little names derived from ‘clear spring,’ or shady grove, or SUNNY HILL, so that
if we reject the explanation of the name 7uaim Greine preserved by written and
oral tradition, we must only invent a little etymological FABLE to account for it ina
new and /earned manner.

“A monastery was founded here at an early period by St. Cronan, who was vene-
rated there as the patron, and whose Coarbs the abbots of 7uatm Greine were
called; but no life of him has been published by Colgan, nor discovered by the
investigators of Irish hagiology employed on the Ordnance Survey of Ireland.

“According to the frish Calendar collected from various sources by the Four
Masters, his memory was celebrated on the 19th of October, under which his life is
certainly given in Colgan’s MSS., which were in Louvain about one hundred years
ago. Till the life of St. Cronan of Zuaim Greine be discovered, no chronological
calculation can be made of the time at which an ecclesiastical establishment was
first placed at Zuaim Greine.

**For the annals of Zain Greine, see Archdall’s “ Monasticon,” p. §5, copy in
the Royal Irish Academy, and ‘‘ Annals of the Four Masters,” at the years A.D.
735, 744, 747, 789, 1002, 1026, 1031, 1078, 1084, 1093, 1100, 1164, 1185, 1485.

“Colgan has published a passage relating to this place in his Acta SS. (under,
chapter 1. of the appendix to the life of St. Cormac, Bishop of Ath-7ruim), which
he gives as from the ‘ Annals of the Four Masters,” A.D. 964, but which is not to be
found in the copy published by Doctor O’Conor, nor in any copy to which we have


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-115.png ---
County of Clare. 95

but the fate he merited soon overtook him, for he fell by the
troops of Thomond.*

1164. This abbey was put into the same miserable state
this year.!

1170. It was plundered again about this time.«

Tomgrany is now a parish church.

» Jd. and O'Halloran, vol. 2, p. 294. ' Act. SS. p. 634. * Id.

access in Dublin. This passage is of great value, and cannot be a fabrication
of Colgan, though it is probable that he has quoted the wrong Annals,* It runs

thus :—

“A.D. 964, Cormac O’Killeen, Coarb of the Saints Kiaran, Coeman, and Cro-
nan, bishop sage, a man of great age, who erected the church of Zuaim Greine,
together with its tower, died.

*«It is to be lamented that we have not the original Irish of this passage, as it
would show that a Cloig Teach (round tower) was erected at Tuaim Greine, in the
third quarter of the tenth century. This passage must be looked for in the more
ancient original Annals.

“Tt will further appear from a passage given by Keatinge in the reign of Brian
Boromh, that the fower of Tuaim Greine was not built for the first time in the Abbacy
of Cormac O’Killeen, but redui/t or repaired, as can be inferred from the words
employed, Cloigtheach Thuama Greine do athnuadhadh le Brian, i.e. ‘The round
tower of Zuaim Greine was renewed by Brian.’ This passage can be easily reconciled
with the one published by Colgan, for the fact was that Saint Cronan’s little tower,
which had been shattered by lightning at various periods, and patched up as often,
was no longer large or strong enough to answer the purposes of the monastery,
which had in the course of three or four centuries sprung up at 7uaim Greine, and
Brian thought proper to extend his patronage to the aged abbot to have it rebuilt.
The antiquary Bos to lament that even the site of this tower is not now known at
Tuaim Greine.

“The present church of Zuaim Greine is of no antiquity, and there is nothing there
by which the antiquarian can be interested but a rude castle, which was built by
the O’Grady's, hereditary Aerenachs of Tuaim Greine, and lords of the territory of
Hy Donghaile, in which it is situated. This castle is mentioned in the College list
of the castles of Thomond, as belonging to Edmond O’Grady, who had another
castle at Moyno, and another at Scariffe.

“ The little town of Scariffe, which is shewn on the Down survey as a village even
then of some importance, belongs to this parish. It is mentioned in the “ Annals of
the Four Masters” at the year A.D. 1598, as a castle taken from the Attorney of
the Bishop of Meath’s son (Brady) by Taidg O’Brien. _It is also mentioned in the
same Annals at the year 1564. The holy well of Saint Cronan, the patron of
Tuaim Greine, is situated in the centre of the townland of Currakyle.—Your obe-
dient servant,

Joun O'Donovan.”

® The Irish text of this passage is found in the “ Chronicum Scotorum.” The
translation is as follows :—

“ A.D. 964, Cormac Ua Cillin, of the Uib Fiachrach Aidhne, Comarb of Ciaran
and of Coman, and Comarb of Tuaim Grene; and it was by him the great church
of Tuaim Grene was built and its C/oightech (round tower). Sapiens et senex, et
Episcopus, quievit in Christo.

Sce also Petrie’s “ Round Towers,” p. 375.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-116.png ---
96

COUNTY OF CORK.

Abbey Mahon, near Timoleague, in the barony of Barryroe,
and close to the shore of the bay of Court M‘Sherrie ; the
monks of the Cistertian order founded an abbey here at their
own expense; the Lord Barry endowed it with eighteen
plowlands, which constitute the parish of Abbey Mahon ; but
the building was never finished, for the suppression of monas-
teries taking place, those lands were seized by the crown.
The walls of the church are yet standing. This house has been
mistaken for that of de Sancto Mauro, alias de Fonte vivo.!

Abbey Shrowry ;* To the west of Skibbereen, in the barony
of Carbury. Here are the ruins of a parish church, which is
said to have been a religious house, but nothing appears of
it in our authors.™

Ballybeg ,? a small walk from Buttevant, in the barony of
Orrery and Kilmore. Philip de Barry founded a priory here
for regular canons following the rule of St. Augustin, and
dedicated it to St. Thomas, the favourite saint of that age ;
he endowed it in the year 1229, in remembrance of which, his
equestrian statue in brass was erected in the church. David,
his grandson, enlarged the revenues belonging to the priory
in the year 1235, and was made a Knight, but was killed in
the year 1262."

David de Cardigan was prior in the reign of King Henry
III. and John de Barry in the following reign.°

The possessions belonging to this house were, in the 16th
year of Queen Elizabeth, granted for the term of 21 years to

| Smith's Cork, vol. 1., p. 253. ™ Smith's Cork, vol. 1, p. 281. ™ Lodge, vol. 1,
194,195. ° King, p. 218.

‘Abbey Mahon—The ruins of Abbey Mahon are close to the bay of Court Mac
Sherry, in the parish of Abbey Mahon, in the barony of Ibane and Barryroe, to
which it gives name. It is one mile and a half E. S. E. from Timol e, in the
County of Cork. This parish is situated on the north-west side of Court Mac
Sherry bay on the south coast. It formerly constituted part of the parish
of Lisle, from which it was separated on the erection of an abbey by some Cis-
tertian monks, which stood close to the shore, and was endowed by Lord Barry
with eighteen ploughlands, but was not entirely complete at the general suppres-
Sion of monasteries when its possessions were seized by the crown and granted to
the Boyle family, and are still the property of the Earl of Shannon.

3 Abbey Shrewry was situated in the parish of Abbey Shrewry, on the northern
bank of the river IIen, one mile west of Skibbereen, in the eastern division of the
barony of West Carbery, in the county of Cork. This parish is situated near
the southern coast on the road from Cork to Baltimore, and is intersected by the
river IIen, on the north of which may be seen the ruins of this religious house
from which it took its name.

3 Ballybeg—The venerable remains of this monastery, known as the Abbey of
St. Thomas, are situated on the river Awbeg, about one mile from Buttevant, in
the parish of Ballybeg, in the barony of Orrery and Kilmore, county of Cork.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-121.png ---
Ee

County of Cork. 97

Mary, XXXV. Henry VIIL, thé abbot was found seized of his
priory with a cemetery and certain buildings on the site, con-
taining one acre, annual value besides reprises, 6s. 8d. also
sixty acres of arable land, of the small measure, and forty of
pasture, being the demesne lands of the priory, annual value,
besides reprises, 40s.; one hundred and twenty acres in the
said townland, annual value, besides reprises, 60s.; and the
following rectories appropriated to the said prior :—Ballybeg,
annual value, besides reprises, £4; Kilkerran, Ardsoyll, and
Rathbarry, annual value, besides reprises, 100s. ; Ballycloghie
and Ballycastell, annual value, besides reprises, £7 ; Druse-
mallyny, in MacWilliam’s country, annual value, besides
reprises, £6; Carryketwohill, annual value, besides reprises,
46; Castlebeghan, annual value, besides reprises, £6 ;
Kylcarryhyn, annual value, besides reprises, 20s. ; Killnemal-
laghe, annual value, besides reprises, £8; and Rossaghe,
Downeraghill, and Cahirdowgan, annual value, £6; all sterling
money. The said lands and rectories lie in the county of Cork.

Inquisition, 5th February, III. James I, finds that, 28th
April, XVI. Elizabeth, a grant for a term of years was made
to George Bourcher, Esq., of this priory and the demesne
thereof, with certain lands in the town of Ballybeg; as also the
rectories of Ballybeg, Ballikeran, Ardhoile, and Rathbarry,
Ballyclogh and Ballycastell, Crustmalyny in MacWilliam’s
country, Carricktwohill, Castlebechin, Kill . . Kilnemal-
lagh, Rosseghe, Downeragill, and Chairdowgan, in the counties
of Cork and Mayo. To hold the same at the annual rent of
441 10s. Irish money.

David de Cardigan was prior in the reign of King Henry
III. and John de Barry in the following reign.°

The possessions belonging to this house were, in the 16th
year of Queen Elizabeth, granted for the term of 21 years to
George Bourchier, Esq., who forfeited the same by non-pay-
ment of the rent ;? those lands and tithes were granted in
trust to Sir Daniel Norton, for the wife of Sir Thomas Norris,
president of Munster, and were found, in the year 1622, to
be of the yearly value of £ 260.4

Of this abbey there yet remain theeast windowand the steeple,
which is a strong building, and by the holes in the vaulted roof
it appears that they had a chime of bells; the traces of the
foundation, with an high tower a considerable way to the south-
west, prove it to have been a truly magnificent structure."

Ballymacadane ;4 four miles from the city of Cork, on the

° King, p. 218. ? King, p. 218. Smith, vol. 1, pp. 323) 324. "1d.

4 Ballymacadane.—' Inquisition st June, XXX. Queen Elizabeth, finds that the

two carrucates of land called Ballimackedane and Bally Ildy, adjacent to this abbey
H

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-122.png ---
98 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

high road to Bandon; Cormac M‘Carthy, the son of Teige,
surnamed Laidir, about the year 1450, founded an abbey
here for nuns following the rule of St. Augustin ;* though
others say it was founded for friars. Part of the walls of
the building still remain." .

“Inquisition 12th January, XXXIII. Elizabeth, finds that
this religious fouridation, with a carucate of land called Balle-
macydane, and half a carucate called Ballelikye, adjoining the
said monastery, were of the annual value, besides reprises, of
10s. gd. Irish money.”

“ Inquisition 7th*March, XXVII. Elizabeth, finds that the
abbey of Ballyvaggadan, in Barret’s country, containing two
carucates of land, was in the possession of Cormac MacDerby,
and of the annual value, beside reprises, of 10s. Irish money.”

Ballynoe; in the barony of Kilnataloon, and two miles south
of Knockmourne ; there are large ruins of an ancient building
here, said to have been a religious house.”®

Ballyvourney,*® or the Town of the Beloved; is a small
village six miles west of Macroomp, in the barony of Muskerry.

St. Abban, who lived to a very great age, and died A.D.
650, built a nunnery at Burneach, in Muscragiamitin, and
presented it to St. Gobnata, who was descended from Conor
the Great, monarch of Ireland; her patron day is February
14th ;¥ the church, which is dedicated to her, is 104 feet in
length and 24 in breadth, and the steeple seems nodding
to its fall?

Bantry,” a decayed town on the bay of that name, which

* Smith, vol, 1, p. 179, and Map. * War. Mon. “Smith supr. © Smith, vol. 1,
pb. 161. *Zs also called Husneagh and Borneagh. ¥ Act. SS. pp. 315,622. * Smith,
vol. 1, ~. 193. *Was called anciently Ballygobbin,

and with their appurtenances belonged thereto, and were of the annual value of
35. 4d., and that Felemy Mac Owen, and other friars of the Order of St. Francis,
were in possession thereof, and that the tithes of the said lands belonged to the
rectory of Iniskynie in this county.”

5 Ballynoe.—This is probably represented by the large ruin to be seen a little to
the south-east of the village of Ballynoe, supposed to have been the ruins of a
religious house founded by Knights Hospitallers, to whom the place anciently be-
longed. This place is also called Knockmoume.

° Ballyvourncy.—Of the conventual church of Ballyvourney, some very extensive
and interesting ruins still remain. In one of the walls is a head carved in stone
which is regarded with much veneration. Near this is a holy well much resorted
to on the 11th of February, the festival of St. Gobnata, the patroness, and also
on Whit Monday, and near the well is a large stone with a circular basin or font,
rudely excavated, the water from which is held sacred.—See ‘‘Smith’s History
of Cork,” vol. i., p. 185.

7 Bantry.—According to the “ Annalsof the Four Masters,” the monastery of Bantry
was built by O’Sullivan in the year A.D. 1320. The MS. History of the Franciscan
Order in Ireland adds: ‘‘ The building of the Convent of Bantry, in the diocese
of Ross, was begun about the year 1320, and it was reformed by Father David
Afarly in the year 1432. When persecution arose it was seized on by the English
in the year 1508,.two of the friars being killed, and the rest obliged to fly for their

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-123.png ---
County of Cork. : 99

gives name to the barony ; Dermot O'Sullivan Beare built a
beautiful small monastery on the sea-shore near this town, for
conventual Franciscan Friars, in the year 1320, and died in
the year 1466." It is now wholly demolished* mo

Inquisition 12th January, XX XIII. Queen Elizabeth, finds
that this religious foundation, with its appurtenances and a
watermill near the monastery, were of the annual value of 12d.

Bridgetown, on the river Blackwater, in the barony of
Fermoy. Alexander, the son of Hugh, founded a priory here,
in the reign of King John, which he endowed and dedicated
to the Virgin Mary, and supplied it with regular canons from
the priory of Newtown, in the county of Meath, and the abbey
of St. Thomas in Dublin.4 King Edward I. granted a con-
firmation of the endowment made by Alexander. The family
of Roche contributed largely to the possessions of this priory.

In the year 1375, King Edward III. directed his writ to the
bishops and commons to elect chosen persons, who were
immediately to repair to England, there to treat, consult,
and agree with his Majesty and council, as well touching the
government of this kingdom, as for the aid and support of the
war his Majesty was then engaged in. Thomas, the prior of
Bridgetown, was one of the persons appointed on this impor-
tant business.

Opposite the high altar is a ruined tomb of the founder.
The priory was pleasantly situated at the very confluence of
the rivers Awbeg and Blackwater, which glide through a deep
rocky glen opposite to the ruins.¢

Brigowne,’ one mile east of Mitchelstown, in the barony of
Clongibbons. St. Abban founded Brighgobban, which was
once a considerable place, and called a city." There yet

> War. Mss., vol. 34, War. Mon. °Is called in Irish Ballindroghed. 4 Monast.

Angl., vol. 2, p. 1045. eld. * Aylof's Calendar of ancient Charters, p. 452.
© Smith, vol. 1, p. 349. “Act. SS., p. 627.

lives. Subsequently, Daniel O’Sullivan, Earl of Beerhaven, having driven out the
English in the year 1602, partially destroyed it lest it should again become a strong-
hold of the enemy, promising, at the same time, to rebuild it as soon as possible.
This, however, he never was able to accomplish, for he was obliged to fly into
Snain, and there met an early death.”

8 Brigowne.—The following passage from the ‘‘Irish Life of Saint Abban,”
founder of Brigobban (Brigowne), shows that he founded and consecrated several
other churches in this district, and that he deposited a copy of the Liturgy of the
holy church in each of them ; he had at this time returned from Rome, having
founded several churches on the Continent on his homeward journey. The passage
is as follows :—

“ Aban returned into Erin, bearing the blessing of those multitudes with him.
Aban went into Connaught and founded three noble churches there, and he then
returned into Crioch Eachach Coincinn, in Criock Corca Duibhne, and he blessed
(consecrated) Boirnech and he gave it to Gobnaid ; and he blessed Cill Aithfe on
Magh Concin, and he gave it to Fionan; and Fionan foretold the coming of Aban
some years before his birth. He blessed Cul Cullaing and Brigoban, and Cill

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-124.png ---
100 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

remain at Brigowne the walls of a church, built of large
blocks of a very fine freestone, brought with much labour
from the mountains, and the ruins of a round tower, which we
are informed fell about the year 1720. This church is sup-
posed by some to have been erected by St. Finchw; his staff
was kept here as an holy relique, and the adjacent country
people used to swear upon it! His festival is observed here
November 25th.*

Buttevant, in the barony of Orrery and Kilmore, was an

Smith, vol. 1, p. 353. * Calendar, vet.

Cruimpir, and Cill-na-Marb, and he blessed Cluain Aird Mobecoc, and Cluain
Fionnglaise, and he left Becan there, and he left the office of the holy church in
every church of them.” —‘ Life of Saint Aban O’C. MS., C.U.I.” p. 54.

Regarding the round tower which once adored this very ancient town, Father
Smiddy thus writes :—

“Tt must be admitted that, in not a few instances, human hands have assisted
the elements in obliterating all vestiges of many round towers. This was the
case with respect to the Round Tower of Roscarbery, of which not a trace now
remains ; and also with regard to the round tower which stood near the Church
of St. Finbarr, in the city of Cork. In the year 1720, a violent storm threw down
the Round Tower of Brigowne, near Mitchelstown, leaving standing of it only a
fragment or stump about fifteen feet high from the base. In that state it continued
till about fifty years ago, when this fragment was taken down, and the stones used
in the erection of a new glebe-house or parsonage in its immediate neighbourhood.
The Keystone or lintel over the door, which had on it an inscribed cross, the work-
men refused to take away ; and that is either buried in the adjoining cemetery, or
perhaps, forms there now the footstone of an unknown grave. St. Finneachan,
or Finchu, was, at an early period, bishop and abbot of Brigowne. His staff or
crozier was kept there for ages asa venerable relic ; and, of himself, there is in the
ancient Book of Lismore, a curious biography, replete, according to the taste of
the age in which it was written, with legends, wonders, and supernatural incidents.
Finncu means the fair hero or warrior, a name which, probably, he obtained
because, as this record of his life states, he had often, even on the battle-field, per-
sonally assisted his friends in the cause of right against might. The site of his
monastery was called Sruighe-amhane, which means the field or farm of the river.
Though the round tower and monastery have disappeared, the ruins of the old
church are still standing there, and the memory oP Finneachan himself lives
distinct and undying in the local traditions of the people.”—(‘‘The Round
Towers,” &c., page 195).

All Irish scholars will not agree with the learned writer as to his explanation
of the name Brigowne. Mr. Joyce, in his ‘Irish Names,” &c., page 356, gives
a different derivation :—‘‘ Bri (he says), signities a hill or rising ground, the
same as the Scotch word Brae. Brigowne, a village near Mitchelstown, in
Cork, once a celebrated ecclesiastical establishment, where are still to be seen the
remains of a very ancient church and round tower, is called in Irish Bri-gobhuns,
#.¢, the hill of the smith. In our present names, this word does not occur very
often : it is found simply in the form of Aree, in Donegal, Monaghan, and Wexford ;
while in Tyrone, it takes the name of Zrigh.” Gibson in his ** History of Cork,” ,
I1., 468, gives « still less plausible origin for this name. “ The parish may have
derived its ancient name from the mountain stream or river Bregog, of which
Spenser speaks.” 1t seems to me that as St. Abban has been from time immemorial
the patron of this place, its name might easily be explained as Brigh-Abhaun, i.¢.,
“the hill of St. Abban.”

9° Buttevant.—Inquisition 3rd of St. Hilary, XX XI. Elizabeth, finds that a grant
was made to David Barry, Viscount, of this friary, at the annual rent of 36s. 8d.
Irish, but that the same was forfeited by non-payment of the rent.

Buttevant is situated in the parish of that name, in the barony of Orrery and

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-125.png ---
County of Cork. 101

ancient corporation, governed by a mayor and aldermen, but
is now gone to decay. David Oge Barry, Lord Buttevant,
founded a monastery here in A.D. 1290, for conventual
Franciscans, and dedicated it to St. Thomas the martyr! But
this foundation must have been earlier than the time here
set down; for we find that William Barry, in the year 1273,
granted the whole church of Cathirdusgan to the prior of

1 King, p. 136. War. Mon., Lodge, vol. 1, p. 196.

Kilmore, in a beautiful and fertile country at the foot of the Ballyhowra mountains,
and on the banks of the Awbeg (i.c., little river), about 22 miles N.W. from Cork.
Here, too, are the remains of a sumptuous ruin of the ancient abbey of Buttevant,
picturesquely situated on the steep bank of the river Awbeg. See an interesting
sketch of this historic place in ‘‘ Smith's History of Cork,” p. 112, &c.

Buttevant derives its present name from the Norman war-cry of the Barrys—

‘* Boutes en avant :"—it was in olden times called Ki/nemullagh, as we learn from
the poet Spenser :

“*To Buttevant, where spreading forth at large,
It giveth name unto that auncient cittie,
Which Kilnemullah cleped is of old.”

In many ancient documents, however, it is also called Bothaun, and in Latin,
Bothonia. The ‘‘ Annals of the Four Masters” fix, with accuracy, the foundation
of the monastery for the Friars Minors here : “A.D, 1251. A monastery was erected
at Kilnamullagh, in the diocese of Cork, by the Barry; and it was afterwards
selected as the burying place of the Barrys.” Though Buttevant has now dwindled
to a village, it was formerly a walled and corporate town ; and to judge from its
ruins, must have been of considerable importance. The Barrys ruled here with
regal splendour, and almost with royal power. Such a centre was it become of

iety, that Smith writes: ‘‘This whole town formerly seems to have

en an assemblage of churches and religious houses” (History of Cork, i., 315),
and it merited from Borlase the eulogy, that it was ‘‘an old nest of abbots
and friars.” Ward, in his “MS. History,” gives the following account of the
Franciscan Convent of Buttevant : ‘It was built in 1251, and was placed under
the care of the Superior of Cork in 1260. In the reign of Queen Elizabeth the
friars were several times driven away from it, and some of them were arrested and
thrown into prison. All the buildings, with the exception of the church, were
ruined, and that was preserved on account of the tombs of the nobility there
buried, but all the images were broken. Still some of the friars continued to
reside there, partly in the conventual buildings or their ruins, and partly in the
neighbourhood.”

Wadding also writes regarding this place :—‘‘ Buttefania, or Buttevania: by
Pisanus it is corruptly called Bachonia, and by Rodulphus, Bathonia. The town
was formerly large and frequented, now it is reduced and poor. Two illustrious
families, the Barrys and Lombards, had their residence there. Some say that the
convent was erected by the Barrys, others by the Prendergasts : but I think it was
by the Barrys, whose magnificent tomb was erected in the middle of the choir,
and whose whole family always evinced their piety towards our Order. In the
church are many sepulchres of nobles. It is wonderful with what care the friars
have repaired some of the ruins of this convent.” In the crypt is an immense
collection of bones and skulls, which are popularly supposed to be the remains of
those who fell in the sanguinary battle of Knockninoss on the 13th of November,
1647. Among those who were slain on this occasion was the famous MacAlistair
MacDonnell, surnamed Colkitto. It is said, however, that a great portion of
these human bones were brought to this church from the ancient abbey of Ballybeg,
about half a mile distant, by a farmer who got possession of the abbey-land and
graveyard, and who was justly solicitous to deposit such remains in consecrated

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-126.png ---
102 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Buttevant.™ Some are of opinion that this house owed its
origin to one of the family of Prendergast, but the monument
of the Barrys being in the centre of the choir, confirms to
them the honour of this foundation."

A.D. 1306. David was prior.°

1311. John FitzRichard was prior.?

1318. Thomas was prior.4

1330. William Ketche was warden.’

1342. John Fitz-Richard, the prior, was indicted, with some
of his brethren, for assaulting John Reynolds in the city of
Dublin, and imprisoning the said Reynolds ; the Sheriff was
ordered to take Fitz-Richard into custody to answer the said
offence ; in the same term, Reynolds sued the said prior for
a debt of 100 shillings, for which he was also attached.*

About the middle of the last century the following inscrip-
tion was visible on an ancient stone in the wall of the chapter
house :—

“Philippe de la Chapelle gist ici Dieu de s’ aime ay mercy.”*
The walls of the choir and nave, with several other buildings,
including the steeple, which is an high square tower, erected
on a fine Gothic arch, are yet entire; to the south is the
chapel of the Virgin Mary; which, with the monastery,
forms a picturesque ruin. On the north side of the monas-
tery stands a ruined tower called Cullin, said to have been
erected by one of the Earls of Desmond, who retired thither."
There were some fine paintings in fresco on the walls of this
monastery, and a few of their remains are still visible.”

This house was repaired by the Roman Catholics in the
year 1604.*

Nunnery —Near the monastery stands another ruin, which
is said to have been a nunnery, under the invocation of St.
Owen, or St. John the Baptist ;¥ but we can find no account
whatsoever either of its foundation or order.

™ King, p.136. % Wadding, vol. 5, p.10. ° King, p.31§. Pid. p.136. I/d.
p. 137. "ld. p. 316. "1d. p. 136. * War. Mss., vol. 34, p. 159. "Smith, vol.

1, Pp. 320, 321. * O'Halloran, Int, p. 119. * Cox, vol. 2, p.10. % Smith, vol.
1, p. 321. .

ground. Inthe south gable of the transept is a slab with the inscription :—‘‘ Pray
for the souls of Maurice Fitzgerald, Esq., of Castleishen, of the house of Desmond,
who died the 16th day of September, in the year 1726, and Dame Helena Butler,
his wife, of the house of Ormond, who died in the year 1721, whose bodies are
deposited in this vault along with their ancestors, until the resurrection of the dead,
with Christ our Lord.” To the south-west of the friary, and about thirty yards
from it, stands a square tower, which is described by Smith as being called Cullin,
and as having been built by an earl of Desmond. It is at present traditionally
known as ‘‘Caislane Caoimhin,” and appears to have originally formed part of the
conventual buildings. It is now built into and connected with the Catholic parish
church, which is deservedly reckoned among the handsomest parochial structures
in the south of Ireland.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-127.png ---
County of Cork. 103

Cape Clear Island*® is the most southern part of Ireland and
contains twelve ploughlands ; on the north-west point stands
a castle built on a rock in the sea, and called Dunanore; to
the east of which is the cove of Tra Kieran, or St. Kieran’s
strand, where we find a pillar of stone, with a cross rudely
cut towards the top, supposed to have been the work of that
Saint; this stone is held in great veneration by an incredible
number of pilgrims. who assemble round it every 5th of
March, on which day his festival is celebrated; a church in
ruins under the invocation of St. Kieran adjoins this pillar.*

St. Comgall, a disciple of St. Finbarr, was abbot of
Inisdoimhle,> and we meet with a St. Killian, who was
abbot here.*

820, 823, and 851. This island suffered from many de-
vastations.

953. Died the abbot Dunlang, son of O’Dunagan.?

960. The island was again despoiled.“4

Carigiliky ; In the parish of Miros in West Carbery. Here
are the foundations of some extensive ruins, with a large
cemetery ; this probably was the site of the abbey of Maure
or of the Clear Spring, which was founded A.D. 1172, by
Dermot M‘Cormac M‘Carthy, King of Desmond, who sup-
plied it with Cistercian Monks from the abbey of Baltinglass ;*
some writers place this foundation three years earlier.!

A.D. 1252. Patrick was abbot.®

1291. The abbot sued Dovenald O’Maythan for a messuage
and four carucates of land in Ardocherys.®

1519. The abbot John Imurily was made bishop of Ross in
this year.!

5th December, 30th Queen Elizabeth, this abbey with its
appurtenances in the towns of Maure, Leshinau, Curraghenin,
Lehenaugh, le Graunge, le Garnans, le Curragh, Ardgehan,

* Was ealled anciently Inisdaimhle and Inis Uladh, that is, Insula Ulidiorum.
Act. SS. p. 629; and in the Ecclesiastical books, we find it under the name of Insula
Sanctae Clarae. * Smith, vol. 1. p. 286. > Act. SS. p. 597. ° Id. p. 330. © Tr.

Th. p. 633. * Ann. Four Masters. “4 Tr, Th. p. 633. ¢ War. mon. Pembridge.
© Canobia Cistert. © King, p.396. *Jd. ‘Jd.

10 Cape Clear Island.—Archdall identifies Cape Clear Island and Inishdoimhle,
and in this he may be right. Colgan, however, who is referred to in proof, expressly
states that Inisdoimhle, also called Inis- Uladh ‘‘ex eo quod sancti de Ultonia eam in-
coluerant,” was situated in the river Suir on the confines of the Deisiand Hy-Kinselagh
**jacetque in confinibus Desiorum et Hi-Kenselach, in Surio flumine” (Acta SS.
pages 629, 630). The Martyrology of Donegal corroborates this opinion of Colgan.
At 1st December (page 325), it states that Inis-Doimhli was called Inis-Uladh,
“because the Ulstermen inhabited it,” and at 4th July, it describes the situation
of the island as ‘‘ between Ui-Ceinnselagh (county of Wexford) and the Deisi
(Waterford).” This description would make it probable that Inisdoimhle was the
ancient name of the island in the expansion of the Suir, near Waterford, now called
“Little Island.”

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-128.png ---
104 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Lyffevarrey, Cregan, Aneghepheyne, Lahernemannagh, Man-
ister, Nestrohuirie, and the rectories of Maure and Lyslie, or
elsewhere, in this county and belonging to the monastery of
Carigiliky, was granted for ever to Nicholas Walshe, at the
annual rent of £28 6s. 6d.

Castle Cor; In the barony of Duhallow and two miles north
of Loghort. It appears from a plea roll, 30th King Edward I,
that there was an abbey at Castle Corith;* but we have no
other account of it.

Castle Lyons )" A well-built market town, twelve miles from
Cork, in the barony of Barrymore :—

Gray Friars ; John de Barry founded this monastery in the
year 1307,™ but good authority has given this house to the Black
Dominican Friars, and says that it was dedicated to the
Virgin Mary." A considerable part of this building still re-
mains, particularly the choir, nave, and steeple of the church.
The possessions belonging to this monastery came into the
hands of the first Earl of Cork, who bequeathed the rents
and profits arising therefrom to his daughter, the Countess
of Barrymore, to buy her gloves and pins.°

White Friars ; ——— de Barry founded a monastery here
for Carmelites or Whitefriars.?

Cloggagh ;* An inquisition of the 17th of King James I.
finds the possessions of the little abbey of Cloggagh in this
county.1 We have no other knowledge of this abbey.

Inquisition 12th January, XX XIII. Elizabeth, finds that this
religious house, situated near Timoleague on the east, was
possessed of half a carucate of land, annual value, 6s. 8, Irish
money.

Clonmene; Lies on the south side of the Blackwater, in
the barony of Duhallow.

"Aud. Gen. * King, p. 133. ' Called anciently Castle Lehan. ™ War. mon.
™ Burke, pp. 291, 292. ° Smith, vol.t, p. 164. ? Burke ut supr. 4 King, p. 137.

1 Castle Lyons, or Castle Lehan, is beautifully situated in a rich fruitful soil, a
short way from the river Bride. In this place John De Barry founded a monastery
of Conventual Franciscans, anno 1307. Upon the dissolution, it was granted to
the Earl of Cork, who assigned it to his son-in-law David, the first Earl of Barry-
more, or rather, to his daughter ; for, in his will, he says :—‘‘ he bequeathes the
rents and profits of his house to his daughter Barrymore to buy her gloves and
pins.” A considerable part of this abbey still remains, particularly the choir, nave,
and steeple of the church, which are still standing connected with the parish church.

13 Cloggagh.— Inquisition 5th January, X VII. James, finds that all the titles of the
said half carucate of land did belong to the abbey ; that the fishery of the pool of
Cloggach, lying between Cloggach and Kilmoaloada, and adjoining the said lands,
did belong to the abbey ; that the said abbey, tithes, &c., were concealed by
Dermot MacCarthy, formerly Vicar of Kilmoaloada, and that on his death, John,
his son, claimed the same as his Jawful inheritance, and sold the same to
Dermot O’ Drea, parson of Kilmoaloada.”—‘' Ordnance Survey Papers,” R.I.A.,
vol. iv., p. 31. .

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-131.png ---
County of Cork. 105

A Monastery for friars following the rule of St. Augustin,
was founded here by O’Callaghan’

Cloyne ,** In the barony of Imokilly, a poor village, yet is a
bishop’s see; with a good cathedral.

? Smith, vol. 2, p. 302. * Called by the Irish writers Cluainumha.

13 Cloyne.—The account given by Archdall of this ancient and venerable see is
meagre inthe extreme. The see of Cloyne was founded by St. Colman Mac Lenin,
who was closely allied by blood with the reigning family of Munster. His genealogy
in the Book of Lecan traces back his family to Mogha Nuadhat ; but the Martyrology
of Donegal leaves us in uncertainity as to whether he was descended from that
Prince, or from another distinguished chieftain named Lughaidh Lagha. In his
carly years he was famed for hisrare poetic talents, and was honoured with the title of
Royal Bard of Munster. In after times he dedicated his minstrelsy to religion,
and. composed several poems on sacred subjects—a fragment of one of these, being
an elegant metrical Life of St. Senanus—was known to Colgan, who describes it
as ‘‘stylo vetusto et pereleganti patrio sermone conscriptum.” (Acta SS., page
339). In the Book of Lismore, there is another short poem in Irish, composed by

t. Colman, in praise of St. Brendan. It thus begins :—

“Brendan, flame of victorious lightning ;
He smote the chafer, he ploughed the waves
Westward to the populous assemblative place—
The fair-sided Land of Promise.”

At the request of St. Ita, St. Brendan, on a certain occasion, went forward to
meet the youthful Colman, and admonished him to enter on a life of penance,
saying ‘‘ God has called thee to salvation, and thou shalt be as an innocent dove in
the sight of God.” Colman, throughout the remainder of his life, was docile to
the inspirations of grace, and became illustrious among the saints of Ireland by his
learning and virtues. Towards the close of his earthly pilgrimage, hearing of the
fame of the school of Lough Eirce, he wished, though himself a master in the
paths of perfection, to visit that monastery, and to enrol his name among the
disciples of St. Finbarr, Our annalists do not mark with precision the year in
which St. Colman founded the Monastery of Cloyne. It was certainly not before
the year §50, for it is recorded that, at the inauguration of Aodh Caomh, King of
Cashel, about that time, our saint took part as the royal minstrel of Munster.
There seems, however, no ground for doubting the acccuracy of the statement made
by O'Halloran in his History of Ireland (vol. 3rd, page 76) on the authority of the
Psalter of Cashel, that Eochaidh, Monarch of Ireland in the year 560, founded the
Church of Cloyne for St. Colman.

According to the Annals of the Four Masters, St. Colman died in the year 600
(#.¢., 601 of our present computation), and the 24th of November is the day on
which his festival. is marked in all the ancient calendars, and on which it is still
observed in the Diocese of Cloyne. Our patron of Cloyne must not be confounded
with another St. Colman, who was honoured on the same day: both these saints
are thus commemorated by St. A=ngus in his Felir6, at the 24th November :—

“* With Cianan of Daimliac,
A beautiful ear of our wheat,
Mac Lenine the most excellent,
‘With Colman of Dubh-chuillenn.”

The Martyrology of Donegal preserves the following quatrain, from the ancient
poem Naemhsheanchus, on the Saints of Ireland :—

“Colman, son of Lenin, the full,
And Mothemneog, son of Cerban,
Were of the race of two brothers—
Oilioll Oluim, and Lughaidh.””

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-132.png ---
106 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

A.D. 707. An abbey was founded here.*
978. It was plundered by the people of Ossory.*

1089. Dermot, the son of Toirdhealbhach O’Brien, plun-
dered this place.”

* Conry’s MS. *Annal. Inisfal. ™ Id.

The old Latin Life of St. Brendan passes the following eulogy on St. Colman :
“This Colman, the son of Lenin, was for learning and a holy life chief among the
saints, He founded the Church of Cloyne, which is at this day a cathedral, and
famous throughout the province of Munster.”

Cloyne was situated in the territory of Ui-Lethain, and in that sub-division
which was called Ui-Mocaille, a name that is still retained in the barony of Imo-
killy, It is distant nineteen miles from Cork, and “is seated in the heart of a
rich and highly cultivated country, being embosomed in gently rising hills : it does
credit to the choice of the ancient fathers who here took up their abode in very
remote times.”—Brash, ‘‘ Journal of Kilkenny Arch. Soc.” (New Series ii. 253).

To distinguish this see from other churches of the same name—of which there
were several scattered throughout Ireland—it was sometimes called by the name
Cluain-mor, i.e., “‘ The great Cloyne,” but more generally C/uain-uamhea, that is,
“* Cloyne of the caves.” There are some very deep and interesting caves close by
the old cathedral : it is probable St. Colman, or some of his religious, lived in
them in olden times ; and it is the popular tradition that many of the clergy and

eople found a safe retreat there when the country was ravaged by the Danes,

he Protestant Bishop Bennett thus writes of the caves in 1813: ‘‘ The town of
Cloyne is situated on a small limestone eminence, gently rising in the midst of the
valley, through which I suppose Cork Harbour to have once communicated with
the sea, and this eminence, therefore, was once an islahd surrounded with water. . .
On this spot St. Colman, before the year 600, is supposed to have founded his
church, and the security of it must have received no small addition from the cir-
cumstance of a cave, which is on the most elevated part of it, extending in various
branches underground to a great distance. . . . The cave is now in the field
called the Rock-meadow, forming part of the bishop’s demesne, a little east of his
garden wall, and they having been long neglected, and the drains from it choked up,
itis generally full of water in winter, yet there is a large arched passage, running some
hundred yards, leading to another mouth in the shrubbery north of it. A third,
but smaller opening, is also visible in the high ground above the pond ; a fourth,
near the road to the commons ; and these, or similar entrances, gave the name to
the whole of this land of the field of the caverns.” Elsewhere he writes: “The
rock-shrubbery ends at the mouth of a cave of unknown length and depth, which
branches to a great distance under the earth, and is sanctified by a thousand wild
traditions.” Brash further informs us, that ‘‘it is generally believed that the caves
at Cloyne, and the great stalactitical caves at Carrig-a-Crump, about two miles
distant, are connected, which is not improbable. The latter caves have never been
thoroughly explored, though penetrated to a distance of one mile.”

Speaking of the Cathedral, Dr. Bennett writes—‘“' It is a respectable building,
with a handsome nave and transept, and a small choir. By the style of the building
I should suppose it not older than 1250. . . . In the eastern part of the church-
yard, which is large and well planted, still remain the ruins of a small stone
edifice, standing east and west, thirty feet long, and nineteen in breath, known by
the name of St. Colman’s Chapel, and, probably, one of those oratories or early
churches still to be seen at Killaloe, or St. Donat’s, treated of by Ledwich in his
‘ Antiquities." Elsewhere the same writer adds: ‘‘In 1706 the Chapter passed
an order to pull down the battlements of the church, as being too heavy for the
side walls, thus depriving the cathedral of its ancient respectable appearance, and
making it look, as much as they could, like a barn.” An old MS. in the British
Museum, which is believed to have belonged to Sir James Ware (Clarendon
Collection, 4,796), contains a curious account of the graveyard of Cloyne: “ The
best bloods of Ireland,” it says, “ have chosen Cloyne for their lace of burial,
because its founder, being a holy bishop, had such power with , that what
souls had dwelt in the bodies buried under ¢Aa¢ dust would never be adjudged

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-133.png ---
County of Cork. 107

1159. O’Dubery, abbot of Cluanavama, died this year ; in
the annals of Inisfall, he is called bishop Dubrein.*

= Annal. Inisfal.

to damnation.” To corroborate this statement, we may mention that St, Cormac

mac Cullenan, king and bishop of Cashel, directed in his will, as Keating informs

us, that his body should be interred at Cluain-Uamha, because it was the burial-

place of Colman mac Lenan ; if that could not be accomplished, he was to be
uried at Disert Diarmada.

Nearly opposite the west end of the Cathedral, at a distance of thirty yards,
stands the beautiful round tower of Cloyne. Its present height is a little more than
a hundred feet ; its diameter at the doorway is nine feet two inches, with a thick-
ness of wall of three feet eight inches. At the upper floor the diameter of the
tower is seven feet two inches, with a thickness of wall of two feet nine inches,
The tower is divided internally into storeys by seven offsets taken from the thick-
ness of the wall; so that, drawn in section, the internal line of wall would
show a zig-rag outline. The tower was originally crowned by the usual conical
stone roof, which is stated to have been destroyed by lightning on the night of
the roth of January, 1749. Bennet gives the following description of this storm :—
*« A storm of lightning, with thunder, on the night of Janu: roth, 1749, passed
through the country ina line from west to east, and, after killing some cows in
a field south of Cork, struck the round tower of Cloyne. It first rent the vaulted
arch at the top, threw down the great bell, together with three galleries, and de-
scending perpendicularly to the lowest floor, forced its way, with a violent explosion,
through one side of the tower, and drove some of the storeys, which were adnfir-
ably well jointed, through the roof of a neighbouring stable. The door, though
secured by a strong iron lock, was thrown to the distance of sixty yards, and quite
shattered to pieces. A few pigeons that used to roost on the top of the steeple
were scorched to death, not a feather of them being left unsinged. With the
same bad taste which distinguishes all the works of our modem architecture, the
vaulted stone roof of the tower was never repaired, but the height was lowered
more than six feet, and a vi/e battlement, in imitation of the worst English churches,
substituted in its stead.” Wilkinson, treating of the ‘Ancient Architecture of
Treland,” p. 71, states that ‘‘the material of this tower is reddish-coloured sand-
stone of the country, in good preservation ; much of it is very carefully worked to
the curvature of the tower with a chisel-pointed hammer ; the masonry of the
doorway is put together in a laboured manner, and finely chiselled, each stone
being apparently worked as it was required ; the stones are flat-bedded and of
considerable size;” and, subsequently, he adds, “ that the masonry of the doorway is
so carefully put together, that a file alone would produce such careful work in the
present day.” :

In a paper read twelve years ago before the Kilkenny Archzological Society
(New Series, ii., 265), we find it stated that ‘the round tower at Cloyne is locally
known by the Irish-speaking people as Giol-cach ; and the same term is locally
applied at Ardmore, at Kineth, and at Ratto, in Kerry,” Within the past few
days this statement has been confirmed and further illustrated by the Rev. Richard
Smiddy, in his interesting work on the ‘*‘ Druids, &c., of Ireland.” At page 199
he writes: ‘‘The universal popular name of the round tower in Munster, Con-
naught, and the other Irish-speaking parts of Ireland, is cuslceach or culctheach :
this name is formed from cuilc, ‘a reed,’ and theach, ‘a house,’ that is the reed-
house, or reed-shaped structure. Thus, the people have always said, with constant,
unerring accuracy, when speaking of these structures, cui/ceach Cluina, ‘the round
tower of Cloyne ;’ cui/ceach Colmain, ‘the round tower of St. Colman ;' cuilceach
Deagiain, ‘the round tower of St. Declan,’ at Ardmore, and so on.” To explain
the origin of the name, he further adds: ‘‘ There is growing in the bogs and
rivers of Ireland a large kind of cué/c, or reed, with a conical head, which, in form
and shape, resembles the lines of the round tower, and which, I am sure, was
originally taken as the model for it.” The writer in the transactions of the Kil-
kenny Archseological Society, already referred to, also states: “I was never
more struck with the poetic applicability of this term to our round towers than at

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-134.png ---
108 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

‘Charles Smith, in his history of the county of Cork, says
that St. Ite founded a nunnery here, a little west of the

Ratto, in Kerry, when I stood on the ancient causeway opposite the tower, and
heard the same name applied to the tall, slender, symmetrical pillar, with its
perfect conical spire, as to the tall, graceful reeds, with their spiral feathered caps,
which lined the banks of the Brick, and of the canal which runs up nearly to
base of the tower” (p. 265).

In the ‘‘Book of Rights,” page 87, Cluain-uamha is mentioned as one of the royal
residences of the Kings of Cashel, and subsequently is added :—

‘*Of the right of Cashel in its power
Are Bruree and the great Muilchead ;
Seanchua the beautiful, Ros-raeda the bright :
And to it belongs the noble fort of Cluain-uamha.”

The following facts, omitted by Archdall, have been gleaned from our Ancient
Annals and the “ Wars of the Danes” :—

A.D. 821. Cucaech, abbot of Cluain-uamha, died.

A.D. 822. A party of marauders plundered Cork, Inis-Temhni, Begery Island
in Wexford harbour, Cloyne, and Rosmaelain. The barren rock, called Scelig
Michil, i.e, St. Michael’s Rock, the abode of a solitary named Edgall, was also
invaded by them, and, as they found nothing else to take, they carried him off into
captivity, in which he died in the following year. Keating says the invaders, on
this occasion, were White Lochlann, that is, Norwegians.

A.D. 835. Between the years 824 and 835 the greater part of the churches of
Erin were plundered by the Danes. The monasteries and churches were the
reputed repositories of wealth, as they were the centres of civilization throughout
our island. They thus became the chief aim of the plunderers, and even at this
early date the marauders made their way to the ecclesiastical establishments in
some of the most remote parts of the country. The long list of the places plun-
dered by them on this occasion ends with the names ‘‘ Cell-Uasaille, now Killossy,
or Killashee, near Naas, county Kildare ; Glendalough, county Wicklow ; Cluain-
Uamha, county Cork ; and Mungairet, now Mungret, county Limerick.”

A.D. 857. Maelcobha Ua Faelain, abbot of Cluain-Uamha, died. Lynch’s MS.
gives us in this year the additional entry :—‘ Robertachus bonus episcopus de
Cluain-Uamha obiit.”

A.D. 884. Reachtaidh, learned Bishop of Cluain-Uamha, died.

A.D, 888. Cluain-Uamha was again plundered by the Danes, and Fergal, son
Rite its bishop and abbot, and Danan, son of Cerin, its sub-abbot, were
killed,

A.D. 1056. Daighre O’Dubatan, anchorite of Cloyne, died at Glendaloch.

A.D. 1071. A fleet with Dermot O’Brien sailed round Ireland: he devastated
Cluain-Uamha, and took away the relics of St. Finbarr from Cill-na-clerich.

A.D. 1075. O’Carrain, archinnech of Cluain- Uamha quievit in Christo.

A.D. 1094. O’Molvain, Bishop of Cluain-Uamha, died.

A.D. 1099. Uamnachan Ua-Mictire, comharb of Colman, son of Lenin, died.

A.D. 1137. Cluain-Uamha and Ardagh of Bishop Mel were burned, both
houses and churches.

A.D. 1149. Nehemiah O’Moriertach, bishop, died. He flourished in 1140, as
we learn from St. Bernard in Vita S. Malachiae, who gives him the title ‘* Epis-
copus Cluan-vaniae,” which, in some of the printed texts, is corrupted into ‘* Duen-
vaniae.” Bishop Nehemiah is described by an old writer in ‘* Tyndal’s Vision”
as ‘‘a plain and modest man, excelling in wisdom and chastity.”

A.D. 1159. O’Duberg, also called O’Dubrein, abbot of Cluain-Uamha, died.

A.D. 1162. Diarmid Ua-Laighnen, lector of Cluain-Uamha, was killed. He
is called by Lynch ‘‘ Dermicius O’ Leighnin, archidiaconus Cluanensis et Momoniae,
Doctor.

A.D. 1167. Ua-Flannain, bishop of Cluain-Uamha, died.

A.D, 1192. Matthew O’Mongach, bishop of Cloyne, died. He was Legate of

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-135.png ---
County of Cork. 109

present See house; but he certainly mistakes, for that abbey
was at Cluainchreduil, which is in the county of Limerick.

the Holy See for Ireland at the time of the English invasion, and was succeeded
ies Legatine authority by the celebrated Matthew O’Heney, archbishop of
el.

The subsequent history of the See till the Reformation era may be seen in Ware.
Much additional light is thrown on this period by the Pipe Roll of Cloyne, pub-
lished in Cork, in 1859, by Richard Caulfield, Esq. In the Preface the learned
editor gives the following description of the contents of this valuable fragment of
our Diocesan literature:—

‘* This roll is said by Ware to have been begun in the year 1364, in the time of
John Swafham, a Carmelite Friar and Doctor of Divinity, who was then Bishop of
Cloyne, and so its earlier dates seem to show ; but after a while, many documents
much older than the time of that bishop, were included. It consists of a series of
entries, being copies and abridgments of findings of juries, and acts and deeds re-
lating to, or affecting the temporalities of the See of Cloyne, and was probably an
imitation of an English practice long established. The bishop in those times was
a great feudal lord, holding lands and seignories in the same manner as lay barons,
and sitting in the Parliament or great council, in right of his territorial possessions.
In England, such baronies, whether lay or ecclesiastical, originally consisted of lands
held in capite, that is, immediately from the king, without any intermediate lord ;
but many of those held by laymen, becoming reduced by alienation or subdivisions,
the Crown adopted an arbitrary practice of summoning whom they pleased, and
this gradually ripened into law. But in the case of bishops and peeral abbots, the
ground of the nght to sit as Barons of Parliament, seemed to have continued as
it originally stood, except in so far as it has been affected by special legislation.
In Ireland, a tenure in capite was never essential to a lay barony ; and probably
the bishops and abbots themselves were, in general, undertenants. It appears
from some documents near the fend of the roll, that the bishops of Cloyne held
large estates as feudatories of the Barry and Roche families. . . . .

“* The time when lawlessness began to prevail in the county of Cork is rather
distinctly vindicated by the nature of some of the entries of the roll. At first all
transactions between the bishops and their feudal and other tenants, proceeded
regularly according to the English Law, without disturbance from any aggressor.
At last, in 1402, appears a deed, by which Lord Barry formally agrees with the
Bishop of Cloyne, to impose no legal burthens or exactions on bim or his tenants.
Immediately after, others make a like agreement with the Bishop, whose sacred
character, of course, formed his sole claim to exemption from the ill-treatment
which others were obliged to submit to. In the same year Maurice Roche, Lord of
Fermoy, binds himself in like manner to the Bishop and Ecclesiastics, and in case
of infraction, agrees to submit to excommunication without any legal process. In
the third year of Henry IV. appears a document, by which the Earl of Ormond
~-as Lord of half the Barony of Inchiquin, and farmer of the other half—takes the
Bishop of Cloyne and his goods and property into his special protection, By
another document, about the same time, the King interferes for the protection of
the Bishop. Then follows another document, on the same subject, closing the
series. ere the roll was discontinued, probably in consequence of the utter
impossibility of stemming the tide of outrage, or enforcing any longer the rights of
the see according to law. It appears from the roll that villeinage, of which so
little trace can be found elsewhere in Irish documents, was anciently quite prevalent,
and it further appears, that men of Irish race, living on the Bishop's estates, were
destitute of any rights in their own labour, being seemingly in a similar condition
with that class in England, who were called villeins in gross. In the year 1348
there occurs, as the reader may see, a finding of a jury, that John, who was called
Lowis, is mere Irish, and of the race (progenie) O’Karny, and that all his goods,
lands, and tenements, are the property of the Lord Bishop of Cloyne, because
all of the race of O’Karny, are Irishmen, of the Church of St. Colman, and born
in servitude : yet it appears in the same finding, that this John Lowis hath
thirteen tenanted houses, and some land.”

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-136.png ---
110 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Cluain; Between the mountains Crot and Marige. St.
Sedna, a disciple of St. Senan of Iniscathy, governed a church
erected in this place; but he was buried at Kinsale’

This place and the following are now unknown.

Cluainfinglass ; An abbey was founded here by St. Abban,
A.D. 650."

Cork ,**® Is the second city in Ireland, and increasing every

¥ Act. SS. p. §73. *ld. p. 615. *Was called by the ancient Irish Corcach,
or Corcachbascoin, that is, a marshy place; the harbour they called Bealaghconliach.
Act. SS. p. 494-

44 Cluain.—This is probably the place referred to in the following passage of the
Irish life of St. Findbarr :—

“* After St. Barra had built the church of Achadh Duirbchon, near Cuas Barra, he
crossed the Abhan Mor to Cill-Cluana, and he built a church there, and remained
there for some time, till two pupils of St. Ruadan of Lothra, #.e., Cormac and
Baoithin came to him, and soon after Ruadan himself came to him there.. After
this, Ruadan’s pupils came to ask him for a place for themselves, and Ruadan
said to them: ‘Go forth to where the tongues of your bells will sound, and it is
in that place your resurrection will be on the last day, and remain in that place.’
They then went forth till they reached Cill Cluana (the Church of Cluain), where
Barra was, and the bells sounded there, and the clerics became very much dis-
heartened, as they did not expect to get this church or place. Barra saw this, and
said to them : ‘Be not disheartened,’ said he, ‘ for I will give up this church, and
all the wealth and property that belong to it, to God and to you ;’ and so Barra gave
his church to them, and the above-named clerics remained in that church. And
Barra built twelve churches more after this before he came to Cork, and gave them
all in charity and love of God. And he was then led by the angel to where Cork is
to-day, where he settled down in the seat of his resurrection.” —O' Curry, MS, C.U.I.

18 Cork.—The site of the present city of Cork was, in the beginning of the sixth
century, a low, marshy tract, through the centre of which flowed the waters of the Lee.
‘When this river overflowed its banks the whole country presented the appearance
of an immense lake, which was called in those early times Lough Eirce.

It was at the source of the river Lee, near Lough Allua, that St. Finbarr erected
his first cell; and to the present day that district, now situated in the parish of
Inchigeelagh, recalls his memory in the classic name of ‘‘ Gougane Barra,” which
means ‘the lonely retreat of St. Finbarr.” Thence, however, he soon removed to
the banks of Lough Eirce, and erected there his chief school and monastery, which
became so illustrious for its learning and sanctity, that innumerable students and
pi ims flocked to it from every part of our island. “Here in this solitude the saint
laid the foundation of his monastic establishment: it grew rapidly, became a crowded
city, a school for learning, a college for religion, a receptacle for holy men, a sanc-
tuary for the oppressed, an asylum for the poor, an hospital for the sick.”—{Had/’s
Treland, ii., 214.)

From the peculiarity of the site chosen for the monastery, the city received its
name of Corcach Bascain, or simply Corcach, that is, ‘a marsh.’

Colgan has given a short account of this famous school, and preserved the names
of some of the most illustrious saints who flourished there :—‘‘ After these things,
St. Barra came to a place which in the Irish language is called Loch-Erce, near
which he constructed a monastery, to which, as to the abode of wisdom, and sanc-
tuary of all Christian virtues, disciples flowed in crowds from every quarter in so
great numbers, through zeal of holiness, that, from the multitude of the monks and
cells, it changed that desert, as it were, into a large city: for from that school
which he instituted there, numerous men came, remarkable for holiness of life and
the praise of learning, amongst whom were conspicuous St. Eulangius or Eulogius,
the instructor of St. Barra himself, St. Colman, of Dore Dhunchon, St. Bathinus,
St. Nessan, St. Garbhan, son of Findbarr, St. Talmach, St. Finchad of Ross-
ailithir, St. Lucerus, St. Cumanus, St. Lochinus of Achadh-airaird, St. Carinus,

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-137.png ---
County of Cork. ut

day in commerce and wealth; it is a bishop’s see and a cor-
porate town, sending two burgesses to parliament.

St. Barr, Barroc, or Finbar, but by his parents named Lochan,
was of the race of the Ibriunratha; he flourished about the

St. Fintanus of Ros-coerach, St. Euhel de Roscoerach, St. Trellanus of Druim-
draighniche, St. Coelchuo, St. Mogenna, St. Modimochus, St. Sanctanus, and St.
Lugerius, son of Columb. All these, and many others that came from that very
celebrated school, by the merits of holiness and virtue, constructed cells in different
places, and consecrated themselves and all these to St. Barra, their father and
master, and his successors.” —( Acta Sanctorum, p. 607.)

The name of St. Findbarr holds a prominent place in the early history of the
Irish Church. St. Cuimin of Connor, in his poem on the characteristic virtues of
our saints, writes :—

“Fin-Barr, the torch of wisdom, loved
Humility towards all men ;
He never saw in pressing distress
Any one whom he would: not relieve.”

In the ancient list of Irish saints, which illustrates their lives by comparison with
the saints of other nations, St. Finbarr, who is styled ‘‘Bishop of Munster and
Connaught,” is placed in parallel with St. Augustine, the apostle of England.—
(Liber Hymnorum, 1.A.S., p. 70.)

The martyrology of Donegal marks St. Bairre's festival on the 25th of Sgptember.
The mart: logy of Tallaght on that day gives the feast of Barrind Corcaige, but

. adds, on the 26th of September vel hic, Barrind Corcaighe. In the famous Cata-
logue of the Three Orders of Irish Saints, published by Fleming and Usher, the
name of S. Barrindeus appears among the saints of the second order. Marianus
O'Gorman, in his metrical martyrology, prays : .

‘May the noble Baire from Corcach
Be before me to the great land,
For he is blooming-sweet to the poor.”

St. AEngus, in his Feliré, also commemorates, on the 25th of September—

‘The solemnity of the beloved man,
The festival of Bairre from Corcach.””

And the note is added in the Leabhar Breac;:—‘‘ This is the festival of Bairre
from Corcach: he was of the race of Brian, son of Eochaidh Muidhmhedhoinn,
and it is in Achadh Cill-Clochair, or Drochait, in Aird-Uladh on this day with
Bairre.” There is evidently an omission in this note, which is thus supplied in the
Roman MS. of the Féliré :—‘‘Of the race of Brian Mac Eochaidh M. was Bairre
of Corcach, and it is in Achadh Cill-Clochair, or at Drochait in Aird-Uladh, that
his festival is kept ; or it is the feast of Iomchadh that is kept in Cill-Clochair at
Ard-Uladh on this day with Bairre.”

Two ancient Latin Tives of St. Finbarr were published by Mr. Caulfield in 1864.
In the Irish life preserved in the Brussels Ms. the virtues of the saint are thus
compendiated :—‘‘His humility, his piety, his charity, his abstinence, his prayers
by day and by night, won him great privileges: for he was godlike and pure of
heart and mind, like Abraham; mild and well-doing, like Moyses; a psalmist, like
David; wise, like Solomon; firm in the faith, like Peter ; devoted to the truth, like
Paul the Apostle; and full of the Holy Spirit, like John the Baptist. He wasa
lion of strength, and an orchard full of apples of sweetness. When the time of his
death arrived, after erecting churches and monasteries to God, and appointing over
them bishops, priests, and other degrees, and baptising and blessing districts and
people, Barra went to Kill-na-Cluana (.¢., Cloyne), and with him went Fiana, at
the desire of Cormac and Baoithin, where they consecrated two churches. Then
he said, ‘It is time for me to quit this corporeai prison, and to go to the heavenly

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-138.png ---
112 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

year 600, and built an abbey, which, after him, was called
the abbey of St. Barr, or Finbar ;> this foundation is by some
placed A.D. 606.° This abbey was founded near Lougheirc,

> Usher. Act. SS. p. 750. War. mon. ¢Conrys MS.

King who is now calling me to Himself.’ And then Barra was confessed, and
received the Holy Sacrament from the hand of Fiana, and his soul went to heaven,
at the cross which is in the middle of the Church of Cloyne; and there came
bishops, priests, monks, and disciples, on his death being reported, to honour him.
And they took him to Cork, the place of his resurrection, honouring him with
psalms and hymns and spiritual songs; and the angels bore his soul with joy un-
speakable to heaven, to the company of the patriarchs, prophets, apostles, and
disciples of Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Trinity, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.”

We will not attempt to give in detail any sketch of the life of this great saint.
A few facts will suffice for our present purpose :—‘‘This most holy and elect of
God, and most worthy priest, Barr (it is thus his ancient Latin life begins), was born
of the sept called /éruin-Ratha, of Connaught, whose territory in after times
became the Diocese of Enaghdune.” He had for his master a religious named
Corporius, styled in our Irish calendars Mac-Cuirp, who himself had trained
to piety in Rome, in the monastery of St. Gregory the Great. St. Finbarr was
remarkable for miracles from his infancy ; and it is recorded in his life that, in
company with SS. Colgu, Maedhoc, and David, and twelve religious of his own
monastery, he made a pilgrimage to Rome. St. Gregory the Great predicted his
promotion to the episcopate, which was fulfilled on his return to Ireland ; and at
the same filme a fountain of oil, symbolical of the abundance of graces with which
his ministry should enrich our Church, sprung forth in that spot, ‘‘ close to the altar,
where a cross was in after times erected, and where the saint’s remains were also
for a time deposited.” (Lynch's MS. Hist.)

Having governed his monastery and see for seventeen years, St. Finbarr was
summoned to his heavenly reward, and the 25th of September is marked in all the
ancient calendars for his festival. It was at the monastery of Cloyne, fifteen miles
from Cork, that St. Finbarr rested in peace ; but his remains were translated to his
own great monastery, and being deposited for a while beneath the monumental
cross at his cathedral church, they were subsequently encased in a silver shrine, and
exposed to the veneration of the faithful. They were thus preserved till the year
1089, when, as the Annals of Innisfallen relate, ‘‘ A fleet, with Dermot O’Brien,
devastated Cork, and carried away the relics of Barre from Cill-na-Clerich.”

St. Nessan, the immediate successor of St. Finbarr, was also renowned for his
sanctity : he died in the year 551. So numerous were the holy men who flourished
here, or wished their remains to be interred in the great Sanctuary of Lough-Eirce,
that St. Aingus, about the year 800, writes :—‘‘ Seventeen holy bishops, and seven
hundred favoured servants of God, who rest in Cork with Barri and Nessan, whose
names ate written in the heavens—all these I invoke unto my aid, through Jesus
Christ.” And again, he invokes all the saints who, by their prayers and peniten-
tial deeds, had sanctified that district :—‘‘ Three hundred and fifty holy bishops,
three hundred and fifty priests, three hundred and fifty deacons, three hundred and
fifty exorcists, three hundred and fifty lectors, three hundred and fifty ostiarii, and
all the saints, with the blessing of God, in Loch Eirchi, in the territory of Mus-
craighe and Hy-Eachach Cruadha, as is said:

‘The protection of Loch Irchi,
. In which is a sweet-toned bell :
Numerous as leaves upon trees,
Are the saints who around it dwell.’

“All these I invoke to my aid, through Jesus Christ."—(/rish Ecclesiastical
Record, vol. iii., p. 391.)

Among the sacred treasures of Cork was preserved a copy of the Gospels, tran-
scribed by St. Finbarr, and encased in a precious shrine :—‘‘ Evangelium sacris
Sancti Barrii digitis exscriptum librum gemmis auroque ornatum.”—(Lyach’s MS.)

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-139.png ---
County of Cork. 113

which is generally supposed to be that particular hollow in
which a great part of the city of Cork stands. St. Barr died
at Cloyne, but was interred in his own Church, where his

Towards the close of the 1oth century, Columb Mac Kieregan sent this relic, borne
by two priests, as a protection to Mahoun Mac Kennedy, King of Munster. It
was brought back stained with that prince’s blood, and our annalists relate that
Bishop Cormac, raising his hands to heaven, uttered a prophecy (inserted in the
‘Wars of the Danes,’ p. 93,) in which, execrating the dread sacrilege which had
been perpetrated, he prophetically foretold the future fate of the murderers,

St. Bernard, in his life of St. Malachy, has preserved to us an interesting account
of the appointment of a bishop of this see in the year 1140, We will give in full
the narrative of this great doctor of the Church :—‘* About the year 1140 a vacancy
occurred in the see of Cork ; dissensions followed, each party being desirous of
electing one pleasing to themselves, heedless of the choice of God. Malachy, hear-
ing of such dissensions, proceeded thither. Having assembled the clergy and
people, he restored to union their hearts and their desires, for all agreed to leave
the selection of their future bishop to him whose pastoral solicitude extended to that
and to all the other churches of Ireland. He then chose for the see, not one of
the princes of the land, but one from among the poor, whom he knew to be holy
and learned, and one, moreover, who was not a native of that diocese. This person
being sought for, was found laid up with illness, and so weak that he was unable to
proceed abroad, except when borne on the arms of assistants. Then Malachy said,
‘In the name of God I command him to arise: obedience will restore him to
health.’ What was the poor man now to do? He was anxious to obey, but he was
unprepared to do so ; and even were he able to go thither, yet he feared the epis-
copal ministry. Thus the twofold enemy of sickness and fear of the burden strug-
gled against his desire to obey; nevertheless this was victorious. the hope of salva-
tion coming to its aid. Therefore he makes an effort; he raises himself up; he
tries his strength ; he finds that his strength has increased. With his material
strength his faith also increases, and this, too, becoming more robust, reflects its
firmness on his physical powers And now he arises by himself ; he moves about
without difficulty; he feels no fatigue in walking. At length, without the help of
an assistant, he proceeds, sane and courageous, to Malachy, who placed him in the
see, amidst the applause of the clergy and people. Thus was all done in peace:
for, seeing the miracle, no one dared to resist the decision of Malachy, and neither
did he who was chosen make further opposition, seeing that the will of God was
so manifestly made known.”"—( Vita S. Malachia, cap. viii.)

Lynch, in his MS. History, justly supposes that the holy bishop thus chosen by
St. Malachy was Giolla-Aedha O'Muidhin, who took part in the Synod of Kells
in 1152, and who is celebrated in our Annals as “a man full of the grace of God,
the tower of virginity and of wisdom in his time.” He was of the A/uinter-aedh,
on the borders of Lough Con, and as he was still living when St. Bernard wrote,
his name is not mentioned in the above narrative. He restored the church and
rebuilt the monastery.which, in after times, was called from him *‘ Gille- Abbey.”
His death is marked in our Annals in the year 1172.

He was succeeded by Bishop Gregory, who governed the see fourteen years.
He made a grant of the Church of ge Nessan, in Cork, to the monks of St.
Thomas, Dublin, together with its lands, tithes, and other offerings, on condition
of the payment of a cask of wine annually. A charter of Dermot, King of
Munster, during his episcopate, makes known to us another church of this city,
dedicated to St. John the Evangelist. This important document is as follows :—

«Dermot, by favour of Divine Providence, King of Munster. to all the faithful

ple greeting and peace fot ever.

«Being fully persuaded of the fleeting nature of human memory, and of the
unstable pomp of a perishable world, we have on that account decreed to record
in writing the affectionate zeal with which our father, Cormac of blessed memory,
King of Munster, built and confided to the protection of his people the Church of
St. John the Apostle and Evangelist, at Cork, for the use of Archbishop Maurice and
his successors, and for the pilgrims out of Connaught, the compatriots of St. Barre.

I

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-140.png ---
114 . Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

bones were afterwards deposited in a silver shrine ;* his festival
is held on the 25th September’

St. Nessan, a disciple of St. Barr, and a presbyter of Cork,
died March 17th!

4 War. Bish. p. 556. °Calendar. Vet. * Act. SS. p.630.

“¢ And now having succeeded to our paternal Kingdom, relying upon the Divine
assistance, we have undertaken, for the salvation of our soul, and of the souls of
our parents, to defend the said church in such manner as it becomes royal munifi-
cence to do, and to re-edify and enlarge the same, in honour of the saints under
whose protection the said place is known to be. Be it therefore known to all the
faithful, that we do confirm, for all time to come, to the said foundation, all that
the said place now justly possesses, either by the paternal donation, or by the
grants of other kings ; for my glorious father, the King, bestowed upon the said
place Lysnoldarrah, and Diarmid O’Connor endowed it with Aillina Carrigh.

“« And be it known, furthermore, that we have ourselves granted to the said pil-
grims the lands of Illa, and by this our charter do confirm the same : and our illus-
trious son Cormac, at the request of Catholicus, Archbishop of Tuam, has granted
in perpetuity to God and to St. John, the lands of Maeldulgi, for the salvation of
his soul and of ours, to be enjoyed freely and without molestation, and exempt
from all secular services, which grant of said lands we also hereby confirm.

“Now, finally, we do take under our protection the said monastery, with the
aforesaid lands, which we exempt from all secular charge, and yield freely and
peaceably to God for all time to come. And lest at any time any one should pre-
sume to call in question the truth of those former grants, or of this our present
grant, we have authenticated this charter with the impression of our seal, and de-

ered it, in the presence of fitting witnesses, to the King of Connaught, to be
reserved.
sa And the following are witnesses, on the part of the clergy and people :—

“*CHRISTIAN, Bishop of Lismore, Legate of the
Apostolic See.

**Donat, Archbishop of Cashel.

““GrEGorY, Bishop of Cork.

‘«Bricrus, Bishop of Limerick.

«* BENEDICT, Bishop of Ross.

‘*MATTHRW, Bishop of Cloyne.

“Donat, Abbot of Mayo.

‘*Grecory, Abbot of Cong.

“* EUGENE, Bishop of Ardmore.”

Of the old church thus repaired, the steeple is the only part that now remains.
A round tower formerly stood in the church-yard, but all traces of it have lon;
since disappeared. A Frenchman, M. De la Boullaye, who travelled in Irelan
in 1644, and published an account of his tour, at Paris, in 1653, writes that—“ In
one of the suburbs of Cork there is an old tower, ten or twelve feet in circum-
ference, and more than one hundred feet high, which they firmly hold to have been
built by St. Barre.” And speaking of the ruins of Gill-Abbey, he says they are
situated at the distance of one mile from Cork, ‘‘ opposite the well called by the
English Sunday Spring, to the south side of the sea... . . Hereis a cave, which
extends far under the ground, where, they say, St. Patrick resorted often for
prayer.” This is the cave referred to in our ancient writers as the “‘ antrum Sancti
finbarri.” The MS. of Dive-Downes, who was Protestant Bishop of Cork
towards the close of the t7th century, describes the parish of St. Finbarr as com-

ising the parishes of St. John, Rinn-Mahon, St. Stephen, St. Nicholas, and St.

‘ary-de-Narde. He adds:—“ There is one mass-house in the parish ; ’tis now
ruinous. . . . . Colman Sarsfield is Popish priest of this and the united parishes ;
he has been here about four or five years. He has a mass-house (the one above
referred to) near Red-Abbey. He was bred at Bourdeaux, in France, in the Irish
seminary. Sarsfield says Mass twice every Sunday morning ; and the rest of the

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-141.png ---
County of Cork. 115

A.D. 685. The abbot Russin died April 7th, he was the
son of Lappaius.®

733. Died Selbac, the comorb of St. Barr.»

goo. Historians relate, that about this time there were

8 Act. SS. p. 150. » War. Bish. p. 556. .
priests in Ireland, by order from the Pope, have the privilege of saying two Masses
in one day, by reason of the great extent of most parishes or unions.”

Some of the details of this MS. of Dive-Downes are full of interest, and throw
considerable light on the condition of Ireland, and especially of the See of Cork,
about the year 1700. Thus he tells us that £20 was given at the time for
bringing in a Tory. Again, that Teigue Dash was prosecuted for having a
harper Pisying in his house on Sunday.—‘‘In the parish of ‘Ardnageeh 5
David Terry, Papist, gives the seventh part of his milk to the poor. In
Abbeysrowry, the rector or vicar usually demands, besides his burying fees,
when the man of the family, or widow, dies worth £5, the sum of 13s. 4d. as
a mortuary ; if the man dies worth less than £5, they demand his second-best
suit of clothes, or 6s. 8d. in lieu thereof. In Dromdal ¢ parish, Felix
M ‘Carthy is priest 5 he was here before the late troubles. A Protestant school-
master complains that Papiststeach publick school in this parish. In Caharagh
parish’tis thought that there are forty Papists for one Protestant; William Guricheen,
a very old man, is priest there. In Cannaway parish—no church, no Protestants—
there are the ruins of a house inthe churchyard ; there is a vault whole ; the priest
built an altar in it about a year ago, when some person of note was buried. enis
Sweeney is Popish priest of this parish and Macromp.” Of Durrus, he writes—‘‘ St.
Faughnan is the patron saint of this parish, Not far from Bantry, by the sea-
side, are the ruins of an abbey which belonged to the Franciscans. I don’t hear
that there were any other religious houses besides this in the barony of Beera and
Bantry. Humphrey Sullivan is Popish priest of this parish and of Kilcroghan ; he
has been here about twelve years. All the inhabitants are Papists. No Papists
are allowed to live within the walls of Bandon. The Earl of Cork in his leases
has obliged all the tenants not to admit Papists. In the parish of Skull, there are
about four Protestant families, and about four hundred Papist families. Daniel
Carthy is Popish priest of the eastern part of this parish ; he has been here ever
since before the late troubles. No glebe in this parish, no Registry-book, nor Bible,
nor Common Prayer-book. In Kilmoe, there are the ruins of a chapel at the
west-end of the town, dedicated to St. Mullagh, The church of Kilmoe is
dedicated to St. Briana, a/ias Brandon, whose festival is observed in this parish;
there are about nine Protestant families, and two hundred Papist, Teige Coghlen
is Popish priest of Kilmoe and of the western part of Skull; he has been here
about eight years. A young Irishman, a Papist, teaches school about the
middle of the parish. In all the O’Sullivan’s country they observe as a holiday
*St. Rooane’s Day.’ At Kinneigh, a high round tower stands in the south-west
corner of the churchyard. ’Tis supposed this church was formerly a cathedral. A
stone is in the south-west corner of the church of Kinneigh, counted very sacred,
which the Irish solemnly swear upon. The church is accounted by the Irish
very sacred. There is a tradition that formerly in this churchyard there was a
well that had great medicinal virtues, and that the concourse of people being
very chargeable to the inhabitants, they stopped it up. In Murragh, Daniel
Hurley, a quiet man, is Popish priest of this and three or four contiguous

ishes ; there are ‘more Protestants than Papists; there was a registry lately
ight, and a Bible, and two Common Prayer-books. In Desertsurgis there
are one hundred and fifty families of Protestants ; no Popish schoolmaster in this
parish 3 & Bible and Common Prayer-book lately bought. Denis Mahony is

opish priest of this parish.”

¢ County of Cork Grand Jury Presentments, at the close of the 17th
century, detail some facts of the deepest interest. In 1687, they present—‘‘ That
the Protestant clergy, under colour of law, exact fromthe Roman Catholick subjects
several sums of christening, purification, burying, and book money, and sue them in

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-142.png ---
116 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

in this abbey 700 monks and 17 bishops, who devoted them-
selves wholly to a contemplative life.!

822. The Danes plundered and burnt this city.*

823. They renewed their depredations.!

838. The town was again spoiled.™

839. The Danes repeated the like devastation.”

874. Died Domnald the scribe.°

891. Died Soerbrethach, another scribe.?

908. Ailliol M‘Eogan, the abbot of Cork, lost his life in

' Walsh's Prospect, p 145. *Annal. Inisfal. \ Id. ™ Tr. Th. p. 632. ® Annal.
Lnisfal. ° Tr. Th. p. 632. ? M'Geogh

their spiritual courts, and commit them to prison, so dispeopling the country, &c., that
therefore, your Lordship would favorably represent the same to the Government, or
otherwise make such order that may hinder these inconveniences ; and the rather,
because the like duties are not demanded in any other Christian country by the
clergy, nor from any other but the Roman Catholics.” In 1694, they present—
‘*An address to the Judge, complaining of the Popish clergy that come from
beyond the sea, and praying for the suppression of Popish schools.” In 1696,
they state—‘‘ That John Mulconry, a Popish priest, and others, are out on their
keeping, and cannot be taken by warrant; we, therefore, pray they may be
ordered to surrender themselves by a certain day, or that they may be proclaimed
rebels and traitors to the Government.” In the following year they complain—
“*That Cornelius Crowley, a/ias Maddery, of Skibbereen, and Owen MacOwen
Sullivan, of Kilcaskin parish, and others, all Irish Papists, have taught school,
and continue to do so, contrary to the Act.” In April, 1698, they present—‘‘ That
P. Morrough, Titular Vicar-General, and Dr. John Slyne, Titular Bishop (of
Cork), remain in this kingdom contrary to the late Act.” On 13th of August,
1701, they also complain that—‘‘ John Connelly, formerly Vicar of Rossecarbery,
still remains in this kingdom contrary to the Act.” And on 27th July, 1702, they
again present—‘‘ That John Slyne, Titular Bishop of Cork. remains still in this
kingdom, exercising ecclesiastical jurisdiction contrary to the late Act.”

We have said that St. Finbarr first erected his cell on the banks of Lake Allua.
In after times that spot became a favorite resort of Pilgrims. Seven churches
were erected there, and it bloomed as a garden of Paradise :—

‘There is a green island in lone Gougane Barra,
Where Allua of songs rushes forth as an arrow ;
In deep-vallied Desmond, a thousand wild fountains
Come down to that lake from their home in the mountains.
There grows the wild ash, anda time-stricken willow
Looks chidingly down on the mirth of the billow,
As like some gay child, that sad monitor scorning,
It lightly laughs back to the laugh of the morning ;
And its zone of dark hills—oh ! to see them all bright’ning
When the tempest flings out its red banner of lightning ;
And the waters rush down, ’mid the thunder’s deep rattle,
Like clans from their hills at the voice of the battle ;
And brightly the fire-crested billows are gleaming,
And wildly, from Mullagh, the eagles are screaming.
Oh! where is the dwelling in valley or highland
So meet for a bard as this lone little island.”

At the close of the 17th century, a priest named Denis O’Mahony chose
this spot as a penitential retreat, and restored its seven chapels. Opposite the
island he placed a small tomb with the inscription—'‘ Hoc sibi ef successoribus in
cadem vocatione monumentum imposuit Dominus Doctor Dionysius O Mahony,
Presbyter licet indignus, an. dom., 1700.”

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-143.png ---
County of Cork. 117

the same battle in which Cormac M‘Cuillenan, Archbishop
and King of Munster, met his melancholy fate.4

gto. The Danes did again plunder and burn this town."

913. They renewed their devastations.*

915. The same violences were continued.

960. As they were in this year."

961. Died Cathmogan, the comorb of St. Barr.”

970. This abbey was destroyed by the Danes.*

976. Magthamhain M‘Cinneide going to the house of
Donobhan M‘Cathail, King of Cairbre Aodhbha,Y under the
protection of Columb M‘Ciaragain, the comorb of St. Barr,
to conclude a peace with Maolmuaidh and Donobhan, he was
treacherously seized by Donobhan, notwithstanding the co-
morb’s protection, and delivered to Maolmuaidh M‘Broin,
Tadg M‘Broin, and Brian M‘Broin, who put him to death;
for which base and inhuman action, the comorb and church
excommunicated both the betrayer and murderers.*

978. Cork was plundered twice in this year.*

990. Died Columb M‘Ciaragain, the comorb.>

1006. Died Cellach, the son of Cenngorann, provost of
this abbey.*

1013. A great fleet of the Danes came before Cork, and
destroyed the town by fire?

1025. Dungal ua Donchadha, King of Cashel, who had
forsaken the world, and dedicated himself solely to God, died
in this abbey.®

1026. Cellach O’Selbac, comorb of St. Barr, and esteemed
chief among the sages in Munster, died this year in his pil-
grimage.'

1027. Died Neil O’Mailduibh, comorb of St. Barr

1028. Died Airtri Sairt, comorb of St. Barr.®

1034. Died Cahal, the comorb.!

1057. Mugron O’Mutan, comorb of St. Barr, was murdered
in the night by his own people.“

1080. The town was destroyed by fire.!

1089. Dermot, the son of Toirdhealbhach O’Brien, spoiled
and plundered the town of Cork, and carried away the reliques
of St. Barr.™

1107. Died Maclothod O’Hailgenen, comorb of St. Barr."

1111. Died Patrick O’Selbac, comorb also.°

1134. This abbey was refounded, for regular canons follow-

aie’ Inisfal. * M‘Geogh. * Tr. Th. p. 633. *Annal. Inisfal. * Tr. Th.

War. Bish. p. 556. *M'Curtin, p. 207. 7 A territory in the county
of Limerick now called barony of Kenry. *Annal. Inisfal. * Annal. Inisfal.

War. Bish. supr. °Act. SS p. 334. "Annal. Inisfal. ° Id. ' War. Bish. p.

556. S/d. “Jd. ‘Ann. Ulst. * War. Bish. ~. 557. Annal. Inisfal. \Annal,
Inisfal. ™Id, Jd. ° Annal. Inisfal.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-144.png ---
118 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland. .

ing the rule of St. Augustin, under the invocation of St. John
the Baptist, by Cormac, King of Munster, or, as some write,
King of Desmond.? Some of our annals place this founda-
tion three years later.1 The son of the founder tells us, that
his father built this abbey for the strangers from Connaught,
who were the countrymen of St. Barr.?

1152. Gilla A2da O’Mugin, the abbot, assisted at the famous
synod of Kells held this year. He was justly esteemed for
his piety, and died in 1172. From him this house acquired
the name of Gill abbey.*

1174. About this time Dermot, King of Munster, who was
son to the founder, confirmed the grant made by his father,
and made additions thereto. Donat, abbot of Maig ; Gregory
of Cunuga ; and Eugene, of Ardmore, were subscribing wit-
nesses to this charter.*

1192. Gilbert O’Brogy was abbot, but was deposed ; licence
was granted to the convent, dated April the 21st, to pro-
ceed to an election."

1248. The abbot paid into the exchequer the sum of £20,
being the amount of a fine imposed on him.”

1300. The abbot was indicted at Cork for receiving and
protecting thieves and felons; but he pleaded that he had
formerly paid a considerable fine for that offence before John
Wogan, Chief Justice of Ireland, and that he had not been
guilty since; the jury acquitted him.*

1303. On the 2nd of May a licence was granted to this convent
to elect an abbot in the room of G ——, lately deceased.’

1338. Thomas, the abbot, indicted John Fitz-Walter and
others for cutting down a number of trees in his wood at
Cloghan, in this county, to the value of 100s. and carrying
away the same by force of arms.*

1357. Thomas O’Fin, the canon of this house, was elected
abbot, and the temporalities were restored to him on 1oth
of October,*

1359. Maurice was abbot, who resigned in same year, and
the temporalities were seized from the Ist of July to the
Ist of September following, when they were restored to
William, the newly-elected abbot.>'6

® War. Mon. %King, p. 334. * Id., p. 336. * War. Bish. p. 557. ‘King. p.
336. *Pryn., vol. 3., 2, 573. “King, p. 336. *Jd. 7 Pryn., vol. 3, p. 1017.
® King, p. 337. *ld. "Id.

16 In addition to the facts connected with the monastery of Cork given in the
text, we may mention the following :—

A.D. 680. Died Suibne, son of Maolubhaa, successor of St. Barr.

A.D. 459. Died the abbot Donait, the son of Tohence.

A.D. 767. Died the abbot Sealbach MacConalta.

A.D. 795. Died Commach MacDonat, abbot of Corca mor.

_-

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-145.png ---
County of Cork. 119

Inquisition 12th January, 33rd Queen Elizabeth, finds that
Knocknyleyny, in county Cork, containing half a carucate of
land, annual value 4s. 6¢, was parcel of the possessions of
this house.»

Inquisition 27th March, 3rd King James I., finds that a
great devastation, amounting to the sum of one hundred
marks sterling, was made on this abbey within the three pre-
ceding years, and particularly on the mill and weir of the said
abbey ; and Thomas Smith inhabited and held the said abbey
during that time.

This abbey, containing two acres, with a church and the
appurtenances, also six gardens and third part of a water-
mill, with the tithes of the same, parcel of the possessions
of this house, were granted to Cormac M‘Teige M‘Carthy.
See Inislounaght, in county of Tipperary; and 26th June,
33rd _ of same Queen, the said abbey containing four acres, was
re-granted to Sir Richard Greneville, Knt., together with sixty
acres called Ballygagin ; Kilnoony, in county of Kerry, con-
taining two hundred and sixty acres ; Killynecanana, lying
north-east of Cork-water, and containing sixty acres; Farren-

° Chief Rememb.

. 812. Died the abbot Commach, son of Donat.

+ Died the abbot Forbasach,

. 833. Died the abbot Dunlaing.

. Dunlaing, son of Cathasach, successor of Barra, of Corcach, died.

. 850. Colam Macaireachtach, abbot of Corcach, died.

. 866. Reachtabra, son of Murchad, abbot of Corca mor, died.

ft a AS ean son of Comadh, scribe, wise man, bishop, and abbot
ied.

. 892. Airgetan, son of Forandan, was abbut of Cork.

. 894. Died the abbot Airgetan.

D. 903. Ailioll, son of Eogan, abbot of Trian Corcaighe, was slain in the

same battle in which Cormac Mac Cuillenain, Archbishop and King of Munster,

met his melancholy fate.

-D. 907. Died the abbot Flann Mac Laoige.

. 926. Fonnachta was abbot in spirituals, he directed the greater part of

90
2

A.
A.
A.
A.
A.

jeBEEEEE
co
a

A.
A.
of Cor

yoy

A.
A.
A.

aaa
But

. 949. Ailill, son of Corc, was abbot.
. 987. Colum Airchinneach, of Corcach, died.
. 1000. Flaithemh, abbot of Corcach, died.
. 1036. Aengus, son of Cathan, abbot of Corcach, died.

1057. Dubhdaletha Ua Cineadha, Airchinneach of Corcach, died.

5. Clereach Ua Sealbhaigh, chief successor of Bairri, the glory and

of Desmond, completed his life in this world.
. 1096. Ua Cochlain, a learned bishop and successor of Bairre, died.
. 1106. Mac Beatha Ua Hailgheanain, comorb of St. Barra, died.
. 1116. Cork was destroyed by fire.
. 1126. Corcach mor, of Munster, with its church, was burned.
A.D. 1152. Finar, grandson of Celechar Ua Ceinncidigh, successor of Colum,
son of Crimhthann tof Tit da-ghlas], and who had been successor of Barr for a
time, died.

A.D. 1157. Gillaphadraig, son of Donnchadh Mac Carthaigh, successor of Barr
of Corca, died.

3
dada idddade
POBDSE PESbS

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-146.png ---
120 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

duffe fifteen acres ; the island of Insiquiny, with three acres of
unprofitable, and a chief rent out of the island of Cloghaule,
parcel of the possessions of said house, to hold to him and his
heirs, at the annual rent of £15 3s. 6d., Irish money.>&

Ware supposes this to be the abbey which St. Bernard calls
Monasterium Ibracense, but Allemande is more inclined to
think that Begery, in county of Wexford, is that monastery.

The monks of this abbey erected the first salmon weirs
on the river Lee, near the city of Cork. The remains of
this building were totally demolished about the year 1745.

Grey Friary" Dermot M‘Carthy Reagh founded this

boo Aud. Gen.

1? Grey Friary—The MS. History of the Franciscan Order in Ireland, written by F.
Francis Ward, O.S.F., in 1632, gives the following de‘ails connected with this con-
vent:—‘‘The convent of Cork, called also the monastery of the Blessed Virgin Mary
of Shandon, was founded in the episcopal city of Cork, in the year 1214, and com-
pleted in the year 1229. Father Wadding says that this monastery, on account of
Its strict observance of regular life, and the piety of the brethren, was formerly
called ‘the mirror of all Ireland.’ It was erected into a custodia in the year 1260,
in the general chapter of Narbonne. It passed to the Friars of the Reformed
Observance previous to the year 1500, and remained in their possession till the
year 1540, when heresy and persecution began to rage, and it was the first convent
in all Ireland that was suppressed by the heretics. It remained desolate till the
year 1600, when in the provincialate of F. Maurice Ultan, a residence was erected
in that city, and F. William Farris was appointed guardian, and from that time
to the present day (1632), the friars labour with great fruit for the salvation of the
faithful and the conversion of the heretics. The first founder of the convent was
Dermod MacCarthy More, called Dondraynean, King of the people of Munster ;
and some provincial kings of his kindred were buried there in the habit of the
Friars Minors. The most powerful family of the MacCarthys also erecteda
mausoleum for themselves in that Convent, till, in the course of time, they were
divided into several noble families, each of which built a special convent for its
own immediate members. Besides the tombs of the MacCarthys, and of fourteen
Knights of Mora, the families of the Barrys and the chief nobles and citizens of
that county are buried there. Philip Prendergast, the Treasurer of King John of
England, who was one of the greatest benefactors tothis house, is also buried there.
A curious charter of his to the convent will be found in Wadding. A chapter
was held in this convent in 1224. 1288, 1521, and 1533. One of the most remark-
able religious of this convent was F, Francis Matthew, who, after being Guardian
in Cork, his native city, was appointed Provincial in 1626, and was subsequently
Guardian of St. Anthony's, in Louvain. In his writings he assumed the name of
Orsulanus. and it was in reply to him that Paul Harris wrote his curious Arktomatix,
hea whip for the Bear. F. Matthew was put to death for the faith in Cork, in the

ear 1644.

» Inquisition sth April, XXX. Elizabeth, finds that Andrew Skiddeis, late of
the City of Cork. gent., was seized in fee of the precincts of this priory with
three gardens near Cork ; the moiety of a water-mill, the third part of another
mill; a 1 of water called the Friar's Pool; the right of fishing for salmon
in Gaule’s weir from sunset on Saturday to sunrise on Sunday ; also one salmon
on every Friday out of the said fishery, provided two fish were taken; forty
acres of land in the townland of Templenamkahir, with the appurtenances,
all the said premises being of the annual value of 40s. ; also a park, containing
by estimation, one acre, annual value §5.; also certain gardens belonging to the
friary, annual value 6s. ; all the said premises being in the county of Cork, and
held from the Queen in capite by knight's services.

“ Ordnance Survey MS., R.1.A.” vol. iv., p. §2.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-147.png ---
County of Cork. 121

monastery A.D. 1214, for Conventual Franciscans, and dedi-
cated it to the Virgin Mary; the founder dying in the year
1219, his son Fineen continued the work, and the Lord
Philip Prendergast, of Newcastle, was a great benefactor,
having rebuilt this house in the year 1240 ;° although other
writers affirm that the Bourks were the parents of the
second foundation.4

A.D. 1244. On the 15th of October, King Henry III. granted
the sum of £20 to be paid on the feast of All Saints yearly, to
buy one hundred tunics for the use of the Franciscan Friars of
Dublin, Waterford, Cork, Athlone, and Kilkenny.®

1291. A general chapter of the order was held here.”

1293. King Edward I. granted to the Friars Minor of
Dublin, Waterford, Cork, Limerick, and Drogheda, an
annual pension of thirty-five marks.! Several liberates for
the payment of this pension remain on record.

1317. The friars of this monastery complained, that they
were indicted and impleaded in the King’s courts, contrary,
as they alleged, both to the common and ecclesiastical laws.8

1371. Philip Prendergast, a descendant of the founder,
made a grant to this friary.5

1500. Before this year the Franciscans of the strict obser-
vance had reformed this convent.!

Many illustrious persons were interred here, particularly
Cormac M‘Donald, King of Desmond, in 1247; M‘Finin,
who was killed in the Lord Stanton’s court in 1249; Dermot,
surnamed the Fat, in 1275; Donald Rufus, in 1300; and
Thady, the son of Donald, King of Desmond, in 1413.*

The Franciscans of this monastery were called the friars of
Scandun.!

26th May, 8th Queen Elizabeth, this friary, with its appur-
tenances and forty acres of land in the town of Templene-
marhyr, also a park containing one acre and an half and a
stank, with seven gardens, parcel of the possessions of the
friary, were granted to Andrew Skydie and his heirs, in capite,
at the annual rent of 58s. 8d. sterling.”

This building, which stood on the north side of the city,
is now entirely demolished.

Dominican Friary ;* this monastery, called the abbey of

° War. Mss. vol. ca 135, and Mon. “Allemande. ° King. p. 308. @ Cylnn,
Annal. ‘ King, p. 308. © Annal. Munst. » Wadding. ‘Id. g* King, p. 307.
\ Wadding. \ Aud. Gen

18 Dominican Friary.—Inquisition 25th June, XXVII. Elizabeth, finds that
David Goulde was seized in fee of three parts of the precincts of this friary, three
parts of the moiety of a salmon fishery, three parts of a water-mill, three parts of

a certain arable and pasture land belonging to the friary ; annual value £6.
** Ordnance Survey MS., R.I A.,” vol. iv., p. 67.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-148.png ---
122 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

St. Mary of the Island," was founded in the year 1229"
Philip de Barry, who arrived here to assist Robert Fitz-
Stephen, his uncle, in his conquests in this country, was a
rincipal benefactor to these friars, and his equestrian statue
in brass was formerly in this church?

A.D. 1333. 13th January, 8th King Edward III, a liberate
issued for the payment of one year’s annual pension to the
Dominican friars of Cork, Drogheda, Dublin, Waterford, and
Limerick.?

1340. John le Blound was prior.4

™Bourke. "Ann. de Trim. King, p.87. °War. Mon. ¥King, p, 87. Id. p.90.

This house was founded for friars-preachers, or Dominicans, by Philip de
Barry, a Welsh knight, ancestor of the noble family of Barrymore, in the county
of Cork. A bronze equestrian statue of the founder was preserved in the ch
by the community, as a monument of pious gratitude, until the suppression of the
convent under Henry VIII. The convent was dedicated to the Blessed Virgin;
and from its insular site—being built on one of the it marshes of “ the five-isled
city”—was called “ St. Mary's of the Island.” The church attached to the con-
vent is noticed in the history of the order as having been magnificent—‘‘ Magnifica
Ecclesia.” Soon after its erection, David MacKelly, dean of Cashel, took the
habit of a Dominican in this house ; in 1237 he was consecrated bishop of Cloyne;
next year, being succeeded in the chair of St. Colman by a brother Dominican,
Allan O’Sullivan, he was translated to the Metropolitan see of Cashel. Arch-
bishop David introduced into the arch-diocese an affiliation of friars-preachers from
Cork, and built for his brethren a beautiful church and abbey, at a short distance
from his own cathedral, on the rock of Cashel. His name is celebrated in the
works of many foreign and domestic writers. In 1245 he assisted at the first
general council at Lyons, to the acts of which his name is subscribed. .

A charter, confirmed by assent of King Edward II., was granted, in 1317, by
Sir Roger de Mortimer and his council in favour of the Dominican community, by
which the ward or custody of the gate of the lately-erected city walls, nearest of the
abbey of St. Mary’s, should be committed to the mayor, bailiffs, and other trusty
men, and free passage to and from the city should be given to the friars, and, for
their sake, to other good citizens.

Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March and Ulster, father of the Heir- Presumptive to
the crown of England, and Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, when he came to Cork, took
up his viceregal residence in the Dominican convent, He died in that house on
St. Stephen's day, 1381, and, as is sup] , was buried in St. Mary’s Isle.

A friar of the order of Preachers from Cork, and thence called Fr. Joannes
Coreagiensis, was Archbishop of Cologne in 1461.—({See Supplement of Hib.
Dom., page 866.)

The Convent of Cork, with the houses of the Dominicans in Youghal, Limerick,
and Coleraine, were in 1509, erected into ‘‘a congregation of strict observance,”
under the direction of a Vicar-General of the Order, which congregation was
solemnly spproved in the general chapter in Rome, A.D. 1518. A few years
later all the Dominican communities of Ireland, inside and outside the Pade, being
restored to discipline, and united in spirit, were formed into a distinct Province of
the Order, to be governed by an Irish Provincial, freely chosen in chapter.

The monastery of the Island at Cork, with all its appurtenances, lands, water
mills, salmon weirs, fishing pools, &c., was confiscated to the Crown in 1 544»
and sold to a person named William Boureman, at a head rent of six shillings
and nine-pence a year! The Friars, nevertheless, maintained possession for a
long time afterwards, and though often obliged to disguise and hide themselves,
they never abandoned the hope of regaining their ancient Convent, in which,
at intervals, during “ the troublesome times,” they contrived to live in community
until the reign of William III.

In the reign of Queen Elizabeth, Matthew Sheyne, Protestant Bishop of Cork,

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-149.png ---
County of Cork. 123

1355. Another liberate issued on 4th of May for the pay-
ment of the same pension."

1381. Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March and Ulster, and
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, died in this monastery on the
26th of December,* and John Colton, being appointed Lord
“Justice, took the oath of office in this house, on the following
day.

* King, p. 87. *Cox,vol.1,p. 135. *War. Bps. p. 84.

ordered the image of St. Dominic to be dragged from ‘the Abbey of the
Isle” to the High Cross of the City, where it was publicly committed to the
flames, and burnt to ashes, amidst the tears of the persecuted Catholic citizens.

At the commencement of the reign of James I., the Friars began to repair
their convent and church. Religious persecution soon stopped the work of resto-
rationin the old Catholic churches and abbeys. In 1616 we find a it made
a mu John King, of the church, steeple, monastery, &c., of St. Dominic, in

‘ork.

A middle chapter of the Fathers of the Irish Dominican Province, was held
in the Convent of Cork, at which Father James O’Hurly, subsequently Bishop of
Emly, presided, which is specially noticed in the Acts of the General Chapter of
Rome, in 1644. Several of the Friars there assembled, became soon after illus-
trious as bishops and martyrs for the faith in the time of persecution.

Father John O’Morrogh, a distinguished preacher in this convent, is said, in the
Annals of the Order, to have flourished about the year 1640.

1642. The Dominican Order completely restored in Ireland. There were
flourishing, in the short interval of peace for the Catholic Church, 43 houses, and 600
Friars of the order of St. Dominic.

1644. The Catholics expelled from Cork, by order of Lord Inchiquin.

The year 1647 was marked by the glorious martyrdom of Father Richard Barry,
a Cork Dominican, then Prior of Exchel, who, having valiantly stood up for
the defence of the sanctuary in the Cathedral of Cashel, and refused to accept his
life, on condition of stripping himself of his religious habit, and assuming a
secular dress, was condemned to be burned alive on the summit of the Rock of
Cashel, and having heroically suffered in the flames for the space of two hours,
was transfixed through the side with a sword. Four days after, when the Parlia-
mentary forces had retired, the Vicar-General, with the Notary Apostolic, Henry
O’Callanan, having judicially examined the proofs of his martyrdom, conveyed his
sacred remains in solemn procession and with joyful anthems to the beautiful
cloister ee his Convent, where, perhaps, they are reposing undisturbed to the

resent day.

“ In-1648, Dominic de Burgo, a young professed member of the Order of Preachers,
and near relative of the Earl of Clanricarde, was made prisoner on hoard of the
ship in which he had taken his passage to Spain, to pursue his studies. He was
thrown into prison at Kinsale, whence he le his escape by jumping from the top
of the gaol wall down on the sea-shore. For two days he lay concealed in a neigh-
bouring wood, all covered with mud, without clothing, fc or drink. At length
he found shelter under the hospitable roof of the Roches in that neighbourhood,
probably of Garrettstown. He was, at a later period of life, the celebrated Bishop
of Elphin, for whose head or capture the government offered a large reward, and
to whom Oliver Plunket, the martyred Archbishop of Armagh, wrote from his
dungeon, warning him of the attempts of the Privy Council against his life. He
died in exile

In 1651, Father Eneas Ambrose O’Cahil, an eloquent preacher, and zealous
missionary in Cork, being recognised as a Friar of a Dominican community, was
rushed upon by a troop of Cromwell's soldiers, cut to pieces with their sabres, and
his limbs were scattered about to be trampled under foot. At this time, indeed,
a most furious Pereenno taged, the effects of which, on the condition of the Domi-
nican Order in Ireland, are thus described in one of the Acts of the General Chapter
held in Rome A.D. 1656:—“ An abundant harvest of those who in our Irish

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-150.png ---
124 : Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1400. September 18th, an annual pension of thirty marcs
was granted to the Dominicans of Cork, Dublin, Waterford,
Limerick, and Drogheda."

1484. In a general chapter of this order, held at Rome

" King, p.87.

province have suffered cruel torments for the Catholic faith, has been gathered, in
these our days, into the celestial granary ; since of forty-three convents which the
Order possessed in this island, not a single one survives to-day, which the fury of
the heretical persecutor hath not either burned or levelled to the ground or di-
verted to profane uses. In these religious establishments, there were counted about
six hundred, of which but the fourth part is now in the land of the living, and even
that number is dispersed in exile ; the remainder died martyrs at home, or were
cruelly transported to the island of Barbadoes.” Among other facts connected
with this period, it is recorded that Father Thomas Fitzgerald, a Dominican, a
priest, combining great zeal and piety, with primitive simplicity of manners,
ressed himself as a peasant, and in that assumed garb. served the Catholics
of Cork during the entire period of Cromwell’s usurpation. Father Eustace
Maguire, of the convent of Cork. was no less distinguished, in the time of terror
and persecution, for his intrepid courage, than for his n.eek piety and religious zeal.
Being chosen by the Catholics as governor of the castle of Druimeagh, near Kanturk,
he so guarded and defended it during the period of Cromwell's wars, that it was
never taken or surrendered.

In 1689 King James II. landed at Kinsale, and proceeded thence to Cork. On
his arrival in this city, the king lodged in the house of the Dominican Friars, and
on Sunday heard mass in the Church of the Franciscans, called the North Abbey.

At the accession of William, Prince of Orange, the most persecuting laws were
enacted against the Catholic clergy and people. The Dominican Friars fled from
St. Mary’s Island, of which they never alter were able to resume possession. The
Convent was used for the residence of the Governor or Mayor of the City. It was
called, in after times, the Great House of St. Dominic's, aud became the town
mansion of the Earl of Inchiquin.

About the year 1698, Father John Morrogh, O.S.D., not being able to escape
from the city, on account of illness, was taken prisoner, thrown into irons in Cork
jail, where he found rest in a pious death. in the year 1702. About the same time,
Father Walter Fleming, O.S.D.. came to Cork, whence he sailed to France, in
company with Father John O'Heyn (author of the interesting Dominican history,
called Epilogus Chronologicus), and having sailed the year after for Ireland,
with Father Daniel M‘Donnel.of the same Order, both Friars were seized on board
before they came on shore, and more than a year were kept in chains and close con-
finement in Cork jail, whence they were allowed to take shipping again for France.

In the beginning of the 18th century Father Ambrose O’Connor. appointed
Provincial of Ireland while in Spain, privately returned home, and made his visi-
tation in this country, providentially escaping the spies who were in search for
him. In the Memorial or Report of his Visitation as Provincial, which he drew
up for Pope Clement IX. in 1704, he states that he found about ninety Dominican
missionaries working in the service of religion, but living in concealed places, and
that five were confessing the faith in prison.

The fury of the persecution somewhat abating about the time of the Hanoverian
succession, the scattered Dominicans of Ireland cautiously began to unite and form
themselves into communities. The friars of Cork lived together in the narrow
obscure lane in the northern district of this city, off Shandon-street, called to this
day Friary-lane. Father Peter M ‘Carthy was Prior.

1731. In the Report of the Lords’ Committee to ing ire into the state of Popery
in Ireland, one Friary only is returned as being in Cork, with the number of friars
unknown.

In 1784, the Dominicans built a more suitable convent and chapel in a more
public and convenient place, on the site of old Shandon Castle. They remained

ere till 1839, when their present beautiful church of St. Mary’s, on Pope’s Quay,
was solemnly dedicated.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-151.png ---
County of Cork. 125

the roth of November, a licence was granted to Maurice
Moral, prior provincial, to reform this convent.”

20th December, 35th King Henry VIII. a grant was
made to William Boureman of this monastery and its ap-
purtenances, with three small gardens, containing two acres,
a water-mill, two stangs of land, a fishing pool, half a sal-
mon-weir, three acres of arable land called the Half Skeagh-
begge, ten other acres of arable, and twenty acres of arable
and twenty of pasture in Galverston ; to hold the same in
capite for ever, at the annual rent of 6s. od. sterling.*”

1578. This year, in the month of October, to the great
grief of the Irish inhabitants, the bishops did publicly burn,
at the high cross in this town, the image of St. Dominick,
which had belonged to this monastery.*

This house, which stood in an island called Cross-green,
on the south side of the town, is now entirely demolished

Augustinian Friary ; A monastery was founded, on the
south side of the city, in the reign of King Edward I, for
friars following the rule of St. Augustin ;2 some writers give
this foundaticn to Patrick Lord Kingsale, who lived in the
reigns of King Henry V. and VI.;* and another writer brings
the foundation so low as 1472, or 1475.°

6th October, 19th of Queen Elizabeth, a grant was made
to Cormac M‘Teige M‘Carthy of this friary and its appur-
tenances, containing two acres, a church, &c., at the annual
rent of £13; and for the other possessions the rent of 16s. 8d.
all Irish money.¥

Of this building, the steeple, which is 64 feet high, and the
walls of the church, still remain ; the east window, the only one
in the choir, was truly magnificent, and measured 30 feet in
height and 15 in breadth ; the whole erection was converted
into a sugar-house, and is now called the Red Abbey.°

Carmelite Friary ; Bourke is the only author who men-
tions this house for White Friars.

Nunnery of St. Fohn the Baptist; William de Barry and

“Bourke. p.87 ‘Aud. Gen. *War. Bps.p. 564. Smith, vol. 1, p. 388. *War.

mon. *. ade vol. 4, p. 35. Herera, quoted by Allemande. Aud. Gen. ° Smith,
vol. 1, p. 388.

WAugustinian Friary.—Inquisition 31st October, IV. King James, finds that the
friars were seized of the third part of a water-mill called the upper mill of Douglas,
on the lands of Buelibracky, and the tithes of the mill and the said lands, that
William White and John, his son, by writing, dated XIII. Edward IV., granted
to the friary a parcel of land in Shandon, near Cork, in breadth between the lands
of St. John the Baptist, on the north, and the lands of the said William and John
on the south, and in length from the land of the Grey Friars, on the west, to the
highway on the east :—

Inquisition 7th October, V. James, finds that the said mill was built by the
O’Dalies, and that the said lands of Buelibracky contain, by estimation, two acres,
and that the same did belong to the friary.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-152.png ---
126 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

John de Barry, supposed to be John Keltagh Barry, and
styled the Lord John Barry of Hely, who was basely mur-
dered in the year 1327,¢ did, together with John Fitz-
Gilbert, and Philip Fitz-Robert, grant several carucates and
parcels of land, tithes, and advowsons of churches, to Agnes
de Hereford and other women, to serve God in the habit
of nuns, in the house of St. John the Baptist, in St. John’s-
street, within the suburbs of Cork.®

This nunnery, of which there are now no remains, was
situated near the present market-house, and the site was
accidently discovered in digging up some old tombs.*

Preceptory; there was a preceptory of the Knight’s Tem-
plars in this town, for we find that William le Chaplain
was master of Cork about the year 1292.8

Priory of St. Stephen ;® An house was founded in the
south suburbs of this city for the support of Lepers, and
Edward Henry was keeper of it A.D. 1295.

1408. November 22nd, Henry IV. granted the custody of
this house, then vacant and in his gift, to Henry Fygham,
chaplain, for life ;} and November 22nd, 1419, it was re-
granted to another Henry Fygham during life* This priory,
when suppressed, was granted to the city of Cork, and about
the year 1674, an hospital for poor children, now called the
Blue-coat Hospital, was erected on the ancient site.! :

Christ Church ; otherwise called the Church of the Holy
Trinity.

Inquisition roth September, XX Queen Elizabeth, finds
that a chantry was founded in this church for the support of
eight priests ; to which, contrary to the statute of mortmain,
the following grants were made: by James White, the Church
of St. Laurens in this city, with three messuages adjacent
thereto, annual value, besides reprises, 3s. 4¢.; by James
Milton, a carucate of land near Cork, in the tenure of James
Meagh, annual value 6s.; and by Philip Golde, a college, built
of stone, near Christ Church, annual value, besides re-
prises, 6s.

4 Lodge, vol. 1, p. 196. * Dugdale, vol. 2, p. 1020. * Smith, vol. 1, p. 389. © King,
D on Id. p. 139. | Harris’s Collect. vol. 4, * King, p. 139. ' Smath, vol. 1,
P. 389.
titled when on the toad to Cork, that the master of the honpitalskouldy forthe
space of twenty-four hours, maintain and support all the horsemen and footmen
attending the said Cormac, his heirs and assigns, with victuals, and all necessaries,
in consideration of which the said master claimed housefoot, and firefoot out of
the woods of said Cormac for the support, repairing, and re-edifying of the hospital
when necessary. The master was seized of the advowsons Aghnynagh and the

rectory of the parish churches of Mucrumphe and Clounadrohide, and the patron-
age of the parish church of Moyviddy and Kilkollinan.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-153.png ---
County of Cork. 127

St. Peter's; The same inquisition finds, that there was a
chantry in this church ; to which, contrary to the statute of
mortmain, two messuages and a garden, annual value, besides
reprises, 6s. 8a., were granted by Robert Golde, for the purpose
of finding one priest to say mass.

Cregan, see Timoleague.

Cullen ; In the barony of Duhallow, and five miles and an
half south-west of Kanturk ; near this church are some ruins
which are said to have been an ancient nunnery.™

Donaghmore ; In the barony of Muskerry, and six miles
north-east of Macroomp. St. Fingene, a disciple of St.
Finbarr, was abbot of Domnach mor mitine® which, in after
ages, became a parish church, and is now called Donaghmore.

Fermay ,™ A small village on the river Blackwater, in the

™ Smith, vol. 1, p. 302. ® Act. SS. p. 258.

™ Fermoy ; The monastery of Fermoy was the head of the great religious institu-
tions founded by St. Finnchua in the beginning of the seventh century. This saint
received the waters of baptism from St. Ailbhe, studied at Benchor under its holy ,
founder, St. Comghall, was subsequently abbot of that great monastery, but
resigned that office to establish the great religious school in his native territory at
Fermoy. He was remarkable for his penitential spirit, and, towards the close of
his saintly career, made a pilgrimage to Rome. e ancient name of the place
now called Fermoy was Magh Meine, and thus it was known till the siege of Dram
Damhghaire, which is recorded to have taken place about the year of our Lord 220.
Munster was at that time invaded by Cormac Mac Airt, who, full of confidence ig
his Druids and in the valour of his troops, encamped at Drom Damhghaire, in the
S.E. of the county Limerick, since called Cnoe Longa (Knocklong), #.¢. hill of the
encampment. In thisemergency a famous Druid, named Mogh Ruth, hastened from
his residence in Oilean Dairbre, now the Island of Valencia, to the aid of the
Munster army, and through his skill and bravery a brilliant victory was achieved.
The troops of the monarch, adds the ancient tale, were pursued by the men of
Munster, led by their Druid, Mogh Ruth, in his chariot drawn by wild oxen, till
driven beyond the borders of the province, and into Magh Raighne, in Ossory.
The men of Munster now returned home in triumph, after having repulsed the
invader, and called a convocation of the states and people of the pores to give
thanks to their friend and deliverer, Mogh Ruth, after which they unanimously
agreed to give and confirm to him and his descendants for ever the possession of
the plain and country then called Magh Meine (or the mineral plain) in reward for
his great services.

‘agh Meine was thus handed over to Mogh Ruth, and hence it was called Fearn
Moga, or the land of Muga, as written in some old MSS. __ His tribe and family,
who settled down in this territory, took the tribe name of Fer Mugai, #.¢., the men
of Mugai, anglicised Fermoy ; and the race of Mogh Ruth continue to inhabit
there even to this day, in the families of O’Dugan, O’Cronin, and others in that
and the neighbouring districts. The following extract from the MS. Book of
Lismore further illustrates its names :—

“*They then sent for the clay of Comlehaille Meic Con, é.c., the Caile (or land) of
Mene, son of Erc, son oY Deaghaidh, which is called Fir Mulghe, é.¢., Fermoy,
to-day. The reason it is called Caile Meic N-Eirc is because his sons dwelt there,
namely, Mene, son of Erc, and Uatha, son of Erc, and Ailbhe, son of Erc.
Another name for it was Fir Muighe Mene, so called because of the abusdance
of the minerals contained in the mountains around it, and because there are mine-
Tals in all the fields around it also. Another name for it was Corr Chaille Meic
Con, because it was the patrimony of the Clann Dairine, and it is in it Rossach-
na-Righ is, #.2., Ross-na-Righ, the ancient burial place of the kings of Munster,

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-154.png ---
128 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

barony of Clangibbon. An Abbey was founded here under
the invocation of the Virgin Mary, for Cistertian Monks, who
were brought hither from an abbey on the Suire, in the
county of Tipperary ; and a new colony was afterwards intro-
duced from the abbey of Furnes, in Lancashire.°

° War. mon. Pembridges Ann. and Ann. B.V.M, Dubl. &c.

and it is there Mac Con was till the time of the battle of Ceann Abrath.” (See
Forbas Drom Damhghaire. Book of Lismore, and O’Curry’s copy, C.U.D., p. 42,
and O’Curry's Lectures on Manuscript Materials of Irish History, pp. 171-2, and
Second Series, vol. i., pp. 212, 278, &c., &c.)

The hitherto unpublished tract on the Topography of Fermoy, in the same old
MS., is interesting, as preserving the names and boundaries of the political and
ecclesiastical sub-denominations of this district, and the names of many of the old
ecclesiastical foundations of the place, with special references to the most remark-
able families, civil and ecclesiastical, of ancient Fermoy. It runs thus :—

“¢Crichadh-an-Chaille! of valour,
Is there one of you to tell [its history]
It was given to the son of Sonax [#.e., Mogh Ruth]
For his having relieved the Forbas, &c., &c.”

“This country was in two Triuchs® before it was given to Mogh Ruth, and

e there were eight Tuaths in each Triuch. and the line of demarcation between
those two Triuchs was, namely, the course of Glaisse Muilinn Mairteil® in Sliabh
Cain,* and Loch Luinge® on the Machaire, and Gleann na n-Dibergachael on Moin
Mor,6 and when being given to Mogh Ruth they were made into one Triuch, in
order to lessen the [political] influence of the race of Mogh Ruth after him, and
securities for preserving that freedom to him. Mogh Corb,’ son of Cormac Cas. and
his descendants after him ; and after that it was arranged into ten Tuaths, eight
ee to constitute the [political extent of the] country, and two Tuaths as border

lands.

‘*The first Tuath of these that is mentioned is the Eoganacht of Gleann

1 Crichadh an Chaille, one of the ancient names of the place now called Fermoy.
* Triuch—an ancient sub-denomination of land, supposed by some to be repre-
sented by the modern barony ; but the two Triuchs mentioned here comprised the
baronies of Fermoy, Condon. and Clongibbon. Tuath, an ancient political sub-
denomination of land. See W. K. Sullivan’s Introduction to O’Curry’s Lect.,
Vol. i. 3Glaisse Muillinn Mairtel, i.c., the stream of Martel’s [or Mortar] mill,
which flows southwar through the glen called Leaba Molaga [or St. Molaga’s
bed] into the river Fuinshion, north-west of Marshalstown, now called Abham
Carraig na m-Brointe (or the river of the rock of the Querns] ; others suppose this
to be the Sheep River to the west of the above mentioned stream. ‘4Sliabh Cain,
i.e, the range of mountaiys extending from the Galtees westward to Buttevant.
5 Loch Luinge—Probably the lake from which Baile an Locha, south of
Mitchelstown, has its name. The boundary line between the baronies of Fermoy
and Clangibbon passes through this townland. which is marked on Petty’s Map of
the County of Cork as Baile de Locha. ® Moin Mor—This place probably com-
prised the greater part (if not the whole) of the present Nagle Mountains, and the
coarse land on the northern and southern slopes of this range. This appears from
the fact that the monastery of Baile na Mona. situate four miles south of Mallow,
on the road to Cork. was in Moin Mor, and the glen called Gleann-na n-Diberga-
chaile was, in all probability, to the east of, or somewhere about, Ballyhooley,
7 Mogh Corb, son of Cormac Cas—There is evidently a mistake in our text here ;
Mogh Corb was son of Oiliall Olum, not of Cormac Cas _ He is mentioned in the
Annals of the Four Masters, at the year A.D. 195, as one of the seven sons of Oilioll
Olum, who were slain in the battle of Magh-Muchruimhe by Mac Con and his
forces. Cormac Cas was second son of Oilioll Olum, and ancestor of the Dal-g-
Cas tribes of Munster. ® Two Tuaths of border land—These were the two Tuaths

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-155.png ---
County of Cork. 129

A.D. 1226. Patrick, the prior, was made bishop of Cloyne,
according to Sir James Ware ; but from the records it appears,
that W. then prior of Fermoy, was elected bishop of Cloyne,
and received the royal assent.P

® War. Bps. p. $75.

Omnach (now Glanworth), for it is the noblest of them, because it is one of the free
Tuaths of Cashel, with its border Tuaths, and Hi Ingaire, which is called Magh
Fece, is the noblest Baile of that Tuath, and Ceapach Inghin Ferchair is opposite
it on the other side; and Gleann Caintinn, out of which are Hi Caimh (i.e.
O'Keeffe) and Hi Digi; and Corr Tuath, out of which are Hei Finghin ; and
Lisleithisel, and Daire Hi Tnuthghaile ; Cathair Droinne,® out of which are Hi
Annratham (i.e. O’Hanrahan), DunMaelclaigh, ie the chief fortress of the
Eoganacht ; and Achad Loiscthi,!° out of which are Hi Lachtnain,!! Hi Dubh-
thaigh, Hi Leannain, and Hi Draighnein (é.¢. O'Drennan, or O'Drynan), i.e.
Ceall Ghallan ;* and Moin Banba, out of which are Hi Daronaigh and Lis na
Caille, out of which are Hi Dubhghaille and Hi Cleirigh ; and Rath Mor, out of
which are Hi Damain; Leath Baile Hi Conchobhair, for O’Conchobhair was
chief of Hi Inghaire, #.¢. of Magh Feige, and the [sub] denominations of this place
are—Dun Loibinn. i.¢. Teach an Turtain. and Cluain Dallain,!* and Moin Luachra,
and Ceall Garbhain ; and its boundaries are the line of road which leads from
Airgeatland’* to Cnocan Dun Martain, and whick passes down through that

lace to Abhann Mor, and the ditch west of Gort an Grain extending by Gort

roma Airthir to Leiscnen, along the course of Abhan Mor, and Hi Dallain;
are the hereditary occupiers of Cluain Dallain and of Moin Luachra and of Gort
an Grain, the church of Eoganacht Gleann Ommach is the principal church
and a third of the land of Brigh-Gobban belongs to that Tuath, se. Carrac-
Cormaic and Ceall-Danain, Cul Domhnann, Cluain Locha, Cluain Lena, Cluain
Cairbreach, Ceall-Bracain, Coirrlis Da Conall. Craes Cru, Tipra-Gruagain,
Tulach Aedha, Ard Catha, Cainn-Innse and Dun Draighnein to the east of Aith
Lis Ceindfaelaidh.

“ Since the two Tuaths of O’Cuain, namely Hi Maille Machaire, ‘and Hi
Ingardail’ were united into one Tuath, the chief Baille of Hi Ingardial, i.
Conbaid (hound drowning), because Finn’s hounds were drowned there, and out
of this place came Hi Buadhaigh. The Martra, i.c. Ath Ubhla, out of which
are Hi Aichir, Ceall Achid. out of which are Hi Lomthuile. The Creg, out of
which are Hi Riagain, Leitir. out of which are Hi Corcrain. The Recles, out of
which are Maeilluaigh, Cill Conaim is the chieftain of Hi Cain, and before they
were united into one Tuath O’Riagain was of Hi Ingardail.

‘* Hi Maille Machaire, i.e. Leac Glas and Cul Baedain out of which are Hi
Taimhainigh and Hi Fogartaigh, Leathnocht. in which are twelve tribe names,
viz.: O’Conbhaidhe from Cathair Meic Maille, Hi Gormachain, from Lis
Dormchada, Hi Uallachain, from Cuirr Hi Uallachain, Hi Lachtnain from
Fidhrus ; Meic Cuirc, from Cill Feichin, Hi Ceithernaighe, from Cnocan
Tulaird, Hi Caelbheannaighe, from Cuirr Hi Cacilbheannaighe. Hi Cuicneachain,
from Greallach, Hi Cuicneachain, Cill Cromglaisse, out of which are Hi Cuain,
Laiche Hi Fiaich, out of which are Hi Finneachta; Ard Fleada, out of which are
Hi Finneachta; Ard Fleada, out of which are Hi Cinnfhaelaidh, Manann, out of

of [Dirainn or] mountain land surrounding Fermoy on the north and east sides,
namely, Hi Rossa and Hi Cuccraidhe Sleibhe. ® Cathair Droime, now Caher
Droinge, situate about midway between Mitchelstown and Kilworth. The site of
this Cathair [or fortress] is now marked by the ruins of an old castle, which com-
mands a good view of the country many miles around, and which is marked on the
Ordnance Map of the County of Cork, sheet 19. }° Achadh Loischi, now St Nath-
alis, north of Glanworth. ‘Hi Lachtnain, now O’Lachtnan, sometimes written
O’Laughnane, and Iaughnane. 1 Ceall Gallain—The old church which gives
name to the parish of Kill Gullain, north-west ot Mitchelstown. See Ordnance
Map of County Cork. 1 Cluain Dallain, now Clandillane, east of the town of
Fermoy. ' Airgeatlaind, now Araglin.
K

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-156.png ---
130 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1248. The abbot was fined in the sum of 410 for divers
offences.4

1290. Maurice le Fleming made a considerable grant to
this abbey.”

1301. The abbot Maurice Garton fell from his horse into
the river Funcheon, in the neighbourhood of this abbey, and
lost his life ;* he was succeeded by Henry.

1303. Maurice, Lord Kerry, died in this year; at which
time Thomas, his fifth son, governed the abbeys of Fermoy
and Odorney."

1311. Dionysius was abbot.”

1355. David Rawyr O’Kyff was abbot.*

1367. Henry was abbot, and in same year William

aKing, p. 359. "dd. p. 282. ‘Jd. p. 358. ‘ld. p. 283. “Lodge, vol. 2, p. 103.
“King, p. 359. "dd. p. 282.

which are Hi Britain, Garran O'Ceamaighe, out of which are Hi Ciannaighe.
Cill Cruimtir, is the Church of this Tuath.

“And one third of Termun Brigh Gobun, belongs to Hi Cain, i¢., the two
Ceannacans and Cul Lugdach, Moin Mucrinde, Ceall Droma, the Marbhthir, the
Lianans, Cnocan Hi Chroinghilla and Beallach na Ros.

“ Tuath O’Cuscraidhe, é.e, Liathmuine and Cul na n-Aracul, out of which are
Hi Lighda Cluain Meic Carthaind. out of which are Hi Artuir, Lis an Cnuic,
out of which are Hi Donnchada, Cill Mochuille, out of which are Hi Beachagain,
Hi Dunadhaighe, Hi Riagain, Daire Faible, out of which are Hi Adnachain,
Loch Arda O’Cullin, out of which are Hi Cuinn Leath, Baille, Hi Finn, out of
which are Hi Finn, and its other half Bally, the Arda in Terman, Brigh
Ghobunn, Liagan I.ig Uanach, out of which are Hi Ithfearnan, Durmach, out of
which are Hi Dunadaighe, and the church of this Tuath is Ath Cros Molaga, out
of which are Hi Corrcrain, Hi Ceamsain, Hi Aengnsa, Hi Muircheartaigh, and
Hi Duibheidigh, and a third of Termann Brugh Ghobunn belongs to this Tuath,
i.e, the Baile of Brigh Ghobunn itself, Cluain Aei, Carratc on Furnaidhe Garran
Hi Adhnachain, Baile Hi Mhasilmordha, Baile Hi Chuind, Cnocan Muighe
Ginne, Cluain Garbhain, Cul Aithlis Cindfhaclaidh Gort na Fuinnsion, Cill
Seanaidhe and they are the family names which belong to this church, i.e,
O’Maclmorda are its Comarbs, and O’Finghin, its Aisdre O’Brian, O’Deargain
O’Mulalaidh, O’Flannagain and Meic Breathnuighe and .Hi Artuir, are the
chieftains of this Tuath.

“Tuath O’Conail, from Gleann Cubhra to Lebglaise and Hi Dubhlaidh are the
chieftains of that Tuath, and Liattruim, from Airgeadlomn. eastward to Lebglaise,
is the patrimony of O'’Dubhlaidhe, and that is O’Naibelain, Baile Idir da
Abhainn, #.e. Ard Meic Cuillair, and Uamh Croine, and from that eastward to
Dun O n-Gennti these are one Baile, and out of it are Hi Aengusa Magh Drisen,
on the south side of the river and on the north, these are one Baile, and out of it
are Hi Manog, Feic-Beg is a half Baile, out of it are Hi Riain and Hi Feargusa,
Rath Siadhail and the Corran are its other half Baile, and out of it are Hi Cuain,
Cil Uird is the church of this Tuath, and out of it are Hi Mongain and Hi
Cuillinnain and Hi Brocain.

“ Hi Cuscraidh Sleibhte is the border land of this Tuath we have mentioned, #.e.
Cill Mithne Gort Aicde, Maelrach, Lurga, Daire Leith Re Meic Meada, Gleann
Domhainn, Ceapachna Fian, Gort Ruadh, Ceapach Hi Meadhra, Daire Leathan ;
Eidhnen Molaga, with its Terman, is the church of this Tuath; the Comarb of
that church is Mag Floinn, and the clerk of its crozier is O’Coscrain.

‘The most noble ofthe Tuaths of the other half of that country is Tuath Muighe
Finne in which Cathair Duthaghain is. out of which are Hi Dubhaghain, and the
breadth of this Tuath is from the middle of Relig na m-hanleagh eastward to Ab-

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-157.png ---
County of Cork. 131

Fleming was elected, who paid his homage, as abbot of Fer-
moy, to John, bishop of Cloyne, for the lands of Kilconany
1480. The abbot Nicholas O’Henesa was made bishop
of Waterford in this year.”
26th June, 33rd Queen Elizabeth, a grant was made to Sir
Richard Greneville, Knt., and his heirs, of this monastery,

. ° 7 King, p. 359. * War, Bps., p. 536.

hannnaCarcrach. Hi Daerghala are its hereditary people, Maistre-Meic na gam-
hnaighe ; Daire Hi Diarmata, i.e. Hi‘ Diarmada and Hi Cochlain are its heredi-
tary occupiers. Dun Tulcha Cill Curnain ; Croch, out of which are Hi Dathail of
Croch. Ard Ceanannais and Dun ar aill are one Baile, and out of it are Hi
Faelain and Hi Uirisi. Cill Fadais the burial cemetery of that Tuath, and it was
Mac Con Gairbh, #.e. Mac Coemoc, that consecrated that church. Hi Maeil Bile
are its Comarbs. Hi Amhradha and Hi Labhra and Hi Eire are its hereditary
people, and the Hi Duibh, of Trochmael, were chiefs over them.

“«T have another Tuath yet to describe, #.¢. Madh O’Cathail, 7.c. Messignighe and
Carraigh Leme-Laeghaire. out of these are Hi Domh-naill, chiefs of Magh ; Cill
Cuile, out of which are Hi Fearghala ; Baile Hi Fiachain, out of which are Hi
Fiachin, Cluain Caisi] and Daire na Teide, the chief Baile of Hi Annadha. out of
which are Hi Annadha; Garran O’n-Gnima, out of which are Hi-Gnimh ; Cuil-Baile
Hi Finn, out of which are Hi Finn, Claen Uir is their burying place. The Comarb-
ship of that church is the hereditary privilege of the Hi Annadha, and Hi Cennagain
are its Mac Cleircach ; the Hi Brain from Clettigh are in this Trian, and the
Meic Cairtin from Baile Meig Cairtin, and they are of the people of Rathan, and
this Trian is the hereditary lordship of Hi Domhnaile (O’Donnell), and he is also
entitled to the other two Trians when they have not a chief of themselves,

“The third Trian of them which I have not described, #.¢. Magh Nale, with its
subdenominations, out of which are Hi gormain ; the Brugh and Flaithneim, out
of which are Hi Ardghala ; Tulach-Finnleithid, out of which are Hi Cuilein ;
Magh Lis an Ibhair, out of which are Hi Donnagain ; Baile Hi Mulghuala, out of
which are Hi Macilghnala. and out of it also are hi Macilmuala ; Cil O’n-Gerbhin-
nain, out of which are Hi n-Geibennain and Hi Cailte: Claenuir is the burial
place of those two [families] and of O n-Gormain ; and Rathan is the burial place
of all the other families of this Trian after them, and the Meic Finnen are the
Comarbs of Rathan. The other family names are Hi Crainchi, Hi Conaill, Hi
Conaic, Hi Brain Meic Coirtein, and O’Hardgala is the hereditary chief of this
Tuath.

“Hi Bece Abha, ée. Dun Cruadha, out of which are I Laeghuire ; the Rindi,
around the river, out of which are Hi Cairbre and Hi Cathail; Cill Laisre, at both
sides, out of which are Hi Cleirigh ; Moin Ainmneat both sides, out of which are Hi
Eoguin ; Athan Crainn, at both sides, out of which are Hi Buachalla ; Cill Cuain,
out of which are Hi Fiadhain [or Uan], and Hi Laeghaire are their chieftains.

“The other half of that Tuath is Hi Bece upper, #.e. Sonnach Gobann and
Cluain Lochluinn near Abha Bec east and west, out of which are Hi Gobunn ;
Baile Hi Grigin, on the same river, out of which are I grigin; Gleann Tuircin to
the west and east on the river ; Daire Hi Ceinneidigh, out of which are Hi Cein-
neidigh ; Ceall Ossain Luimneach Beg, extending west of Taedan, and from that
eastward to Lochluingi, with its other patronymics, O’Gobunn is hereditary
chief over them, and he is entitled to the other half of Ibh Bece when there is not
a chief of the Ui Laeghaire. Cill Commuir is the burial place of Hi Bece on
either side, and Hi Dathail are comarbs of that church, and Hi Cochlain are its
Mac Cleireachs.

“ Tuath O'Fiannaidh, from Baile Hi Gormain, west to the road in Druim Raite,
and to Ath na Ceall, and from Abhan mor to the limit of Magh Finne, and the
chief of that Tuath is Mag Fiannadhnighe, and its patronymics are Hi Etromain,
and Hi Annrathain, and Hi Fireidhin, and Hi Brain Fhinn, and Hi Dubhain. Cill
Cluaise is the burial place of that Tuath.

“ Tuath O’n-Duinnin, and its length is from the summit of Sliabh Cain to Each-

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-158.png ---
132 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

containing three acres, with the appurtenances, and a parcel
of land of the following denominations: Garricula, Ardeval-
legge, Aghavanister, Kilcroige, Coulevalinter, Venosige, Kil-
valinter, Venosige, Forraghmore, Downbahenie, Kilcoman,
lying south of the Blackwater, Ballymabene, Granesheagh,
Ballinegehie, Corrowharden, Carrigincroughere, and Glasi-

lascaib Molaga, and its breadth is from Glaise Muilim Mairteil to Beam Mic
Imhair, O’Lannain is chief of this Tuath ; Hi Cineadha, and Hi Seansain, and Hi
Dungasa, and Hi Dungaile are its patronymics, and Cill Maincheas is their burial
place.

“The border land of one half [side] of that country is Rossach na Righ and
Cathair-Gobhunn, and Cluas Droighe, and the Carcuir, and the burial place of
this Tuath is Cill Colmain Grec, and its proper name is Hi Rossa, and its length is
from the summit of Sliabh Cain to Abha Beag et reliqua.”

Ath Ubhla, now Appleford, in Fermoy. A passage in the Irish Life of Saint
Carthach, or Mochuda, of Raheen, Bishop of Lismore, gives the following
account of this and other places in the county of Cork :—‘‘ Another time Mochuda
went from Rahin into the province of Munster, and he came into Ciaraighe
Cuirche (now Kerrycurrihy, in the county of Cork), and he met Carbry Crimthan,
King of Munster, who happened at that time to be at Moy-Cuirche. At this
time there came a fiery thunderbolt, which demolished one of the king’s castles,
and killed his queen and his son Aedan, and a number of his people, and the
king’s two favourite chariot horses were also killed by the fall of the castle. The
king at once requested Mochuda to resuscitate his queen and his son, and when
Mochuda saw the firmness of the king’s faith, he made prayers for them, and bade
them arise and they arose, and Mochuda restored them in perfect health to the
king, and the king gave him extensive lands and many servitors. Another time
Cathal MacAedan, king of Munster, was in the land of Cuircne afflicted with
various diseases, being deaf, dumb, and blind ; Mochuda came to where the king
was, and the king and his friends implored Mochuda to relieve his distress.
Mochuda made prayers to God for him, and put the sign of the holy cross on his
eyes and ears, and mouth, and he was cured of all his diseases and troubles, and
the king Cathal gave extensive lands to God and to Mochuda for ever, namely,
Cathal Island, and Ross Beg and Ross More, and Pick-Island (now Spike
Island), and Mochuda sent holy brethren to build a church in Ross Beg, in
honour of God, and Mochuda himself commenced building a monastery in Pick
Island, and he remained there a full year.

“* Mochuda then placed three of the disciples above mentioned, namely, the
three sons of Nascann, #.¢,, Bishop Gaban, and Sraphan the priest, and Laisren
the saint, in those churches. And it was the holy bishop of Ardomain that gave
holy orders to these three in Mochuda’s presence, and it was he that was appointed
to preserve them in the path of righteousness, and he left two score more of his
brethren in his own stead in the monastery of Pick Island. Pick Island is a most
holy place, and most pious people reside in it perpetually.

“ And Mochuda then returned towards Rahin, and on his way eastward through
Munster he passed over a river which was called Neim at that time, but which is
called Avanmore to-day, and he saw a large apple in the middle of the ford, over
which he was passing, and he took it up and carried it in his hand, and hence
Ath Ubhla (now Appleford), in Fermoy, has its name. And the servant asked
for the apple from Mochuda. and he did not give it but said :—God will work a
miracle with this apple through me this day. for we shall meet the daughter of
Cuana Mac Cailchin, with her right arm powerless and motionless, hanging by
her side, and she shall be cured through this apple and through the power of
God: And this was verified; for Mochuda saw the virgin. with her maiden com-
panions, who were at their sports and amusements on the green of the court, and
going up towards her he said:—‘ Take this apple to thyself, my daughter.’
She stretched forth her left hand for the apple as was her wont ; Mochuda
said :—‘Thou shalt not get it in that hand, but reach out the other hand for it

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-159.png ---
County of Cork. 133

ganishe, containing by estimation five hundred and fifty acres,
at £15 18s. 4d., Irish money.

The church of the abbey, now the parish church, was a mean
Gothic building.*

Glunay, is said to be in the diocese of Cork, where the abbey
of the Vale of God was built, and which abbey, continues our
author, was a daughter of the abbey of Jerpoint, in county of
Kilkenny.»

Glanore, or Glanworth ;»»® has its situation on the river
Funcheon, in the barony of Fermoy. The family of Roche
founded a monastery here in the year 1227,° for friars of the
order of St. Dominick ;3 but Bourke says, this foundation
(dedicated to the Holy Cross) was at some later period.®

Grange; formerly called Grany, is seated on the river
Bride, in the barony of Muskerry, and a mile east of Kilcrea.
From Colgan we learn, that St. Cera, who died A.D. 679, built a
nunnery at Kilcrea,! but in the records it is said to be at Grany.&

The Great Isle 8®* in the barony of Barrymore, and form-
ing one side of the harbour of Cork, is four miles in length,

= Aud. Gen, *Tour through Irdand. p. 131. Allemande, i.e., The Golden
Vale. °Smith, vol. 1., p. 351. ‘War. Mon. *Bourke, p. 334. *Act. SS. p. 15.
SSmith, vol. 1, p. 211. %6Called anciently Inismore, in Ibhmaccaile, or Imokilly.
Vard. vita Rum.

and thou shalt get it,’ And the maiden being full of faith, attempted to reach
forth the right hand, and the hand was instantly filled with vigour and life, and
she reached it out and took the apple into it.

*« There was joy all over the king's palace on this occasion. and all gave praise to
God and to Mochuda, for this miracle, and Cuana said on that night to his
daughter, make now your selection. and say who you like best of all the princes of
Munster, and I will have him married to you; to this the maiden replied, ‘I
shall have no husband but the man who cured my hand.’ ‘Hear you that O
Mochuda,’ said Cuana. ‘Give me the maiden,’ said Mochuda, ‘and I will give
her as'a spouse to Christ, who cured her hand;’ and Cuana gave the maiden and
her dowry. with an offering of land on the banks of the river Neim, to God and to
Mochuda for ever, and his munificence was too great to be described.

‘«Flandat was the maiden’s name, and Mochuda brought her with him to Rahin,
where she spent her life most profitably with the other ‘Black Nuns,’ till
Mochuda was banished by the kings of Tara out of his own city, when he took
Flandat with him, and the rest of the black nuns, and when he had finished
his own city of Lismore, he sent Flandat to her own country, that she might
build a church there, and she built a noble church in Cluain Dallain, and it
is in Mochuda’s parish it is.” —Irish Life of Saint Carthach, O'Curry M.S., Catholic
University. .

"Glanore, or Glanworth; Inquisition 3rd of Saint Hilary, 31st Elizabeth, finds
that a grant was made of this priory and the possessions thereof to Maurice Viscount
Fermoy, at the annual rent of 15s. Irish ; but that the same was forfeited by the
non-payment of the rent.—Ordnance Survey of Cork, R.I.A., vol. iv., p. 73.

33 The Great Isle, St. Sarann, of Inismor (Great Island), is thus commemorated
in the Festology of Aengus Céle Dé at 15th May. ‘*Sarann, son of Archurr, from
Inismor, in Uibh Mac Caille, in Uibh Liathain in Munster ;” and the Irish life of
St. Findbarr states that St. Sarann settled in Drom Eighneach, in the territory of
Ua Lugdach, that he resigned his own church to God and to St. Barra (Findbarr),
and that Barra gave him a new monastery with its Religious.—Li/¢ of St. Findbarr,
O Curry, MS. C.U.T.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-160.png ---
134 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

seven in breadth, and contains the village of Cove, opposite
to which his Majesty’s largest ships may ride, and the vessels
trading to Cork generally anchor there.8@ The festival of St.
Saran, the son of Archuir, is observed here on the 15th of May.»

Inchrie ; there was a Cistertian abbey here, dedicated to the
Virgin Mary ; it was a cell of the abbey of Maure in this
county,! and is now unknown.

Iniscarva ;*™ five miles from Cork, on the river Lee, in the
barony of Barrets. St. Senan of Iniscathay, built an abbey
here, and placed eight of his disciples therein.! This is now
a parish church in the diocese of Cloyne™

Inishircan > An island between Cape Clear and the main-
land. Inthe year 1460, Florence O'’Driscol, the Great, founded
a small monastery here for Franciscan friars of the strict
observance ;° other writers say, that Dermot O’Driscol was the
founder in 1470? In 1537 the citizens of Waterford destroyed
all the villages on this island, with the mill, castle, and friary.4

This monastery was built near the castle, on the plan of
that at Kilcrea, but much smaller ; the steeple is a low square
tower, from whence runs the nave, with an arcaded wing, to
the south.

Inquisition 2nd March, 5th James, finds that, 3rd March,
33rd Elizabeth, a grant for a term of years was made of this
priory to John Bealinge, at the annual rent of 26s. 8d, Irish
money.— Chief Rem.

LInispict, or Inispuinc,;® near Inishircan, in the barony of

weSmith, vol. 1. p. 169. “Vard. vit. Rumoldi. ‘War. Mon. Harris's tab. *Was
called anciently Tuaimnava, Act. SS. p.140. \War. Mon. Harris's tab. ™Visitation
Book. *Was called anciently Iniskicran. °War. MSS. vol. 34, p. 162. War. Mon.
PWar. Mon. Smith, vol. 1, p. 141. "ld. p. 290.

*“Jniscarra; The Irish lives of St. Senan of Jnis Cathaigh, relate that on his
return home from his great preceptor, St. David of Kilmony, in Alba, he came into
ae sy of Munster; and having settled down in the place then called Ozlean arda

Liathain, now Barrymore Island, he remained there forty days, till admon-
wa by an angel to go forth, and to found a church for himself, wherein to serve
God, with his followers. St. Senan went forward, we are told, directed by the
angel, till he came to a place then called 7saim-na-mba, on the side of the river
Linne (now the Lee), where he founded his church, and fixed his ecclesiastical resi-
dence. When the petty prince of this place came to hear that St. Senan had occu-
pied bis land without permission, he sent messengers to warn him off, and to de-
mand rent and restitution. Subsequently he sent his own favorite steed to be
maintained at the expense of the monastery, but the steed fell into the stream at
the church, where she was drowned, so that no part of her remained to be seen
but her carra, i.¢., her quarters, and hence the place was called /ms Carra.
Tuaim na-mba was its name till then. St. Senan thus maintained his position
here, and left eight of his disciples in the Church of /nés Carra, with St. Cillian,
under the protection of Fechen, son of Faighe, king of Muscraighe, who was also a
disciple of St. Senan.—Life of St. Senan, chap. 3, pp. 15-16.

38 Inispict. The Irish ‘Life of Saint Carthach, or Mochuada, Bishop of Rahen
and Lismore,” contains the following account of this place :—

“* A certain time the King of Munster, namely Cathal, son of Aodh, was in the

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-161.png ---
County of Cork. 135

Muskerry. St. Carthagmochuda built a monastery here
about the close of the 6th century, and placed therein the
three brothers, St. Gobban, St. Stephen, and St. Lafren, with
the bishop St. Domangen, and twelve others of his disciples ;
but they did not continue here, for we find that St. Doman-
gen was honoured in Tuaimmuscraighe.* This place is now
unknown.

Kilbeacan ,; on the north side of Mount Crotte, in Muscry-
ciure, and Keating says, it bears the same name at this day.
St. Abban, who died at a great age A.D. 650, built an

extensive monastery here, and placed over it St. Beacan, altas
Mobecoc.”

Kilchuilinn,® is supposed to be in the barony of Bantry ;
* Act. SS. p. 631. *Lid., p. 615, 622, 751.

land of Cuircne afflicted with various diseases, so that he was deaf, dumb, and
blind; and Mochuada came to where he was, and the King and his friends prayed
him to cure him. Mochuada prayed to God for him, and he put the sign of the
cross on his eyes, and on his ears, and on his mouth, and he was cured of all
diseases and blemishes. And Cathal gave extensive lands to God, and to
Mochuada for ever, namely—Cathal Island. and Rossbeg, and Rossmore, and
Pick Island, now Spike Island. And Mochuada sent holy brothers to build a
church in Rossbeg in honour of God. And Mochuada himself commenced
building a monastery in 7k /sland, and he remained a full year in it. Mochuada
then placed three of his disciples, namely—the three sons of Nascann, 4.¢., Bisho
Goban, and Sraphan the priest, and Laisren the saint, in these churches; and it
was the holy bishop of Ardomain that gave holy orders to those three persons, in
the presence of Mochuada, and it is he that was appointed to direct and to preserve
them in the way of righteousness, and he left two score more of his brethren in the
monastery of Pick /sland, in place of himself. And Mochuada then returned to
Rahen; and that Island which we have mentioned. #.e., Pick /sland, is a most holy
place, and most pious people reside in it perpetually.—O’ Curry MS., C.U.1.

36 St, Cannera was the holy virgin commemorated by Moore in the following lines
of his song of Saint Senanus and the Lady.

ST, SENANUS.

**Oh! haste and leave this sacred Isle,
Unholy bark, ere morning smile ;
For onthy deck, though dark it be,

A female form I see ;

And I have sworn this sainted sod

Shall ne’er by woman’s feet be trod.”
THE LADY.

“‘Oh! Father, send not hence my bark,
Through wintry winds and billows dark ;
I come with humble heart to share
Thy morn and evening prayer ;

Nor mine the feet, Oh! holy Saint,
The brightness of thy sod to taint.”

The legend of St. Cannera’s visit to /#is-Cathaigh and her interview. with St.
Senanus 1s thus preserved in the Irish lives of St. Senanus :-—

“ The pious Cannera, a virgin saint, of Beantraige (Bantry), in the south-west of
Erin, who established a Disert in her own country. A certain night after vespers,
as she was at her prayers, she saw all the churches of Ireland, and a tower
of fire rising out of every one of them up to heaven. The fire which rose out

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-162.png ---
136 Anctent Monasteries of Ireland.

here we find a nunnery, of which St. Cannera was abbess,
where she was also honoured.*
Kilcrea,® five miles west of Cork, in the barony of Muskerry.
Nunnery ; St. Cyra, or Chera,” was abbess here ; where her
feast is celebrated October 16th.*

2 Act. SS., p. 1$5. % The Earls of Clancarty had a strong castle here. * Calendar.

of Innis Cathaigh was the largest, the highest, and most brilliant of all, and rose
most directly heavenward On beholding this the holy virgin exclaimed, that is a
beautiful Recles (church) said she, and it is to it I will go, that my resurrection may
be out of it.—O heavenly spouse, said she, whatever church or holy place that is,
it is there I wish my resurrection to be :_ and she then prayed God that she might
not lose sight of that tower of light, but like the tower of fire that led the children
of Israel through the wilderness, so it might lead her into the place; and God
granted her prayer. She set out forthwith, having no guide but the blazing tower of

re which continued to burn without ceasing, both day and night, till she reached
it. When she reached the water at Luimneach (Limerick) she went on foot over
the water as if she walked on the dry ground, and reached the shore at Inis
Cathaigh, at early dawn next morning. St. Senan, knowing this, came to the
shore to meet her and bade her welcome. It is for that I came said Cannera,
and blessed are they who come in the name of the Lord. Go, said Senan, to
my mother and my sister who abide in that island on the east, and you will be en-
tertained by them there. That is not what I come for, said Cannera, but to be
received by yourself into this island, and to remain here in communion of prayer
with you. Women do not abide in this island, said Senan. What is your reason
for that ? said Cannera: Christ did not come less to redeem women than to redeem
men. Christ was crucified not less for women than for men. Women were serv-
ing and attending Him and his apostles, and women do not go less to
heaven than men. You are speaking in vain, said Senan to the holy virgin, there
is no distinction between their souls, but not so with their bodies, and so women
shall not reside in this island as long as I live, said Senan. And will you give me
a place of interment and resurrection in your island, and communion and sacrament
from yourself? You shall have a place of resurrection on the brink of the sea
said Senan, but I fear the tide will take away your remains. I fear not, said she,
for my hope is in the Lord God, and I have confidence in your great sanctity that
you will put a protection over my body. The holy virgin was standing on the
water, and her 7rosda under her bosom as if she had been on the dry land all this
time while Senan was conversing with her, and at last Senan permitted her to
come in on the brink of the island, and Cannera scarcely reached the island
alive. Senan then went into the church and brought communion and sacrament
with him to Cannera, and she then died and was buried in the strand on the
south side of the island, where her grave is. Any personin the state of grace who
Goes to the stone which is over her grave, and who prays there with fervent

ety, beseeching her intercession with the Trinity for him, if he be going on sea,

¢ will return by the grace of God, and he will not be drowned in any part of the
world.”—Life of Saint Senan. O'Looney, MS., C.U.1., chap. 5, pp. 30, 31; see
also Book of Lismore, fol. 64, l.a.

37 Cill Chera. The following passage from an account of the Saints of Erin in
“‘Leabhar Breac,” in the Royal Irish Academy. p. 21, col. 4, mentions this place,
and preserves the names of some of the ancient churches and distinguished saints
in this part of the country :—

“ Nine persons of the race of Conaire, é.e., Senach, son of Coirill, and Eolaing,
from Athbii Bolc in Muscraidh Mittaine, and Odran, from Lathrach Odran in
Muscraidhe Tire ; these are the three seniors of the race of Conaire.

“Creschad from Cill Chera, Gobinait, the sharp-beaked Cad/ech (nun), from
Buirnech (Mourn) in the boundary between Muscraidhe Mittaine and Eoganacht
Locha Lein, and Sciath, daughter of Meachair. in Fert Sceith in Muscraidhe Aeda;
these are the three virgins of the race of Conaire.

“Lachtain of Achad Ur, and of Aie Cind Chaille in Ossory, and from Bealac

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-163.png ---
County of Cork. 137

Franciscan Monastery ; was founded in this town under the
invocation of St. Brigid by Cormac M‘Carthuigh, the Great,
Prince of Desmond, in the year 1465.8 He was murdered by
Owen his brother,’ and was buried here in the middle of the
choir, with the following inscription on his tomb:

Hic jacet Cormacus fil. Thadei, fil. Cormaci, fil. Dermitii
magni M‘Carthy, Dnus. de Musgraigh Flayn ac istius con-
ventus primus fundator. an. Dom. 1494.°

Thomas O’Herlihy, bishop of Ross, was interred here in
1579.° and the Roman Catholics repaired this house in 1604.

A great part of this building still remains, with the nave
and choir of the church ; on the south side of the nave is an
handsome arcade of three Gothic arches, supported by marble
columns, more massive than those of the Tuscan order; this

* Act. SS., p. 1§. > War. Annal. ° War. Mss., vol. 34, p. 164. * War. Bps.
Pp: $88 * Smith, vol. 2, p. 101.

Abrath, in Sliabh Cain, Finan Cam Chind Ettig, in the boundary of Ely and Fer-
cell; Senan of Inis Cathaigh; these are the three luminaries of the race of
Conaire.
“* Nine persons of the race of Conaire,
By learned persons called
Three lights, three seniors, three virgins,
Commemorated by the learned sages.

‘* These are the three seniors
Who spoke with Christ in conversation—
Senach, son of Cairill, without tribulation,
Eolaing, and Odran.

“ These are the three Caz/echs (nuns)
Who freely gave their love to Christ—
Ciarascach, Gobinait, with devotion,
And Sciach, daughter of Meachair.

“« These are the three lights
Who saved middle Munster—
Lachtain, the fair, the good instructor,
Finan Cam, and Senan.

“ Senan of Sliabh Luimnigh, whois not weak,
Lachtain from Bealach Abrath,
With the King of the elements, a deed not concealed,
And Finan-Cam-Chind-Ettig.

“« They are alike in state with the King of Heaven,
Alike their right and their family,
Alike the union they have consummated
In heaven and on earth,” &c., &c.

The seven sons of Torben, son of Nuachadh, #.¢., Lilan. from Ath-na-Ceall, on
the brink of Abhan Mor (Blackwater) ; Silen and Cellan, from Ath-na-Ceall also;
Senan Liath, from Cill T-Senain Leith ; Trian, from Domnach Mor Muscraidhe
Mittaine ; Mochoba, from Lismore ; Crocho. from Cill Crochan, in the boundary
of Leix and Ossory ; Lachtain, from Achad Ur, in Aes Chind Chaille, in Ossory
also. The seven daughters of Torben were, Coirsech, Cersech, Sodelb, Cellsech,
from Ath-na-g-cell, &c., &c., Xc.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-164.png ---
138 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

arcade continues to form one side of a chapel, being a cross
aisle. In the choir are some old tombs of the family of Clan-
carty, &c. The steeple, a light building about eighty feet
high, and placed between the nave and choir, is still entire,
and supported by Gothic arches. From the gateway, on
either side, to the high road, are high banks entirely formed
of human bones and skulls, which are cemented together with
moss : besides these, and great numbers strown about, there
are several thousands piled up in the arches, windows, &c.
The river Bride runs neat this ruin. The lands were granted
to Lord Muskerry, but after the wars of 1641, Oliver Crom-
well gave them to Lord Broghill.8

Kulcruimthir ;® near the city of Cluainchollaing, or Kilchuile,
in Hy Liathain, the modern barony of Barrymore. St. Abban
built a church here and died in a respectable old age A.D. 650.
St. Cruimtherfraech gave his name to this church and is
honoured there.* This place is now unknown.

Kilfeacle ; or the church of the Tooth, so called froma
tooth of St. Patrick that was preserved there. We cannot
find any circumstance on record respecting this abbey, but
that St. Beoan of Cluainfiachul, in Muscragia, was a disciple
of St. Patrick’s.! This place is also now unknown.

Killabraher ; or the Church of the Brotherhood ;-a ruined
monastery between Churchtown and Liscarol, in the barony
of Kilmore ; it is uncertain to what order it did belong.*

Killeigh ; a small village four miles from Youghal, in the
barony of Imokilly.

St. Abban, who died A.D. 650, built an abbey at Killachadh
conchean, and made the holy Virgin, St. Conchenna, abbess
of it.

© Smith, vol. 1, p. 210, 211.” Act. SS., p. 615, 623. | Zr. Th. p. 181. * Smith,
vol. 1, p. 326. | Act. SS., p. 632.

% Kilcruimthir was situated about a mile and a-half north of Fermoy, on the old
road to Ballyhindon Castle ; it is now an old ruin and burial ground. It was the
parish church of H? Maoile Machaire, in the ancient territory of Fermoy. See note
under Fermoy.

The genealogy of St. Cruimthir Fraech, from whom this place has its name, is
thus preserved in Leabhar Breac in the Royal Irish Academy, p. 16, col. 4 :—
Cruimthir Fraech, son of Carthach, son of Nedi, son of Onchon, son of Findloga,
son of Find Fir, son of Causcrach. &c.

The following passage from an ancient Irish life of St. Aban, mentions this and
other churches in the same country :

“‘ And Aban then returned into the territory of Corca-Duibhne, and he blessed
Bourneach and he gave it to Gobnait ; and he blessed Cill-Aithfe, on Magh Con-
chon, and he gave it to Fionnan, and Fionnan foretold the coming of Aban many
years before he was born. He blessed Cu/ [Cill] Cud/ainge and Brigobann, and Cill
Cruimthir and Cill na Marbh, and he blessed Cluain Aird Mo Beococ, and Cluain-
Fionnglaise, and he left Beccan in it; and he left the office of the Holy Church in
every church of them.” —Life of St. Aban. O'C., MS., C.U.L, p. 54

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-165.png ---
County of Cork. 139

Kil Na Marbhan ; or the Church of the Dead; near
Briggoban, or Brigown, in the barony of Clongibbon. This
church was also founded by St. Abban.™

Kingsale ; in the barony of Kerrycurry and Kinallea, is a
corporation town, sending two burgesses to parliament, and is
well known for its excellent harbour and strong fortifications.

Inquisition 31st August, 32nd Queen Elizabeth, finds, that
the Spittal, or Lazar-House in this town, was endowed with
lands to the annual value of 12€a—Chief Rem.

Priory of Regular Canons ; St. Gobban, a disciple of St.
Ailb, was patron of the monastery of Kingsale ;* and in the
sixth century we meet with St. Began of Kinnsaile. St.
Senan lies buried here : he presided over the Church of Cluan,
‘between the mountains Crot and Mairge, in Munster.°

White Friars ; we haye no information about the foundation
of this house ; but Stephen Prene, the prior of it, obtained,
in the year 1350, a quarter of land in Lischan from Robert
Fitz-Richard Balrayne. Part of the ruins of this monastery
still remain in the north end of the town.9 ,

Legan; There was a monastery here, of which John de
Compton was prior in the year 1301.7 We have no other
account of it, but that, at the suppression of religious houses,
the prior of St. John in Waterford was found to be seized of
this priory.

Lucim ; there was a monastery here, of which the only
account we have is, that it was situated near the city of Cork,
and that David de Cogan was patron in the year 1318.

Maur, see Carigiliky.

Middletown ;* a market and borough, pleasantly situated
in the barony of Imokilly. An abbey was founded here
A.D. 1180, by the Fitzgeralds ;* or, according to others, by
the family of Barry ;¥ it was supplied with monks of the
Cistertian order from the abbey of Nenay, or Magio, in the

™ Act. SS. p. $27. ™Id.. p.750. °Id., p. 573. ° War. Mss., vol. 34, p. 108.

AU Smith, vol. 1, p. 227. * King, p. 141. */d., p. 142. * Was called by the Irish
Castre ni chora. “War. Mon. ™ Allemande.

% Middldown ; The Inquisition given in the text thus commences in the copy
of R.I.A.:—Inquisition the Tuesday next after the nativity of the Virgin Mary.
31st Henry vit. finds the abbot was seized of the abbey, dormitory, cloister,
chapter-house, an hall, &c.

Inquisition 3rd May, 1612, finds that Sir John Fitz Emund Gerrald, knight, was,
at his death, seized of this monastery, and of the possessions thereunto belonging,
containing three carucates of land. and of an hundred acres of land in this county,
and Cowleban , one carucatea ; a mill on the River Awnye Corrg.

Inquisition 26th January, 17th Elizabeth, finds that the castle and townland of
Castleredmonde, in this county, was parcel of the possessions of this abbey. At
the suppression of the monasteries, the abbot was seized of this abbey, castle, and
townland, and are now held from the Queen in capite knight's service, and are now
of the annual value besides reprises, of 16s. 6d.—[ Chief Kemem.]

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-166.png ---
140 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

county of Limerick, and was called the abbey of St. Mary of
Chore, or of the Chore of St. Benedict.*

Donald was abbot of this house, and was succeeded by
Robert, who governed the abbey A.D. 1309.”

1476. Gerald, bishop of Cloyne, appropriated several vicar-
ages to this abbey.”

26th July, 31st King Henry VIIL, the abbot was seized of
the abbey, dormitory, cloister, chapter-house, an hall, &c.,
within the precincts, containing one acre, annual value, besides
reprises, 5s. ; also one hundred and twenty-three acres of land
in the town of Chore, annual value, besides reprises, 56s. 8d. ;
a salmon-wier in the said town, annual value, besides reprises,
6s. 8d.; and a water-mill in the said town, annual value, be-
sides reprises, 20s. ; one hundred and twenty acres of land in
Kyllynnemaraghe and Ballygybban, annual value, besides
reprises, 40s, ; and the following rectories appropriated to the
said abbot: Chore, annual value, besides reprises, 100s. ;
Downbologge, annual value, besides reprises, 66s. 8¢.; Kylow-
ane, annual value, besides reprises, 66s. 8d. ; St. Catharine's,
annual value, besides reprises, 66s. 8¢.; and Mogyelle, annual
value, besides reprises, 20s., all sterling money. The said
lands, &c., lye and are situate in this county —Chief Rem.

17th September, 17th Queen Elizabeth, this abbey, with
two hundred and eighty acres in the town and lands of Chore,
one hundred and twenty acres in Kylnamanagh, Downe-mac-
more, and Rallygibbin ; a messuage and garden in Carrigch
; a parcel of land called Fearrin Edmondroae, ten
acres of land lying there, and five acres in Cnockacottige ; the
rectories of Chore, Donbolloge, St. Katherine near Cork, Kil-
rowan, Kilcollehy, and Moygelly, and the vicarage of Ballene-
chore, all belonging to the said abbey, were granted, in capite,
to John Fitzgerald and his heirs.—A ud. Gen.

Monanimy,; is seated on the river Blackwater, in the
barony of Fermoy, and about three miles below the town of
Mallow. In the King’s quit-rent books, the parishes or
rectories of Clenor, Carigdownen, Carig, and Templebodane,
with the rectory of Cloghan, are charged £3 10s. crown-rent,
as belonging to the commandery of Monanimy. No mention
is made by any of our writers of this commandery, but at
Monanimy we find an ancient castle, with the traces of several
large buildings round it.

Mourne ;> three miles south of Mallow, in the barony of
Barrets. In the reign of King John, Alexander de Sancta
Helena either founded this preceptory for Knights Templars,

» War. Mon. ¥ King, p. 376. * War. Bps., p. 563. “Smith, vol. 1, p. 349-
» Called also Mora and Ballynamona, and by the Irish, Monaster na mona.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-167.png ---
County of Cork. 141

or he was a principal benefactor to it ;° but on the abolition of
that order, it was given to the Knights Hospitallers.4

Friar Thomas Fitzgerald was commendator in the years
1326, 1327, and 1330,° as was friar John Fitz-Richard in
1334,! 1335,8 1337," and 1339.1 We shall here give the reader
the said Fitz-Richard’s appointment to this commandery by
the prior of Kilmainham, dated at the commandery of Tully,
in the county of Kildare, A.D. 1335.

“ We have granted to friar John Fitz-Richard, during life,
the whole government and custody of our house of Mora, with
the appurtenances thereunto belonging, both in temporals and
spirituals, he paying the ducs usually paid by that house ; and
we require, that within the space of the next ten years, he shall,
at his own cost and charge, erect a castle there, completely
finished both as to size, materials, and workmanship.”* %

By an inquisition taken 4th November, 1584, Mourne was
found to be an ancient corporation, but soon after the death
of the Duke of Clarence, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, in the
reign of King Edward IV., Morough O’Brien rebelled, and
ruined several walled towns in Munster, particularly Mourne
and Buttevant in this county.)

The body of the church, 180 feet in length, yet remains, in
which are some gravestones of the Barrets, Quinlans, and
other ancient Irish families. The foundation walls of the
commandery inclosed several acres; it was defended to the
south by a strong castle, which was standing not long since,
and there were two towers to the west. The possessions
were granted to Teige M‘Carthy, whose descendants forfeited
in the rebellion of 1641; notwithstanding which, that family
are at this day styled Masters of Mourne!

6th October, 19th Queen Elizabeth, a grant was made to
Cormac M‘Teige M‘Carthy, and his heirs, of this commandery,
with the appurtenances, and the rectories of Ardsky, Kilcorne,
Granagh, Garriclone, Kilmory, Teamplenetagh alias Teample-
matchie, Clonethe alias Cloricrehedie, Kymoghill alias Kilbro-
gan, Morrompuc alias Morrompy, Balliburney alias Balleivor-

© War. Mon. * Smith, vol. 2, p 18. ° King. p. 38 and 84. ‘'/d., p.84. "ld,
p.61. fd. p. 39. ‘fd. p. 83. * ld, p. 39. | Smith, vol. 1, p. 180.

% The rent payable to the Crown for this preceptory was £15, Irish money ;
and an Inquisition was held 19th March, 30th Elizabeth, to inquire whether Teige
MacCarthie had _not forfeited his grant by non-payment of the rent. (Chief
Remem.)—Ord. Surv., R.1.A., vol. iv.. p. 102.

31 4.D. 824.—Died the Abbot Conmach McSaerguia (?); A D. 839.—Died the
Abbot Aidmeadach; a.p. 850.—Died the Abbot Anda A.D. 866.—Died
Feargus, Scribe and Anchorite of this abbey ; 4.D. 1015.—Died Airbeartach Mac
Coise, Overseer of Ross Alitri; A.D. 1055.—Died Columb O’Cathail, Deacon of
this abbey; A.D. 1085.—Died Neachtain McNeachtan; A D. 1095.— Died Columb
O’Hanadan, the Airchennach.—Ord. Surv., R.LA., vol. iv., p. 110.


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-168.png ---
142 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

ney, Inchegenilagh alias Inchegeilagh, Agheris, Clonedrohide,
Movidde, Carrigrowghanbeg, Whitechurch alias Templegeoll,
Kytanury, Moullie, with sundry other tithes; at the annual
rent of £40 Irish money.—Axd. Gen.

* Inquisition 17th April, 15th King James, finds, that the
rectories of Kilmaghen and Rostelaine were appropriated to,
this commandery, and that all the possessions belonging
thereto, these two rectories excepted, had been in the posses-
sion of John Barry from the 3rd day of February, 1614.—
Chief Rem.

Obalvene ; in a plea roll of the 44th of King Henry III.
we find an abbey of this name, said in the record to be in this
county.™

Omolaggie ; 28th June, 20th Queen Elizabeth, a grant was
made to the provost and fellows of the Holy Trinity near
Dublin, of twenty acres of land contiguous to a cross, and
parcel of the possessions of the abbey of the Corbe of
Omolaggie in this county. See the abbey of Cong, in county
of Mayo.™™ We can find no other vestige of this house.

Quchwill ; This abbey is mentioned to have existed in this
county, A.D. 1355,2 but we know no more of it.

Ross ;°* a small market-town and an episcopal see, now

™ King, p.133- ™@Aud. Gen. "Id., p.142. °Was anciently called Ross alithri,
Ross elihir, and Ross ylider.

33 Ross, formerly knownas Ross-ailithir(i.e., Rossof the pilgrims), and nowgenerally
called Ross-carberry, from the townland in which it is situated, is an Episcopal
See, and lies at the head of a creek about seven miles from Clonakilty. Camden
says the harbour was formerly navigable for ships. Lynch, Archdeacon of Killalla
repeats this statement in his MS. History of the Irish Sees, but adds, that
already, in his time, the harbour was blocked up with shifting sands. He further
tells us that the name oss in Irish has three distinct meanings, being used to
designate a meadowy plain, a grove, and, more frequently, a promontory. This
last meaning would well correspond with the territory of which we speak, which,
jutting out into the sea, presents quite the appearance of a promontory ; whilst
the smiling fields which adorn the surrounding country, would justify the application
of the name in its first meaning. The diocese was, from the earliest times, co-exten-
sive with the territory of the Corca-/aidhe: at Lynch’s time it was eighteen miles in
length, and four or five in width, and consisted of twenty-four parishes, besides three
detached parishes, situated around Berehaven. St. Fachnan, in Irish Fachtna,
who is also called Lachtna, is patron of the See, being founder of the monastery,
and Bishop of Ross in the sixth century. He was disciple of St. Finbarr in the
famous school of Loch-Eirche, and before proceeding to Ross, was abbot of the
Molana monastery, near Youghal. He also, like most of the contemporary saints
of Ireland, received lessons of heavenly wisdom from St. Ita, the Brigid of Munster.
Ross soon became so famous that crowds of students and religious flocked to it
from all parts, so that it was distinguished by the name of Xoss-ailithir, that is,
Ross of the pilgrims. The birth of St. Fachnan, and the future greatness of his
school, were foretold by St. Kiaran of Ossory, whoes mother was of his family, and
who himself was born in the territory of Ross, at a place still called 7raigh-Ciaran
(i.e, St. Kiaran’s strand), in Cape Clear Island. St. Fachnan, having lost his sight
by some accident when he was somewhat advanced in years, it was restored to him
through the merits of St. Mochoemog, also called Pulcherius, who was then in his
mother’s womb, and whose future sanctity was foretold by St. Fachnan, It is also

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-169.png ---
County of Cork. 143

united to the diocese of Cork, and situate on an arm of the
sea, in the barony of Carbury.
St. Fachnan mongach, or the Hairy, abbot of Moelanfaidh,

related of our saint that it was his daily habit to retire for silent recollection and
rivate prayer to a secluded spot on the side of a hill, near the monastery. It
Pappened that one day he left his scroll of prayers behind him. Rain fell heavily
during the night, but in the morning his prayer-book was as dry as Gideon’s fleece,
for the angels had built a small chapel over it. The traces of this ancient oratory
may still be seen, The precise date of the foundation of the celebrated monastery
of Ross cannot be fixed with certainty. Ware says it was founded about the year
590, and his opinion has been adopted by later writers. It would, probably, be
more accurate to place the foundation of the monastery before the year 570, and
the death of the saint about the year 590. The Life of St. Mochaemog states, that
it was by the advice of St. Ita that St. Fachtna proceeded from the monastery
of Ross to the parents of Mochaemog, through whose merits his sight was restored
tohim. St. Brendan, patron of Kerry, is also mentioned among those who visited
and gave lessons of heavenly wisdom in Ross. These two facts sufficiently prove
that the monastery was established before the death of St. Brendan, which took
place in 577, and of St. Ita, which is marked in our Annals in 570.
In some Latin documents our saint receives the epithet Kachina facundus, “St.
Fachtna the eloquent :” sometimes his name is simply Latinized Sanctus Facundus.
In the Irish records he generally receives the designation of Mac Mongach, i.e.,
“ the hairy child,” because athis birth his head was covered with hair :—‘Fachtna,
Mongach quia cum caesarie natus,” as the Calendar of Cashel explains that name.
This designation betrayed Usher and others into error when they style our saint /i/ius
Monghich, ‘‘the son of Mongach.” The genealogy of St. Fachtna is thus accu-
rately given in the ‘‘ Sanctilogium Genealogicum” :—“ Fachtna, the son of Maon-
aigh, the son of Cairill, the son of Fiachna, &c., descended from Lughad, son of
Ith,” and from the genealogical tables, we should conclude that the holy Bishop
Brandubh, whose feast is kept on the 3rd of June, and Saints Casan and Cailcin,
were brothers of our saint. The O’Driscolls. in whose territory Ross was founded,
belonged to the same race, and made it one of their tribe-duties to enrich the monas-
tery and church of their patron saint with lands and other endowments. After St.
Fachnan twenty-seven bishops of his tribe ruled the See of Ross, as is thus ex-
pressed in the ancient quatrain preserved in the Book of Lecan :—

“ Seven and twenty bishops nobly
Occupied Ross of the truly fertile lands,
From Fachtna the melodious, the renowned,
To the well-ordered Episcopate of Dongalach.”

The names of these bishops are not mentioned in our annals, only their number
is recorded, and their jurisdiction, which was co-extensive with the territory of
Corcalaidhe. This example should serve as a warning to the student of our Eccle-
siastical History not to infer from the silence of our annals in regard to other
districts, either that there was no regular succession of bishops or that there were
no fixed boundaries for the ancient Sees of the Irish Church.

St. Fachtna is commemorated in all our ancient Martyrologies on the 14th of
August. The entry in the Martyrology of Donegal on 14th August seems, how-
ever, at first sight to exclude St. Fachtna from the See of Ross. The whole
entry for that day is as follows :—‘‘Fachtna, Bishop and Abbot of Dairinis
Maelanfaidh, in Hy-Cennselach ; forty-six years was his age, and he was of the
race of Lughaidh. son of Ith, according to the Seanchus : Echlech, Cuimmen, and
Caemhan, three sons of Daighre : Brocadh : Dinil.”—(Martyr. of Donegal, page
219.) Thus all mention is omitted of Rossailithir. There is, however, some
confusion in this entry, owing, probably, to a transposition of names. We are,
happily, able to detect the error by the corresponding entry in the Martyrology of
Tallaght, as preserved in the Roman fragment of the Book of. Leinster, which is
as follows :—‘‘ XIX. KalendasSeptembris. Fachtna mac Mongano Ros Ailithir :
Dinil Macintsair : Mac-intsaeir, Episcopus et Abbas Darinsi Maelianfaid : Broccain
Mac Lugdach : Cummini: Coemain: Aicclig.” Thus, it was not St. Fachtna

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-170.png ---
144 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

in the county of Waterford, was abbot of this monastery, and
principal of the school founded there; his festival is held on
August 14th;? a city grew up here, in which there was always

? Calend. Vet.

who was Abbot of Darinis Molana in Hy-Kinnselagh. but St. Mac-in-tsaer ; what,
possibly, gave occasion to this confusion of names, was the tradition mentioned by

ynch, that St. Fachtna, before proceeding to Ross, was abbot of another monas-
tery called also Molana, situated on the islet of Dair-inis, at the mouth of the
Blackwater. See further mention of this monastery in Archdall, at the County
Waterford.

In the Felire of St. AEngus, the name of St. Fachtna occurs in the strophe for
the 14th of August :—

“With the calling of Fortunatus,
Over the expansive sea of ships,
Mac-an-tsaer, the noble chief,
The festival of Fachtna mac Mongach.”

So also he is commemorated on the same day in the metrical calendar of Mari-
anus O’Gorman :—

“*Great vigil of Mary:
Gregory, and the bright hero Felix,
The just Eusebius in their company :
The sons of Daigre, with Dinil ;
Let Brocad be in their presence :
Fachtna the smooth, fair, hairy son,
Eiclec, Cummen, Coeman,
Not narrow fences this structure.”

St. Cuimin of Connor, in his beautiful poem on the characteristic virtues of the
saints of Ireland, thus celebrates the zeal and devotedness of St. Fachtna :—

‘*Fachtna, the generous and steadfast, loved
‘To instruct the crowds in concert,
He never spoke that which was mean,
Nor aught but what was pleasing to his Lord.”

It is generally supposed that the St. Fachnan, patron of Ross, is the same
with St. Fachnan, patron of Kilfenora, Two circumstances strongly confirm this
identity, viz.:—that their festivals are now kept on the same day, the 14th of
August, and that the same tribe was dominant in both territories. However,

ch informs us that in his time (1660) the feast of St. Fachtna, the holy founder
of Kilfenora, was kept on the 20th of December.

As regards the old Cathedral of Ross which, thanks to the munificence of the
O'Driscoll family, was one of the most remarkable structures of the kingdom, the
following interesting details are given in the Consistorial Acts of the year 1517 :—

‘‘ The city of Ross was situated in the province of Cashel, in the middle of a
fertile plain, rich in corn-fields. and stretching along the sea-shore. It was
encompassed with a wall, had two gates, and contained about two hundred
houses. In the centre of the town was the cathedral church, dedicated under the
invocation of St. Fachnan, an Irish saint, confessor, whose feast is celebrated on
the vigil of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary. The walls of the church
were of cut stone ; there were two entrances—one lateral the other in the front,
and in both you descended by three steps to the level of the church. Its floor was
unpaved, and its roof was of wood. covered with slates. The interior of the
church presented the form of a Latin cross, and in size corresponded with the
church of St. Maria del Popolo in Rome. It was divided into central nave and
aisles, and the nave was separated by stone pillars from the aisles. Its roof was
of wood, covered with slates ; in the centre was the choir with wooden benches,

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-171.png ---
)

County of Cork. 145

a large seminary of scholars. St. Fachnan mongach was
succeeded by St. Conall," and we are told, that St. Brendan
taught the liberal arts tn this school,’ in which St. Finchad,

9 Act. SS. p. 196. Tr. Th. Index, Usher. War. Mon.and Bps., p. 583. *Act.
SS. p.471. *War., vol. 2, p. 242.

and at the head of the choir was placed the high altar. To the left of the altar was
the sacristy, well supplied with vestments, crucifixes, silver-gilt chalices, and mitre
and crozier of silver. In the cemetery, outside the church, there was a belfry built in
the form of a tower, in which there was one large bell. As for the dignitaries of
the church, after the bishop there was a dean, with a yearly income of twelve marks,
an archdeacon with twenty marks, and a chancellor with eight marks. There were
also twelve canons, each having a revenue of about four marks, and four vicars
with asimilar income. All these assist daily in the choir, and celebrate low Mass,
On the festival days a solemn Mass is sung. The canons reside in different parts
of the diocese, which is only twenty miles in extent. The bishop’s residence is
about half a mile from the city, and is pleasantly situated on the sea-shore. The
episcopal revenue consists of corn, tithes, and pasturage, and amounts annually to
sixty marks, There are also twenty-four benefices in the bishop’s collation.”—
(Theiner Monumenta, &c., p. §28-9).

During the Confederate war in 1641, as we learn from Lynch’s MS. History of
the Irish Sees, ‘‘ the nave and tower of the cathedral were levelled to the ground,
the choir and two chapelstemaining intact. One of these chapels was dedicated
to the Blessed Virgin, the other to St. Fachnan ; and, in former times, so great
was the concourse of pilgrims to this church on the feast of the Assumption and
Nativity of the Blessed Virgin, that traders used to come thither with their mer-
chandize from all parts of the island, and in the fairs, which had their origin in
this custom, no tax was for a long time imposed on any articles of merchandize.”
Ware, whose authority is followed by many more recent writers, gives the name of
St. Finchad as one of St. Fachnan’s immediate successors. For this he rests on a
passage in Colgan’s Acta, page 607. Colgan, in his Acta, speaking of the disciples
of St. Finbarr, gives, from an old life of that saint, the following names at page
750 :—‘‘S. Finchadius de Domnachmor ; S. Fachna seu Facundus de Ria; S.
Facundus (i.¢., Fachna) de Ros-ailither.” Quoting the same passage at page 607,
by error of the printer, the words which I have italicised were omitted, and thus
the name “‘S. Finchadius de Ros-ailither” appears there in Colgan’s text. This
printer’s error is Ware’s only authority for assigning to St. Finchad the episcopate
of Ros-ailither. Others have inserted the name of Conall among the successors of
St. Fachnan, relying on the prophetic words recorded by Cathald Maguire, as pro-
nounced by St. Kieran of Saigher, when foretelling the future greatness of both St.
Conall and St. Fachtna. This passage of Cathald Maguire, however, makes no
mention of the episcopate of Conall, much less of his being successor of St. Fachnan
in the See of Ross. I insert, nevertheless, this passage of Maguire, as it makes known
to us the birth-place of St. Fachtna, not mentioned by the other authorities : —“ Pro-

hetavit Kieranus de S. Conallo et de S. Fachtnano de Ros-alithir dicens : nascetur
lius in Tulachteann, qui nobis fido amicitiae foedere junctus erit: et post eum
multos monachos et monasteria reget Conallus.”—(Acta SS., page 471.) Thus, as
regards the early successors of St. Fachnan, we must rest satisfied with the
scanty information given in the short record of the Book of Lecan cited above,
viz. : that twenty-seven bishops in uninterrupted succession ruled the See from its
holy patron to Bishop Dungalach. The quatrain, of which we gave a literal
version, was thus translated by O’Flaherty in his Ogygia :—‘‘ Dongalus a Fachtna,
ter nonus Episcopus extat, Lugadia de gente dedit cui Rossia mitram ;” and Ware
gives the following paraphrase made by Mr. Dunkin :—
“Hail, happy Ross! who could produce thrice nine,
All ritred sages of Lugadia’s line,
From Fachnan, crowned with everlasting praise,
Down to the date of Dongal’s pious days.’
The following passages, extracted for the most part from the Annals of the Four
: L

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-172.png ---
146 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

a celebrated disciple of St. Finbar, was a student.t Some
of the natives of Ireland did not seem to show much respect
to it, for, in the year 1131, the people of Conaught, under the
command of Donogh M‘Carthy, plundered this residence of
religion and learning ; but these foes to everything that was
good, were soon after all justly defeated, amd Hugh, the son
of Constantine O’Conor, and O’Cachy, the chief poet of
Conaught, were killed." Cornelius was prior in 1353,” as was
Odo in 1378.%

This monastery has been generally given to the regular
canons following the rule of St. Augustin ; but it appears, from
two instruments published by Hugh Ward, that it did belong to
the order of St. Benedict, and that they professed obedience
to the Benedictin abbey of St. James, without the walls of
the city of Wurtzburgh, in the province of Mentz in Ger-
many The ruins of it still remain.*

Strawhall ;* in the barony of Muskerry ; A&dh, the son ot
Breic, founded a monastery of this name, and died November
1oth, A.D. 588.» Part of the ruins are still visible.*

‘Act. SS. p. 471. * Annal. Inisfal. “Vard. vita Rumoldi, p. 292. * Id., p.293-
Id. * Smith, vol. 1, p. 268. *Was anciently called Enachmidbrenin, and afterwards
Kilbrenin. Usher. ” Act. SS. p. 422.. ° Smith, vol. 1, p. 206.

Masters, furnish the few additional particulars that have been preserved to us
connected with this See :—

A.D. 824 (#.¢, 825). The repose of Conmhach, son of Saerghus, Abbot of
Rossailithir.

A.D. 839. The death of Airmeadhach, Abbot of Rossailither.

A.D. 840. The ‘‘ Wars of the Danes” mentions an irruption of the Northern ©

Pirates about the year 840, when ‘‘they killed Cormac, son of Selbach the
anchorite. He it was whom the angel set loose three times, but each time he was
bound again. Moreover, Cork was plundered by them, and they burned Ross-
ailither, and Kenmare, and the greater part of Munster. But the men of middle
Munster gave them battle, and their slaughter was completed at Ard-Feradaigh.”"—
Wars of ihe Danes, page 19.

A.D. 850. Condach, Abbot of Rossailithir, died.

A.D. 866. Fearghus of Rossailithir, scribe and anchorite, died. This entry
also occurs in the Chronicon Scotorum, but at the year 868, ‘‘ Fergus of Ros-
ailithre, scribe, quievit.”

A.D. 921. The death of Dubhdabraine, Abbot of Rossailithir.

A.D. 1016. Airbhearthach, son of Cosdobhroin, airchinneach of Rossailithir,
died.

A.D, 1055. Colum Ua Cathail, airchinneach of Rossailithir, died.

A.D. 1085. Neachtain mac Neachtain, distinguished Bishop of Rossailithir,
died.

A.D. 1096. The death of Colum Ua Hanradhain, airchinneach of Rossailithir.

A.D. 1127. The Chronicon Scotorum records the fact, that in this year ‘the
fleet_of Toirdhealbach sailed to Ross-ailithre, and despoiled Deas-Mumhain very
much.”

A.D. 1168. The Bishop Ua Carbhail, Bishop of Rossailithir, died.

33 Inquisition, last day of Easter, 29th Elizabeth, finds that the 7th day, nineteenth
of her reign, a grant was made of this abbey to James Goulde, gent., at the annual
+ rent of £9 4s., with a clause of re-entry. —Ord. Surv., R.I.A., vol. iv., p. 112.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-173.png ---
County of Cork. 147

Timoleague ;* a village situate on an arm of the sea, in the
barony of Ibawn and Barryroe, and eight miles south west of
Kingsale. We are informed that Dermot the Brown, son of
Donogh Gad of Carbury, the son of Donogh the Great, died
at Miguisy, and was buried in the new monastery of Cregan,
in Ibaun, and was removed thence to Teaghmolag in A.D.
1279.4 We do not meet with any other account of the
monastery of Cregan, but that the M‘Carthies translated it
to Timoleague in 1390,° and that a castle belonging to the
Morils stood here, which M‘Carthy Reagh took from them
and placed the Franciscans in it ; this account, however, must
be erroneous, for a manuscript which did belong to the friary
of Timoleague expressly says, that William Barry Lord of
Ibaun, and the first founder of this monastery, died on the
17th of December, 1373, and that his wife, Margaret de
Courcey, died on the 24th of January that year.t This house,
which was founded for friars of the order of St. Francis, was
given to the friars of the strict observance in 1400.8

John de Courcey, a monk of this house, and a person well
skilled in divinity, was made bishop of Clogher 18th June,
1484, and September 26th, 1494, he was translated to the see
of Ross; he died on the roth of March, 1518, and was
interred in this monastery; with the assistance of James,
Lord Kingsale, his nephew, he built the library, belfry,
dormitory, and infirmary, and bequeathed liberally to it.
John Imurily, bishop of Ross, died on the 9th of January,
1519, in the habit of St. Francis, and was interred here,' as
was Patrick O’Fehely, a Franciscan of the strict observance,
in 1552 Provincial chapters of the order were held in this
house in the years 1536 and 1563.)

At the suppression there were but four acres and an half
of land found to belong to this friary, which were then
in the possession of the Lord Inchiquin.™

The Roman Catholics repaired the monastery A.D. 1604."
The walls are yet entire, though unroofed ; they enclose a
large choir with an aisle formed by arcades on the south,
which lead to a lateral wing; there is an handsome Gothic
tower, about 70 feet high, between the choir and aisle, and

4 King, p. 309. ° War. Mon. Allemande. ‘* War. Mss., vol. 34, & 152. 8 Jd.

» War. Mss. and Mon. ' War. Bps., p. 588. * War. Mss. sup. | King, p. 310.
™ Smith, vol. i, p. 251. ™ Cox, vol. 2, p. 10.

* Timoleague. The Annals of the Four Masters, 1230, say that the monastery of
Tighe-Molagga was built by McCarthy Ribhach, or the Gray Lord of Carbery,
and that his tomb was erected in the choir.—Ord. Surv., R.1.A., vol. iv., p. 114.

% Tracton Inquisition, 28th April, 4th Q. Elizabeth, finds that John Roche of
Kensale, merchant, died roth April that year, seized of sixty acres of land in Bal-
lenemonagh, annual value 2s. 6¢., besides reprises.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-174.png ---
148 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

on one side of the aisle is a square cloister arcaded, jwith a
platform in the middle ; this leads to several large rooms, the
chapel, the chapter house, the refectory, and a spacious
apartment for the father guardian, besides a hall, dormitory,
&c. Here is a monument of the O’Cullanes, and on the
right a ruined one of the Lords De Courcey ; M‘Carthy
Reagh’s is in the midst of the choir.°

Tracton ; two miles south of Carigaline, in the barony of
Kinalea. An abbey, called the abbey de Albo tractu, and
dedicated to the Virgin Mary,? was founded here A.D. 1224,
by M‘Carthy,? who furnished it with monks of the Cistertian
order from the abbey of Alba landa, or Whiteland, in Car-
mardenshire, in Wales.

A.D. 1031. Inthis year, the 29th of the reign of King
Edward I., the abbot was indicted for receiving and protect-
ing his nephew, Maurice Russell, who had committed a rape
ona English woman, he was found guilty, and fined in the
sum of 40 pounds.*

1311. Owen was abbot.'

1350. Richard Brayghnock, the prior, was indicted for the
murder of John Cardigan, one of his monks, but was acquitted.”

1363. Richard Graynell was abbot; but he was deprived
this year.” See Dunbrody in the county of Wexford.

1375. King Edward III. confirmed the several possessions
that were granted to them ;* and on the Ist of May he took
the abbey into his especial protection

1380. It was ordained by parliament, that no mere Irish-
man should be suffered to profess himself in this abbey.”

Great numbers of pilgrims resorted hither on every Holy
Thursday, to pay their devotions to a piece of the Holy Cross
preserved here, and said to have been presented to them by
Barry Oge.*

The abbot sat as a baron in parliament.” Queen Elizabeth
granted this abbey to Henry Guilford and Sir James Craig,
March 2oth, 1568, on their paying a fine of £7 15s. sterling ;
Sir James Craig assigned it to Richard, Earl of Cork, who
passed a patent for it March 23rd, 7th of James I.°

In 1781, James Dennis, Esq., Chief Baron of the Exche-
quer, was created Baron Tracton of Tracton abbey.

Inquisition, roth September, 20th Queen Elizabeth, finds,
that David Barry, long after the statute of mortmain, had
granted to St. Roddium of Tracton, three carucates of land in
this county, called Ballinspaly, annual value 3s.—Chief Rem.

© Smith, vol, 1, p. 252. » War. Mon. Allemande, * War. Mon. ° King,
p.93. ‘ld, “Td. “Jd. * War. Mon. YId. p. 411. * Jd. p. 93. * Smith, vol.
1,p. 218. > War. Annal. ° Smith, Id.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-175.png ---
County of Cork. 149

Tuaim Musgraighe; The bishop St. Domangan, a disciple
of St. Carthag mochuda, was venerated here, and his festival
observed on the 29th of April.4 It is supposed to be in Mus-
kerry, but is now unknown.

Tulach Mhin ;* In Feara muighe feine, now called the barony
of Fermoy. St. Molagga, who was living A.D. 664, founded
an abbey here, where his festival is held on the 20th of
January.’ This place is also unknown.

Tullelash; in the diocess of Cloyne and barony of Duhallow.

Matthew M‘Griffin founded a priory here for canons regular
following the rule of St. Augustin ; it was afterwards united
to that of Kells, in the county of Kilkenny.

Weeme ;*" near Cork. Here was another abbey of the same
canons, which was dedicated to St. John the Evangelist.¢

Thomas was abbot in 1311.4

Thomas, the abbot, being deposed, a licence was granted,
dated the 22nd April, 1350, to the convent to proceed to
elect an abbot ; Michael, the prior, made a return, that they
had elected Altan O’Nullanagaly.!

Gilbert was abbot; he was immediately succeeded by
David,* who, according to King, was abbot in 1339

Thomas succeeded him.™

Richard O’Tenewir was abbot, but the time is uncertain.”

Youghail;* a seaport and a borough town sending burgesses
to parliament.

4 Act. SS. p. 631. * Td. p. 148, 149. * Harris Tabl. © Id. © King, p.148.
‘Id. * fd. p.141. 'fd, ™Id, *Id.

% Tulach Mhin.—St, Molaga of Tulack Mhin is thus commemorated in the
Festology of Aengus Céle De, in the Leabhar Breac, at 20th January: “ Molaga,
ie., at Land Bechuire in Bregia he is ; or that he was Lachine, son of Dubhdlige,
i.¢., from Tealach-min Molaga, in Fermoy, in Munster.” The ancient lives of St.
Molaga contain some interesting accounts of his relations with this place and the
surrounding country.

37 Allan, on account of his infirmities, resigning, Brother Gilbert O’Brogyd
was elected Abbot in 1334 (1354).

38 Youghal Inquisition, 1oth September, 44 Q. Elizabeth, finds that a close called
John Mahony’s ‘Park, near Youghall, was parcel of the possession of this friary.
Rot. Chancery.

Inquisition taken 31st March, 1604, finds that Sir Walter Raleigh, Knt., was
seized in fee of this friary and of all its possessions spiritual and temporal.

This friary had ten acres of land Ai the small measure, with the chapel of St.
Anne, near Youghall, with an acre of land. The townlands of Rathmolane,
Knocknagippaghe and Carraghmoneoore, in said county, containing one carucate
and a-half ; townland of Balling, in said county ; half a carucate in county Limerick,
townland of Englandstown, one carucate; Liscarrell, three-quarters of a small
carucate ; in county Mayo, Knockfarrin, near Ballinrobe, half a quarter. In county
Waterford, the great burgage of Lismore, half a carucate; in Fereguilie a carucate;
townlands of Bally-McPatrick and Curraghbal-livorough, two carucates. In county
Cork, townland of Garran-James, one carucate; Kilbrie, near Kilbolane, one
carucate ;—All granted to George Isham and his heirs, at the annual rent of
£8 17s. 10d.—(Chief Remem.)

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-176.png ---
150 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Ward's MS. History of the Irish Franciscan Convents, written in 1632, gives
some further details regarding the house of that order in Youghal : ‘‘ The convent
of Youghal, which was called the Mother of the Irish Franciscan Province, was
built in the year 1224. In the year 1583 it was destroyed and depopulated, some
of the friars having been taken and put to death by the English Protestants. It
remained desolate till the year 1627, when a residence was built in the town, and
Father Francis Mede was appointed its first superior. The first founder of the convent
was Maurice Fitzgerald, fom whom sprung the Earls of Kildare and Desmond,
the Barons of Lixnaw, and several other most noble families. He was for many
years Lord Justiciary of Ireland, and headed an army against the Scots in aid of
the King of England. The war being victoriously concluded, he returned home,
distributed his possessions to his children, and became a Franciscan friar. He
lived till the year 1257, distinguished for profound humility and holiness of life,
and died, and was buried in the convent. There are, from ancient times, the tombs of
the Earls of Desmond, the Lords of Desies, and several other nobles of the same
family and country. At the right hand side of the altar in the convent, a certain
friar is buried whose tomb is illustrated by miracles: and also another friar, who
was put to death by the heretics, lies buried in the same place.”

From Hayman’s “‘ Ecclesiastical Notes and Records,” and other authorities, we
lean the following additional particulars regarding the religious foundations of
‘oughal :—

1542.3 Aug. The Lord Deputy and Council agreed that a Commission
should issue to James, fifteenth Earl of Desmond, and others, to take inventories
for the King’s use of all the religious houses in the counties of Limerick, Cork,
Kerry, and Desmond, to dissolve the said houses, and put them into safe custody.
(Smith’s Cork, vol. ii. p. 40). When the Franciscan brethren were removed from
their house, they withdrew to Curraheen, county Waterford, three-quarters of a
mile from Aglish, and about eight from Youghal, a lonely and retired spot among
the mountains, where they were protected and re-established by the Fitzgeralds of
Dromana. At Curraheen they erected a new Friary.

1578.—10 Sept. By an Inquisition taken at Cork on this day it appeared that
William White, long after the statute of mortmain, granted to the Church of the
Holy Trinity, Cork, the rectory of Clere in that county, which rectory at the
taking of the Inquisition, was in the possession of the guardian of the Franciscan
Friary of Youghal, and was of the annual value of 12 pence.—(Inquisitions of
Record in Exchequer). -

1585.—Among the MSS. in the Library of Trinity College, Dublin, is a col-
lection of ‘‘ Maps and Charts relating to Ireland,” one of which is a very inter-
esting pictorial Plan of Youghal of this date. The Franciscan Friary is well
represented ; it is called ‘‘ The Abbey on the So. West of ye Town,” and, by the
scale, it is distant 200 paces from the south gate. In its outward presentment it
rather resembles a feudal fortress than a Friary.

1597-8.—24 Jan, This Friary was granted, by letters patent, to George Isham,
gent. along with the following : Ten acres of land of the small measure, with the

hapel of St. Anne near Yoghal, and one acre of land; the townlands of
Rathnolan, Knocknagippee, and Curraghmonevore, in said county, containing one
carucate and a half; with other grants in the counties of Waterford and Limerick,
at the annual rent of £8 175. 10d.

1602.—10 Sept. By an Inquisition taken at Youghal, the Monastery of St.
Francis, near the town of Youghel, commonly called Le Grey Friary de Youghell,
was found to belong to the Queen.

1603.—13 Sept. The site, circuit and precinct of the late Monastery, or re-
Tigious house of the Friars Mendicant or Begging Friars, commonly called The
Grey Friars near Yoghall, with one park or close, called John Mahowne’s Parke,
containing arable 2 acres, near Yoghall, rent 12d. Irish, was granted to James
Fullerton, gent.—(Calendar of Patent Rolls : 1 Jac. I. p- 7)

1603.—7 Nov. Sir James Fullerton disposed of his title to the premises in-
cluded in the foregaing grant, as well to the Abbey of Molana, for £219 6s. 8d.
Irish money, to Sir Richard Boyle.

160§.—20 June. The site and precinct of this Friary, with 10 acres small
measure thereto belonging, were granted by the King to Donagh, Earl of
Thomond.—(Calendar of Patent Rolls, 3 Jac. I. pp. 79, 80).

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-177.png ---
County of Cork. 151

1665.—21 July. This Friary was leased by Richard, second Earl of Cork, to
Samuel Hayman, Esq., a Somersetshire gentleman. The demise conveyed ‘all
that messuage or tenemt lately erected and built by the said Samuell Hayman,
w't the yard, orchard, and garden thereunto belonging, and also the severall houses,
&c., and one plett of enclosed ground conteyning by estimation six acres.
Together with the dissolved Nunnery or Chappell called St. Anne's Chapell, w't
the applotements, as the same are all now in the tenure of the said Samuell Hay-
man, situate, lying and being in and neere the scite, circuit, ambite and precincts
of the dissolved Monastery of St. Francis: All the South Abbey of Youghall.”
Among the covenants is the following, which declares too plainly the unsettled
state of public affairs—‘‘ And keeping always resident on the premisses, for every
tenemt, one able English footeman wth a pyke or muskett well and compleately
armed and furnished ; and therew all shall and will answere and attend the
said Earle, his heires or assignes, in all musters and in the service of the Crown
and defence of the country, being thereunto reasonably warned and summoned
during this lease.”

I 81.—1 Jan. ‘Elinor, y® daughter of Mr. Thomas Vniacke Esquir® in y*
South Abby, Buryed.”—[Church Register]. From this entry, and from similar
ones of the same date, we learn that the graveyard of this Friary was used for
burials so late as this period ; but it appears to have fallen into disuse about the
close of this century.

The Dominican Friary, commonly called the North Abbey.—1268. Thomas
FitzMaurice FitzGerald, surnamed »Afpagh, founded a Friary for Dominicans, or
Friars Preachers, at Youghal. This House was first placed under the Invocation
of the Holy Cross, but it was subsequently dedicated to St. Mary of Thanks (S.
Maria Gratiarum), on account of a miraculous image of the B. Virgin preserved
here.—( Hib. Dom., p. 272).

1281.—A General Chapter of the Dominicans was held here.

1296.—Thomas Afpagh FitzGerald, the Founder of this Friary, was here
interred, in the middle of the Choir.—(Grace’s Annals). Marleborough’s Chronicle
makes his decease two years later.

1303.—22 Oct. Robert de Percival, an eminent benefactor to this House,
having been slain, along with William de Wellesley, in a battle with the Irish,
was interred in this Friary.

1304.—A General Chapter of the Dominicans was held here.

1450.—The Image of the Madonna and Child, for which this Friary was
famous, is of Italian workmanship of this period. It is of carved ivory, about
three inches high. The circumstances of its discovery, as detailed in 1644, by the
French traveller, M. de la Boullaye le Gouz, are sufficiently curious :—‘‘ In the
Dominican Convent (at Youghal) there was an Image of the Virgin, formerly
held in the greatest reverence in Ireland, which arrived there in a miraculous
manner. The tide brought a piece of wood on to the sands opposite the town,
which several fishermen tried to carry off, the wood being rare in this country, but
they could not move it; they harnessed ten horses to it without effect, and the
reflux of the tide brought it near the Dominican convent. Two monks raised it
on their shoulders and put it in the court-yard of the convent ; and the prior had
in the night a vision that the image of our Lady was in this piece of wood ; which
was found there. So say the citizens, who have still a great devotion towards it;
but the Dominicans, having been persecuted by the English settlers, carried it
elsewhere.”

1493.—This Friary was reformed by Bartholomew Comatius (Bononiensis J,
23rd Master of the Order, as appears from the register of Joachim Turrianus, 35th
Grand Master, where are contained these words: ‘‘ Approved : The Reformation of
the Monastery of Joachia (é.¢., Jocalia or Youghall,) made by Master Bartholomew.”

1501.—Vincentio de Bandello was ‘appointed to reform the houses of the Domi-
nicans, and for this purpose was armed with Apostolical authority. He addressed
himself to the work with zeal; but, being unable to visit Ireland in person, he
deputed John de Baufremez, of Holland, to represent him. The Friaries of Cork,
Limerick, and Youghal were pre-eminent in desiring to subject themselves to
regular observance ; and are specially mentioned and lauded in the Bull issued to
Baufremez, in 1504, by Pope Julius I1.--(Archiv. Apost. Lib, L. fol. 201.)

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-178.png ---
152 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1518.—At the General Chapter of the Dominicans held at Rome this year,
Garzia de Loaysa, a Spaniard, 39th Grand Master of the Dominicans, and
subsequently a Cardinal, issued an approval of the reformation of this Friary,

bsolving from his office the Vicar General appointed by Vincentio de Bandello,
but permitted him to be re-elected.

1542.—3 Aug. Order from the Lord Deputy to dissolve this house.

1543.—28 June. The King granted the custodiam of this Friary to Maurice,
brother of the Earl of Desmond, for three years, by the following letters :—

“Henry VIII. etc. To all whom etc. greeting. Know ye that, on the security
and pledge of Edward Russell and Richard Liston, Pentlemen, We have granted
to Maurice of Desmond, brother of the Earl of Desmond, the custody of
all the possessions, spiritual and temporal, of the late House of Friars Preachers
of and near Youghill, with its appurtenances: To said Maurice and his Assigns,
to have and to hold said custody from the day of ratification to the end of three years
following fully completed, Paying thence to Us annually into Our Court of Exche-

uer in Ireland, Thirty Six Shillings and Eight Pence Sterling, at the feasts of
t. Michael, the archangel, and-Easter, in equal portions, In testimony whereof
etc. Witness our beloved and faithful William Brabazon, Sub-treasurer of our
said Kingdom. Given at Dublin, this 28th day of June in the 33rd year of our

reign.”—[Memor. Roll. 33 Henry VIII. m. 24.]
1550.—21 April. The oldest dated tombstone now to be found in this burying
und, is of this time. It is thus inscribed: ‘*‘ Here Lyeth ye Body of Darby

en, who Departed This Life ye 21 Aprill 1550, Aged 35 years.”

1581.—28 April. This Friary, with six gardens within the liberties of Youghal
(the tithes excepted) was granted for ever, in cafite, to William Walsh, at the
yearly rent of 22 pence sterling.—[ Auditor General]. From him it passed for a
term of years to John Thickpenny, gent.—[ Hs. Dom. p. 273.]

1585-863 Feb. The Friary was granted to Sir Walter Raleigh, at a rent of
S12 19s. 6d., payable at Easter and Michaelmas; with a proviso, that the Act

assed at Limerick, anno 33 Henry VIII., for lands given by the King, shall not
be prejudicial to this patent. Signed, A. St. Leger.—[MS. at Lismore.]
1587.—Dr. Burke, quoting from a work, entitled 7heatrum Catholice et Pro-
testantica Religionis, p. 435, gives an account of the demolition of the Dominican
Friary in this year, with the fate of those concerned in the work. A “certain English-
man named Poer, while destroying the monastery of St. Dominic, in the northern
part of Youghall, fell from the top of theChurch and broke all his limbs. Likewise,
three soldiers of that town, who had cast down and thrown into the fire the Sacred
Cross of that monastery, were dead within eight days from the perpetration of
their crime. The first died of madness. The second was eaten by vermin. The
third was slain by the Seneschal of the Earl of Desmond.”

1603.—17 Dec. By an inquisition taken this day at Youghal respecting the
estates which had been conveyed by Raleigh to Boyle, the jury made the following
report about this Friary; ‘* Lastely, wee finde that the Abbie of Molana and the
late Howse of Observant Fryers of Youghall, with their possessions, does now lye
utterly wast, and have soe remayned ever since the leases made of them to John
Thickpenny, gent. deceased, upon the expiration of which leases graunted to the
said Thickpenny, Sir Walter Rawleighe’s estate [tooke] his beginninge.”—[Inqui-
sitions in Exchequer. ]

1604.—31 March. By an Inquisition taken this day at Cork, it was found
that Sir Walter Raleigh lately attainted of high treason, was seized in fee (among
others) of the Priory or House of Friars Observant, near Youghall, called ‘‘ The
Black Ffreers neere Youghall, with the appurtenances, together with its scite,
circuit, ambite and precinct; and all buildings, edifices, orchards, gardens, lands,
tenements, rents, services, tithes, alterages, oblations, obventions, and all other
its possessions and hereditaments, spiritual and temporal.”

1604.—10th May. The Priory or late House of Observant Friars near Yoghall,
called the Black Friarsof Yoghall with all their Poses spiritual and temporal,
was granted to Sir Richard Boyle—{Calendar of Patent Rolls, Jac. I.]

1617.—The Lady Honor FitzGerrald of the Geraldine Family, presented the
Dominicans of Youghal, with a silver-gilt Shrine for the Image of the Madonna in
their possession. This relique is about 4 inches in height, by 1 in width. Its sides

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-179.png ---
County of Cork. 153

are richly chased with floriated ornaments, and its summit is surmounted by a
Cross. It opens with two folding doors which, thrown back, display the Image
within. The reverses of these doors bear a Crucifixion, and a figure of a Saint
in prayer, respectively. On the outside is this inscription in Roman letter :
““ORATE . PRO. ANIMA. ONORIAE. FILL. IACOBI. DE.GERALDINIS . QAE. ME.
FIERI . FECIT . ANNO . DNI. 1617.”

1644,—A Most General Chapter, held this year at Rome under Thomas Turk
of Cremona, 56th Master of the Order, passed the following decree, respecting
the offerings made in this Friary : ‘‘ We apply all alms, which are offered at the
most venerated Image of the B. V. Mary of Yoghel, to the use of the Monastery
of Yoghel itself, nor may the Provincial in future dispose ef them in any other
way.

1661.—From the Liber Tenurarum in the Exchequer Record Office, it appears
that Richard, Earl Cork, was this year tenant of the late Monastery, or House
of Friars Preachers Observant, near Youghall, with 6 gardens (the tithes thereof
excepted), held of the King in capite, at 15d. per annum.

1698.—1 May. An Act having been passed, which commanded the departure
of all Monastic Orders out of Ireland, never to return on pain of death, the
Dominicans of Youghal were constrained to leave: and they deposited their
Madonna Shrine with Sir John Hore, of Shandon Castle, co. Waterford.—[O’Heyne’s
Epilogus Chron. p. 15.) .

1756.—The brethren in this year were Thomas O’Kelly, the Prior, Dominican
Houlaghan, and James Flynn. They had their venerated Shrine again in their
keeping.—[ Hid Dom. pp. 273, 274.]

Saint Mary's Church, Youghal. Yn the northern part of the town of Youghal,
on the slope of a hill, then as now called Knock-na-Vauriagh (i.e., Mary's Hill),
a Church dedicated to the Virgin, was founded in the eleventh century. That
earlier religious edifices preceded the building on the same site, there is little doubt.
Indeed, we might almost infer, from considering how important the seaport at
the mouth of the Blackwater hadalready become, that such was necessarily the
case. Nor should we stumble at the fortuitous circumstance of our inability
to trace, with certainty, the more ancient foundations. When churches would
successively arise on the same spot, each exceeding its lArareee in size, it would
happen that, in some cases, the lesser building would be incorporated with the
larger so as to lose all its distinguishing features ; and, in others, would be wholly
cleared away, in order that space might be obtained for the new structure, In the
doorway of the square massive Tower of the present building, enclosed between
two pointed arches, is the moulded circular entrance of this Church, and on the
right hand as you enter, the wreck of the base-mouldings belonging to the columns
that supported it. From the drip to the arch, and from the mouldings of the bases,
we can easily tell that this door formed the South Entrance to the ancient
Church, which lay east and west across the present site of the Tower. .The
foundations of the western wall were uncovered a few years since by workmen
excavating for a vault, and were found to lie about six feet to the west of the Tower.
The visitor sees the time-worn stones of this portion of the destroyed building used
again as materials in the lower half of the west side of the Tower, and will readily
contrast them with the fresher stones in the upper portion and in the other three
sides. But the most interesting fragment of the Norman church is preserved in the
North Transept Aisle of the present building, which appears to have been formed
out of part of the old ruined Choir. It is a moulded, circular sepulchral arch,
resting on two low moulded columns, with capitals and bases. Immediately near
it, have been found more of the tapered tomb-flags, popularly called stone-coffin
lids, than in any other part of the building. Most of these were monuments in
the older church. Some two or three belong to the thirteenth century, and should
be assigned to the present edifice. With a single exception, all our tapered tomb-
flags were wilfully Broken in pieces centuries ago ; and the existence even of their
fragments was unknown, until recent researches brought them to light.

This ancient Church continued in existence during the eleventh and twelfth cen-
turies ; but we have been unable to recover its records. There are some grounds
for believing that it was dismantled by the great tempests of 1192, which, the
Irish Annalists tell us, threw down many houses and churches in Munster, and

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-180.png ---
154 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

destroyed much cattle. Nearly on the same site, a new and splendid pile arose
in the commencement of the thirteenth century. The founders were Richard Ben-
net and Ellis Barry his wife, of whom (save their Memorial in the South Transept)
we know nothing. Both names, however, are those of distinguished Anglo-Nor-
man families. The founders set apart for themselves the South Transept, called
the Chauntry of Our Blessed Saviour, as a mortuary Chapel ; and largely endowed
it with lands in the neighbourhood of the Town, forthe maintenance of the offici-
ating priest. St. Mary's, as now established, soon reached a well-ascertained pre-
eminence over the other churches of the district. The taxations of Pope Nicholas
IV., in 1291, and of Pope Boniface VIII., in 1302, declare it to be the richest
benefice of the whole diocese of Cloyne. The bishopric itself is entered in these
documents, as rateable at 185 marks, or about £123. The prebend of Glenowyr
(Glanore or Glanworth) is valued at 284 marks, or £19; while the church of
Yoghel, or Yoghull, is set down at £25. In the taxation of Pope Nicholas,
Youghal is entered, under the head of ‘ Taxacio Beneficiorum Ecclesiasticorum
de Omakylle, in these terms :

“‘ Ecclesia de Ygohel, cujus rector est hoc anno Nicholas de Cler,

vicarius Robertus de Halywell, taxatur ad xxv/i.......... decima Ls.”
That of Pope Boniface is of the same import. In the rural deanery of ‘ Omaéyll,
appears :

“Ecclesia de Yoghull, xxv/i........ cccseecccssecsseee « cereeeee Gecima Ls.”

Nicholas de Cler, who, when the former taxation was made, enjoyed the
wealthy rectory of Youghal, was of the Norman house of Hertford ; and at this
period his family owned the town, and presented to the living.

On the foundation of the College, 27 Decem. 1464, by Thomas, eighth Earl
of Desmond, the Church became Collegiate, and was served by the Warden
and Fellows. The Earl, in 1468, re-edified the building, a special Indulgence
being granted for this purpose by Pope Paul II.

When Commissioners of Queen Elizabeth made inquisition, 31 August,
1590, respecting the diocese of Cloyne, they returned the ‘ Guardianatus
Ville a Collegii de Yoghail' as rateable at 100 marks (£66 13s. 4d.), while
they valued the ‘ Episcopatus' at but £10 10s. od. But the time had come,
when its revenues were to be alienated from the Collegiate Church for
ever. Nathaniel Baxter, chosen Warden in 1592, was obliged, 25 Aug.
1597, to pass his bond of 1,000 marks, which was to be forfeited in case he
did not, in 40 days after demand, resign his office into the Queen’s hands, and
did not suffer her agerts to take possession of thesame. The College and
its revenues eventually passed into the hands of Richard Boyle, Earl of Cork.
In 1608, if we are to receive Boyle’s own testimony, he expended above £2,000
in re-building the Church and College; and, in a MS. preserved at Lismore,
entitled ‘Copie of a Particular of part of the first Earl of Corke’s Comonwealth
Workes,’ we find, first in order, mention of his doings here:

“Imprimis, The Earl of Corke hath re-edified the great decayed church of
Yoghall, wherein the townsmen in time of rebellion kept theif cows, and hath
erected a new chappel there in, and made it one of the fairest churches in Ireland.”

The Earl of Cork was not one who, to judge from his 7rue Remembrances, was
likely to allow his deeds to be hidden under a bushel ; and these statements
about his ‘re-edifying’ and ‘erecting’ at Youghal, we are constrained to
receive with no little scepticism. They are contradicted by proofs

et existing in the Church itself, as well as by the stern voice of contemporaneous
history. The Earl could not have ‘erected a new chappel’ at St. Mary’s; for
his own Transept—that, to which reference is made—preserves in all its details the
exact architectural features of the original structure, reared four centuries before
his time ; nor was his ‘re-edifying’ of the Church of any general character, as we
may easily discover by an examination of the several portions of the edifice. We
have also the testimony of his contemporaries, from which we shall offer one proof,
namely in reference to the Choir or Chancel. In 1641, the Protestant Bishop
of Cork and Ross addressed to the Earl of Cork a severe letter, yet extant,
‘charging him with having stripped the Vicars Choral, and left the Chancel of
Youghal, the revenues of which college the Earl had gotten into his hands in a
state of ruin,'—{Fasti Eccles, Hib. Vol. 1., pp. 226, 227, 2nd ed.]

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-181.png ---
County of Cork. 155

1603.—7 Nov. The wardenship of the College, or Chauntry, of Yoghall,
with all the lands, tenements, and hereditaments to the same belonging, and the
advowson and patronage of said wardenship, called The Wardenship of Our
Ladye’s College of Yoghall, being the estate of Gerald, late Earl of Desmond
attainted, were granted to James Fullerton, gent., rent 3s. 4d. Irish.—{Calendar of
Patent Rolls, 1 Jac. I., part 2, p. 8.]

1604.—31 March. By an Inquisition, taken this day at Cork, it was found
that Sir Walter Raleigh, fately attainted of high treason, was possessed (among
others), for a term of 45 years yet to come or thereabouts, of the New College
of the B. V. Mary of Youghall, and of all its buildings, edifices, orchards,
fruiteries, gardens, impropriate rectories, vicarages, churches, tithes, glebes, etc.,
rendering therefor to the warden £13 6s. 8d. yearly.

1604.—3 April. Grant to Sir George Carew, Knt. In Yoghall town. Two
messuages and gardens, and all the lands and hereditaments, spiritual and
temporal, of the New College of the B. V. Mary of Yoghall, rent 2s.; with the
advowsons, presentations, etc., of the wardenship, and all churches, rectories,
vicarages and chapels of all other benefices belonging to said wardenship, rent
38. 42 3 parcel of the estate of Gerald, Earl of Desmond, attainted : demised
in fee farm to Sir James Fullerton, Knt., 7 Nov. 1603, at a rent of 4s.

This patronage he sold to Sir Richard Boyle, who obtained a new patent.

1604.—10 May. In Sir Richard Boyle’s patent of this date, is the acknowledg-
ment that Sir Walter Raleigh, at the time of his attainder, was lawfully possessed
for the term unexpired of the lease, by mesne conveyance from Sir Thomas Norris,
of all the hereditaments, spiritual and temporal, of the New College of the B. V.
Mary of Yoghall, as granted to said Norris for 60 years by the warden and fellows,
28 Sept. 1588: which interest, as conveyed to the said Boyle, 7 Dec. 1602, the
King now ratifies and confirms.

1609-10.—8 March.—Grant to Donagh, Earl of Thomond. The College, or
tenement within the walls of Yoghall, called The New College of the B. V. Mary
of Yoghall, with all its hereditaments.—[{Calendar of Pat. Rolls, p. 159.]

1609-10.—23 March.—Grant to Sir Richard Boyle. The advowson, patronage,
and presentation of the wardenship of the New College of clerks of the Church of
the E V. Mary of Yoghall, and of all the churches, rectories, vicarages and chapels,
and the nomination of the several curates, and all other spiritual benefits to the
said wardenship belonging. The patent now granted recites previous patents,
bearing date 29 Nov. 1603 and 10 May 1504, respectively, and confirms them.

1641. The Earl of Cork. being ordered by the Lord Deputy of Munster to
mantain Youghal in person, against the troops of the Confederation, took up his
residence at the College, which he strongly fortified. He also built five circular
turrets at the angles of the park, and raised platforms of earth on which he placed
ordnance to command the town and harbour. Several interesting letters, written
by him from the beleagured town. are printed with the State Letters of his son Lord
Orrery ; and his Diary, full of minute records of passing events is preserved, it is
understood, at Lismore, Here he closed his eventful career, dying within the walls
of the College, 15 Sept. 1643.

Saint John's House of Benedictines, Youghal—1360.—Saint John's House,
situated in the Main or High-street of Youghal, was founded at this period. It
was a dependency of the wealthy Benedictine Priory of St. John the Evangelist,
at Waterford, established in that city in 1185 by John, Earl of Morton.

1366.—The Escheator accounts for 16s. 8d. of the rents and issues of a mes-
suage with its appurtenances, in the town of Yoghill, co. Cork, now in the King’s
hands, because the Prior of St. John’s, near Waterford, had acquired it contrary
to the statute of mortmain, and granted it to Walter Kenneford and Isolda Hore.
(Escheator’s Roll, 39 to 41 Edw. III.]

1590.—31 Aug. It was found, that a messuage in the town of Yoghall county
of Cork, commonly called St. John’s House, of the annual value of 8¢., was

arcel of the possessions of the Priory of St. John the Evangelist, near Waterford.
EChier Remembrancer. ]

Of this Chapel, the chief remains are the gables and South side-wall. The
East end, through which was the entrance, is to the street, and still retains its
pointed doorway with its moulded jambs and ornamented spandrils.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-182.png ---
156 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

The Preceptory of Knights Templars, at Rhincrew—1183.—In this year the
Order of the Knights Templars was confirmed ; and soon after a Preceptory was
founded on the suaimit of the commanding hill of Rhincrew (Xeen-cruagh in Irish,
i.e. The Firm Promontory) which overlooks the Blackwater as it grandly de-
douches into the Broad of Youghal. ‘We have very scanty materials for the
history of the Knights Templars that settled in Ireland ; but there is reason to
believe that the Preceptory at Rhincrew was very richly endowed, for castles
belonging to its agents are found in many parts of the Counties of Cork and
Waterford, which were erected both to protect their vassals and to enforce due
paynent of rent and feudal service.” (O’Flanagan’s Guide to the Blackwater,
p- 31.

1186.—Raymond le Gros is believed to have died here, and the neighbouring
Abbey of Molana is reputed to have been his burial-place.

1304.—The houses of the Knights Templars in Ireland were suppressed by a
royal order, addressed to Sir John Wogan; and the Knights of Bt John, or
Hospitallers, were, in 1314, placed in possession of their estates. ‘‘ We have
not been able to discover whether any parts of the lands belonging to Rhincrew
were assigned to this, the rival Order of the original possessors, for we have no
traces of the Hospitallers in the south of Ireland ; the priory of St. John in
Waterford, which has indeed been sometimes described as a foundation of their
Order, was really a monastery of Benedictines, In the Maltese records, however,
we find Irish Knights holding high rank, and entries of money received from
estates belonging to the Order in Ireland ; and there is also evidence to shew
that the lands of Rhincrew were not seized by the Crown previous to the general
dissolution of monasteries.” [©’Flanagan, p. 32,]

1585-6.—3 Feb.—Rhincrew was granted to Sir Walter Raleigh. [Patent at
Lismore. ]

1602.—7 Dec.—Raleigh assigned his grant to Mr. Richard Boyle, afterwards
Earl of Cork.

The Nunnery, or Chapel, of Saint Anne’s—1190.—About this year the Nunnery
er Chapel of St. Anne’s, with which was connected a Light Tower, was founded
by the Anglo-Norman occupiers of Youghal, on the cliff at the West side of the
harbour’s mouth. The house was richly endowed by the Founders, under the
condition that the nuns should see that the light was regularly maintained.

1542.—St. Anne’s Chapel was dissolved, at the same time with the Franciscan
Friary.

1397-24 Jan. By letters patent of this date, St. Anne’s Chapel and one acre
near the same, with the town and village of Rathnolan, were granted in fee farm
to George Isham, gent., along with the Franciscan Friary, and its precincts, at
2s. 4d. [Patent at Lismore.]

1603.—13 Sept. James Fullerton, gent., obtained from the King a patent
for several concealed Church lands, which demised to him (along with others)
the Chapel of St. Anne and the Franciscan Friary, with one pa or close,
called John Mahowne's Park, containing 2 arable acres, rent 12¢. Irish, total
rent £6 13 4 Irish. [Calendar of Patent Rolls: Jac. I. p. 7.J

1605.—20 June. Grant from the King to Donatus, or Donogh, Earl of
Thomond, (among others) : ‘‘The Chapel of St. Anne near the town of Youghall,
with the small parcels of land thereto bel@hging, containing 1 acre, as granted in
fee-farm 24 Jan. 1597, to George Isham, gent.” [Calendar of Patent Rolls: Jac.
I. p. 80.
bearee —M. Boullaye le Gouz, the French traveller, who visited Youghal this
year, thus mentions St. Anne’s: “At musket-shot from the town there was
formerly a convent of nuns on the sea-shore, and there remains of it a Tower
called the Nunnery, upon which the nuns used to light torches to enable vessels
to come into the harbour during the night.” From this record it would appear
that the Nunnery had been at this time removed, excepting the Light Tower that
came down to our own day.

1665.—21 July. The Franciscan Friary and its appurtenances, ‘“‘together with
the dissolved Nunnery or Chappell called St. Anne's Chapell, with the applotments,
situate lying and being in and neere the site, circuit, ambite, and precincts of the
dissolved Monastery of St. Francis, allthe South Abbey of Youghall,” were leased

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-183.png ---
County of Cork. 157

by Richard, second Earl of Cork, to Samuel Hayman, Esq., a Somersetshire
gentleman.

1848.—16 May. The Ballast Board having decided on erecting a Harbour
Light-House at Youghal, an inquisition was held this day for the purpose of
valuing the ground at the harbour’s mouth, formerly occupied by the Nunnery
of St. Anne’s, and the jury awarded £100. So admirably chosen had been the
site of the Anglo-Norman light Tower, that almost on the very same spot was it
found desirable to erect the new beacon, and the demolition of the ancient inter-
esting structure became inevitable. A description of the Tower of St. Anne’s
will not be unacceptable. It was circular, about 24 feet in height, and 1o in
diameter. The only entrance was a narrow Gothic doorway, on the water-side,
facing the East point of the harbour. The visitor found at his right hand, on
entering, the bottom of a flight of stone steps, which were conducted spirally on
the whole interior of the building, and led at the summit to two large circular-
headed windows, one of which opened on the middle of the Bay and the other
faced Capel Island. As is customary in all Light-houses, there was no open
on the land-sides.

Kilcoran, or the Shanavine Monastery. About a mile outside Youghal, on the
South, in the townland of Seafield and adjoining that of Ballyclamasy, is a little field
called The Shanavine, which may be interpreted as The Old Asylum or Sanctuary.
As the field dips down, it forms, with ifs neighbouring height, a small well-sheltered

len, through which a trickling streamlet finds its way. On the slopes of the

hanavine an old religious house was founded. The early missionaries chose
the site, with their wonted judgment. The view from it was beautiful. The blue
waters of Youghal bay formed the prospect in front, and were bounded on one
side by the headlands at the mouth of the harbour, and on the other by the rising
eminence of Claycastle. Around the monastery rose the thick foliage of the forests,
which at the period clothed the landscape in every quarter. Like all early places
of worship in Ireland, the church was of small dimensions, about 40 feet in length
by 18 in width. It consisted of a Nave and Choir. Near it to the N., were resi-
dences of the religious; and on the S.W., almost at the very walls of the church,
was a spring-well in which many of the natives perhaps found their Baptistry,
The road leading to this monastery is one of the most ancient thoroughfares about
Youghal, and preserves the name of the Saint to whom the church was dedicated.
It is called Kilcoran, #.¢., Cill-Kuarain, The Church of St. Cuaran, one of the
patrons of the Desies. This holy Bishop was son of Nethsemon, and in our an-
cient monuments receives the epithet of ‘The Wise.’ He was cotemporary of St.
Columbkille, and from a reform which he introduced in the recital of None, was
sometimes called ‘Mochuaroc de Nona.’ In the Feliré of St. Aingus he is thus
commemorated :—

** Whosoever true delight desires
Without grief, in the land of Saints,
Let him invoke Mochuaroc,

And recite all None.”

The Church, roofless, but otherwise in good condition, was standing in 1790.
About this year, a farmer ef the neighbourhood demolished its walls and con-
structed a barn with the materials. The story has it, that he straightway fell into
bad health, his body swelling up in dropsy and his arms withering in decay, and
thus he died miserably. Such was the terror created by his doom, that no labourer
could be induced to cultivate the field, until the owner, Mr. Seward, resolved to
break it up in 1849. The plough was now brought in, and the foundations of the
different buildings were discovered and were wholly taken away. The only relics
of the Monastery now visible are a few old moss-grown and weather-worn stones,
which give some clue to the style and date of the building. Five of these are
moulded, three with Norman beads. Two were parts of door-jambs ; the rest are

jieces of windows,—a jamb, a mullion, and part of a circular arch. From these
fragments we are inclined to set down this portion as of the middle Norman
period, cive, 1060 ; but the Monastery itself was, we doubt not, of a much earlier
late.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-184.png ---
158 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Chantry ,® in the south wing of the church of Youghal was
founded the chantry of our Blessed Saviour," and John
Welsh, long after the statute of mortmain, endowed it with
sundry lands, to the annual value of 6s. Irish money. Inquisi-
tion roth September, 20th Queen Elizabeth.—Chief Rem.

mD Smith, vol. 1, p. 119.

The question remains to be determined, to what community did this ancient
Monastery belong? The most aged peasants dwelling around, say it was Augus-
tinian, and are probably right. Friar Lubin, in his valuable history of that order,
gives us a map of Ireland, specifying the localities where houses of the order
existed. In Munster, we have at the mouth of the Blackwater ‘ Yoalensis’ marked,
along with the adjoining monasteries of Ardmore, Lismore and Dungarvan ; but
the historian gives us no particulars. Now, we have identified every other local
religious foundation, and do not find among them the house of Augustinians ; why
may it not be sought for here? It is true, that the able compiler of the Irish
Monasticon, printed in London by William Mears, in 1722, denies the correctness
of Lubin’s statement ; and speaking of monasteries erroneously assigned to Augus-
tinians, he says (p. 323): ‘‘ Youghill Monastery is likewise only of the aforesaid
Ffriar Lubin’s discovering, without mentioning the founder, or the time of its
foundation ; and I am well assured that there never were any convents of religious
men at Youghil, besides those of the Dominicans and Franciscans.” But the writer
previously (p. 311) had admitted a self-evident truth, which must weigh with us
In receiving his authority, especially when so dogmatically given : ‘‘It is possible,”
he writes, ‘‘that Friar Lubin might have had some informations which are un-
known to me.”

3° Chantry ; In the south wing of the collegiate church in this town was the
chapel of St. Saviour; and an Inquisition, 20th May, 27th Elizabeth, finds
that John Bennet. called Bishop Bennet, being seized in fee, to him and
his heirs, of a messuage in this town, called Bennet’s great house, near the
gate on the north side of the town, of the annual value of 6¢., Irish money,
besides reprises, and of a “oft adjoining the said messuage, which /o/f runs
from that messuage on the north to the land called Uniak’s land on the south, and
from the town wall on the east to the street called the Common street on the
west, and is of the annual value, besides reprises, of 4¢., Irish ; also another
toft adjoining the said /oft, and stretching from Uniak’s land on the north, to
Coppinger’s land on the south, and from the town wall on the east to the said street
on the west of the town, and is of the annual value, besides reprises, of 4d., Irish;
also a large garden without the town walls, and not far from the north gate
running from the abbey lands on the north to the street on the south called the
Commonlane ; and from the highway on the east to the land called Galians on the
west. and is of the annual value, besides reprises, of 4d; also another garden in the
Church lane, stretching from the said lane on the north, Uniak’s land on the south,
and from the land lately the Earl of Desmond's on the east, to the college lands on
the west, and is of the annual value, besides reprises, of 4¢.; also a garden and a
wall on the north of the Churchlane, stretching on the north from Collyn’s land
to the land of the Church on the west, and from Patrick Walshe’s lane on the east
to the said land of the earl of Desmond on the west, and is of the annual value,
besides reprises, of 4d.; also a messuage called Morresses * * * * house,
with a small messuage annexed thereto, stretching from Arthur’s lands in the north
to Liston’s land in the south, and from the town wall on the east to the Common-
street of the town on the south, and is of the annual value, besides reprises, of 25.;
also two messuages near the Keylane, which stretch from the said Keylane on the
north to the lands called Annias’ lands on the south, and from the town wall on
the east to the street called the Common-street, and is of the annual value, beside
reprises, of 2s.; and also a park or close lying between the hospital for the sick
poor, and the land called Collins’ park, and is of the annual value, besides
reprises, of 4¢. And the said John Bennet being seized of the messuages, &c.,
did long after the statute of mortmain, and without obtaining the royal licence


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-185.png ---
County of Cork. 159

Franciscan Friary ; a monastery was founded here for Fran-
ciscans, on the south side of the town, in the year 1224, by
Maurice Fitzgerald ;° who, it is said, erected this house on
the following occasion’: being about to build a castle in the
town, and the workmen who were digging the foundation, on
the eve of some festival, requesting a piece of money to drink
his health, he directed his eldest son to give it, who, instead
of obeying, abused the said workmen, at which Maurice was
so concerned, that he altered his design, and changed the
castle into an abbey. The founder was Lord Justice of Ire-
land in the years 1229 and 1232;? after which he retired to
this monastery, where he took on him the habit of St. Francis,
and dying the 8th of May, 1257, was interred here in the
habit of his order.4

This was the earliest foundation in Ireland for the order
of St. Francis;* Thomas, the second son of the founder, com-
pleted the building at his own expense, and dying on the
26th of May, A.D. 1260, was interred here.* Several other
noblemen of the house of Desmond were also interred here,
viz., Earl John in 1399,* Earl James in 1462," Earl Thomas in
1534,” Earl James, 4th September, 1535,% and Sir Thomas
Rufus, the eldest son of Gerald, in 1595.7

1300, 1312, and 1331. Provincial chapters of the order were
held there in each of these years.*

1460. This friary was reformed by the Observantines of the
strict obedience.*

1513 and 1531. General chapters of the order were held
here.

In the archives of Christ Church, Dublin, is a letter (dated

° War, Mss., vol. 3, p. 155. ? War. Mon. % Hanmer, p. 198, * Wadding,
quoted by Bourke, p. 42. * Lodge, vol. 1, p.6 and 7. */d.p.1t. *Id. p. 13.
wld. p.16. * 1d. ¥ Id. p.20. * War. Mss., sup. * Id.

enfeoff Walter Monwill, chaplain, and his heirs, to hold the same for the support
of the chaplains of the Chantry of St. Saviour’s or of the Holy Trinity adjoining,
ye collegiate church of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and their successors to celebrate
the holy offices for ever, the said feoffment being in these words :—‘‘ Know all
men that I, Mr. Walter Monvill, of the town of Youghall, chaplain, have granted,
and by these presents have confirmed to the Chantry and chaplains of the chappel
of St. Saviour, adjoining the collegiate church, &c., all the messuages, &c., which
I enjoy by the enfeoffment of Mr. John Bennet, and to have and hold all the said
messuages. &c., to keep one chaplain to serve in the said chappel, &c., for ever, in
the usual and accustomed manner ; and I the said Walter fonvills will warrant
and support the aforesaid grant for ever.

“In testimony whereof (as the seal of. . . . is unknown) I have hereunto
affixed the seal of the Mayor of Youghall, dated at Youghall, 24th May, 31
K., Henry VIII.”

Note—The said premises were formerly held from the Earl of Desmond.

Inquisition, roth September, 20th Elizabeth finds that John Walsh, long after
the statute of Mortmain, endowed this chantry with sundry lands to the annual
value of 6s. Irish money. [Chief Remem.]

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-186.png ---
160 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

in 1482) of indulgence and plenary pardon from Donald
O'Fallon to Richard Skyrret, then canon, and . afterwards
prior of that cathedral, for contributing to the crusade;
Fallon entitles himself deputy of the order of Minors, and
on the seal he is called guardian of Yoghill® There are no
traces of this friary remaining.

William White, long after the statute of mortmain, granted
to the church of the Holy Trinity, Cork, the rectory of Clare
in this county, which rectory, at the taking of this inquisition,
10th September, 2oth Queen Elizabeth, was in the possession
of the guardian or warden of this friary, and of the annual
value of 12d.-—Chief Rem.

Dominican Friary; called the friary of St. Mary of Thanks,
was founded at the north-end of the town in the year 1268,
or 1271,° by Thomas, the son of Maurice, son of John of Cal-
len, son of Thomas, the second son of Maurice, Lord Offaly,
who was interred here in 1296, or 1298.4

A.D. 1303. Robert de Percival, an eminent benefactor to
this house, was interred here on 22nd of October.®

1281 and 1304. General chapters of the order were held here.‘

1493. This house was reformed by Bartholomew de Comatio,
general of the orders

28th April, 23rd Queen Elizabeth, this monastery, with six
gardens within the liberties of Youghal (the tithes excepted)
were granted for ever to William Walsh, in capite, at the
yearly rent of 22d. sterling.»

An image of the Virgin Mary, held in the utmost venera-
tion, was preserved in this monastery; and the general chap-
ter held at Rome in 1644 mentions it in their acts. This
image, says Bourke, is in the possession of the present Domi-
nicans of Youghal.!

Of this ancient building nothing now remains, save the
west end of the nave and a small part of the east window.

COUNTY OF DERRY.

Arragell ;\ In the barony of Coleraine. The great St.
Columb founded a monastery at Arragell, in the territory of
Oireacht Hy Cathan,* and we afterwards find a St. Muadan
of that place.!

>» War. Bps., #291. Ms. additions. * War. Mon. % Lodge, vol. 1, p.8. *Id.
vol. 2, p.137. 'King, p. 87. © Bourke, p. 76. % Aud. Gen. ‘ Bourke, p.272.
* Tr. Th. p. 493 and 495. ' Vard.

\The name Arragell corresponds with the Irish asreagal, which means an
apartment or habitation, and in Ecclesiastical usage was employed to designate

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-187.png ---
County of Derry. 161

This is now a parish church in the diocess of Derry.™

Badoney ,* St. Patrick founded the church of Both-dhomnaigh
(which still retains its ancient name) in the valley of Glann-
aicle, near the river Fochmuine® in Oireacht-Ychathan, and
two miles from Derry ; and St. Atgenius, cook to the Saint,
was a presbyter here.°

In the diocess of Derry are two parish churches, called the
Upper and Lower Badoney ;? the one here mentioned must
be of the Lower Badoney

Boith-Medhbha ,° A monastery of this name was founded by
St. Columb, in Kiennacta (the barony of Kenoght) in the
diocess of Derry ; St. Aidan, nephew to St. Patrick, by Sinecha
his sister, was abbot of it.4

Camus ,;* on the river Bann, in the barony of Coleraine.

™ Visitation Book. ° Now called the Faughan-water. ° Tr. Th., p. 181. ? Visi-
tation Book. % Tr. Th., p. 495.

“a church,” or ‘‘ monastery.” The present Arragell was originally known a’
Aireacal Adamnaim, St. Adamnan being the patron of that church. The ancient
burial-place and site of the church are in the townland of Ballintemple, and a little to
the south there is another spot which bears the name of the same saint: it is marked
on the Ordnance map as ‘St. Onan’s rock.”

2In the Tripartite life of St. Patrick, it is recorded that he founded seven
churches along the course of the river Faughan. One of these was Both-domnaigh,
and it is the only one of these seven churches which still retains its name. St.
Aithcen, seventh in descent from Colla Meann, was the patron saint of Badoney.
The parish of Upper Badoney, which retains the site of the ancient church and ceme-
tery, and coincides with the valley of Glenelly, in the north-east of Tyrone, is also
remarkable as being the birth-p!ace of the great Saint Colman-Ela. Glenelly
appears in the Annals of the Four Masters under the names of Gleann foichle (ad.
an. 854), and Gleann aichle (ad. an. 1600). Thus we are able to understand the
following passage of St. Colman’s Life :—‘‘ There was a man of venerable life,
Colman by name, of a noble family of Erin, descended from the Hy Neill, and
his father was named Beogne. Now this man, being compelled to fly with his family
from Meath, which waslaid waste by the Lagenians, took refuge in the valley of Hoic/e,
and there St. Colman was born.” —Lider Kilken., in Marsh’s Library, fol. 129 b.
In the Annals of the Four Masters (ad. an. 992), it is recorded that ‘‘ Muireagan,
of Both-domhnaigh, successor of Patrick, went upon his visitation in Tirowen, and
he conferred the degree of king upon Aedh, son of Domhnall, in the presence of
Patrick’s, congregation, and he afterwards made a great visitation of the north of
Treland.

3 Both Mheidhbhe literally means ‘‘ Meva’s house,” and is now called Bovevagh,
which corresponds in pronunciation with the original name. St. Aidan, who was
of the same race with the O’Conors of Keenaght, is referred to this church in the
Irish Calendar. His genealogy is thus given by Colgan :—‘‘S. Aidanus de Both-
medhba, filius Fintani, filii Ke nbarchae, filii Conalli, filii Sobharnachi, filii Fin-
cholimii, filii Fiegi, filii Finchadii, filii Conlae, filii Tadgaei, filii Kieni, filii Ailildi
Olum.”—(77. Th. p. 478, n. 5.) Elsewhere Colgan tells us that St. Adamnan
was venerated in this church as patron. In King’s Visitation it is called ‘‘ Ecclesia
Sancti Eugenii,” but this is a mere clerical error for ‘‘ Ecclesia Sancti Eunani,”
#.¢., the Church of St. Adamnan. St. Ringan is also marked out by local tradition
as patron of this church, and an ancient tomb at the N.E. of the old church, is said
to be his. In the Annals of Innisfallen, at the year 1100 of the vulgar era, it is
recorded that ‘‘ the oratory of Both-Meva was burned.”

4The monastery of Cambas, more commonly called Camas, or Camus, was
founded by St. Comgall, and its connexion with St. Comgall’s great monastery was

M

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-188.png ---
162 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland,

The abbot St. Congell, or Comgall, flourished about the
year 580,' and St. Colman, or Mocholmoc, another abbot of
this once celebrated monastery, died 30th March, A.D. 699."

Camus is now a parish church in the diocess of Derry.‘

Coleraine ;> A market-town and borough, sending burgesses
to Parliament ; it is situated on the river Bann, within five
miles of the sea, in the ancient territory of O’Cahane.

* Usher. * Act. SS., p.792. * Visitation Book.

maintained till the tenth century. The Annals of the Four Masters in 938,
record the appointment of ‘‘ Muircertach of Camus” to the Abbacy of Bangor. In
the Martyrology of Donegal, October 30th, we find commemorated ‘‘St. Colman,
abbot of Camus Comghail, on the banks of the Bann,” and again on January 22nd,
**SS. Colma, Bogha and Laisri in Camas Comghail.” The following particulars
regarding this ancient monastic establishment are given by Dr. Reeves in his
notes to Adamnan, 1. 50 :—‘‘ Camus gave name to a parish situate on the west of
the Bann, in the diocese of Derry, which, for distinction’s sake, is called Camus
juxta Bunn, there being another of the same name in the Tyrone part of the
diocese, styled, from the neighbouring river, Camus juxta Mourne. An island in
the Bann, opposite the churchyard of Camus, was formerly called Jnis Lochain,
beside which was a shallow spot, known as Frartas Camsa, t.e., ‘the Ford of
Camus,’ from which the island is called ‘Enis Forsed,’ on Speed’s Map of
Ulster. In the twelfth century an abbey was founded in another part of the parish,
called in Cisterician records, De Claro Fonte, but by the Irish Magh-Cosgrain,
which now gives to the whole parish, according to civil usage, on the Ordnance
Survey, the name Macosguin. All traces of the church have disappeared from the
cemetery of Camus ; but an ancient sculptured cross or pillar, divided by trans-
verse bands into four compartments, each containing three figures in relief, stood
on a base at the west side till 1760, when it was overturned, and, having been
mutilated, was converted into a gatepost for the churchyard, in which condition it
still exists, The name Camus is supposed to be compounded of Cam, and as, two
Irish words, which mean ‘‘ crooked stream,” and in Ireland there are twelve
townlands of itsname. In Scotland it is sometimes Camus, as in Argyleshire,
and sometimes Camdus, as in Lanark and Perthshire. Adamnan, when recording
the fulfilment of a prophecy of St. Columba, that the fountain at Dun-Cethirm
would one day be reddened with the blood of one of his own tribe, adds, that ‘‘a
soldier of Christ, named Fintan, who for many years had led without reproach an
heremitical life at Durrow, related to him (Adamnan), that he himself had found
a lifeless trunk lying in that fountain, and that he on the same day proceeded tothe
monastery of St. Comgall, which in the Irish language is called Camdos (eo die ad
monasterium Sancti Comgelli quod Scotice dicitur Caméos), and there related the
fulfilment of St. Columba’s prophecy.”— Vita S. Col. 1—5o.

5 Coleraine, formerly called Culerathin, is situated on the east side of the Bann.
Lewis says that it derives its name from the words ‘‘ Cuil-Rathuin, descriptive of
the numerous forts in the vicinity, and is, by some writers, identified with the Rath-
mor-Muigheline, the royal seat of the Kings of Dalnaraidhe.”—(Zofogr. Dict.)
O’Brien, however, in his Irish dictionary, derives it from Cusl-rathain, ‘ the ferny
corner,” and the ancient Tripartite Life of St. Patrick confirms this derivation.
It is there related that our Apostle having arrived in this neighbourhood, was hos-
pitably entertained, and received an offer of some land for the erection of a church
in a tract overgrown with ferns, and where some boys were at the moment engaged
in setting fire to the ferns. St. Patrick left St. Carbreus there as Bishop, and
“from that day and circumstance it was called Cuil-raithen, i.e., ‘secessus filicis,’

. the ferny retirement.”—Trias Thaum, page 147. Tirechan also, in Book of Ar-
magh, fol. 15, relates that ‘* St. Patrick crossing the river Bann, blessed the spot in
which is the cell of Cuile-Raithin in Elniu, and a bishop was placed there, and he
erected many other cells in Elniu.” Towards the close of the sixth century, St.
Conall was bishop of Cuserathin, and Adamnan relates that St. Columba visiting

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-189.png ---
County of Derry. : 163

Inquisition 12th November, 1st King James, finds that
John O’Boyll was the last prior, and Ist February, 32nd King
Henry VIII., he was seized of the said priory, and also of four
townlands ahd a half townland, viz., Balleneigfeigh and Att-
woare, Arbeggan, Dunaville and Balliosallye ; also a townland
‘and a-half called Tollo-Cor, in temporals only ; also the fishery
of the river Bann, on the Monday after the Feast of the
Nativity of Saint John the Baptist, in every year, of which the
said prior was seized time immemorial ; and one salmon daily,
during the season, from every fisher in the said river. The
prior surrendered the same Ist January, 34th of same King,
the said lands and fishery, besides reprises, being valued
at 40s.—Chief Rem.

Priory of Canons Regular; St. Carbreus, or Corpreus, a dis-
ciple of St. Finian of Clonard, was the first bishop of Cole-
raine, and flourished about the year 540;" his festival is
celebrated the 11th of November ;* he was succeeded by St.
Conall, who was bishop in the time of St. Columb, the cele-
brated founder of the abbey of Derry, A.D. 546.* Ardmedius,
or Armedacius, abbot of Coleraine, was put to death by the
Danes in 930 Manus M‘Dunleve, in 1171, plundered this
and several other churches, but we are told that he soon after
met with the fate he so justly merited.* Thomas M‘Uchtry

* Act. SS., p. 313,406. Tr. Th. p. 183, 380.  Vard., p. 158. * Tr. Th.,
p. 380. ¥ Act. SS., p. 107. * Annal. Munst.

the monastery soon after the Synod of Dromcheatt (circa an. §90), was joyously
welcomed by St. Conall, the people of the surrounding district of Eilne offering
innumerable gifts (collectis a populo campi Eilne pene innumerabilibus xeniis), and
assembling in the cloister (1 A/atea monasterii strata) to receive his blessing. —
(Vit. S. Col. i., 50). Besides Airmedhach, abbot of Cuil-rathain, slain by the
Danes in the year 930, who is mentioned in the text, we find, in theannals of the Four
Masters, the following entries regarding the heads of this monastery :—‘t An. 972,
Roitectach, superior of Cuil-Kathain, anchorite and wise man, died ;” ‘‘ an. 988,
Mac Leiginn O’Mureadhain, superior of Cuil-rathaindied ;” ‘‘an. 1110, Cernach,
son of Mac Ulcha, superior of Cuil-rathain, died;” “an. 1122, Andadh, son of
Mac Ulcha, superior of Cuil-rathain, died.” St. Bernard also narrates how St.
Malachy O’Morgair visited, on a certain occasion, this monastery, which is called
Civitas Culratim. It was probably in 1213, when the houses of the town and its
ecclesiastical buildings were pulled down by the English of Ulidia, to furnish ma-
terials for the castle of Thomas Mac Uchtry, that the ancient abbey of Coleraine
was demolished. Not a vestige of it now remains, but it is supposed to have occu-
pied the site of the present shambles beside the river. The church attached to the
monastery seems to have been spared on that occasion, and it appears in after times
under the title of S¢. Patrick's. When the possessions of O’Cahan were made shire
ground in the reign of Elizabeth, Coleraine gave name to the county now known as
Derry, and it was so called till the year 1613, when this district, being granted by
the crown toa number of London merchants who were incorporated under the
name of ‘‘ the Irish Society,” was called the county of Londonderry. This so-called
Irish Society was bound to build the town of Coleraine, to people it, to enclose it
with a wall, and to establish a market, within seven years from the date of the
charter, by which were granted to the London merchants the entire abbey of St.
Mary, its site, and the lands belonging to it, together with the old town and all its
appurtenances,

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-190.png ---
164 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

and-the Galls of Ulster built a castle here in 1213, for which
purpose they raised all the pavements and destroyed every
part of the abbey, the church alone excepted.*

Dominican Friary ,® which was also called the monastery
of the Bann,” was founded A.D. 1244° by the O’Cahanes, or
rather, as a good authority asserts, by the M‘Evelins,’ and was
dedicated to the Virgin Mary. Sir Robert Savage of
Ulster, Knt., an excellent soldier, died in 1360, and was buried
here.

A general chapter of the order was held at Rome in 1484,
when a licence was granted on November roth to Maurice
Moral, prior provincial, to reform this friary.®

Shane O’Boyle was the last prior; on the Ist of January,
1542, he voluntarily surrendered into the hands of the King’s
commissioners.»

Francis Porter, in his annals, tells a story of Bishop Bab-
bington having attempted in vain to burn an image of the
Virgin Mary, which belonged to this monastery, and the
bishop, being instantly seized with a violent illness, died in
the month of September, 1611!

A few of the ruins of the building remain near the town,
on the west side of the river.

Derry;" The metropolis of the county, and a corporation
town, sending two burgesses to parliament ; it is a good sea-
port, and will be ever famous for the noble defence it made
against King James II. in the year 1689.

*“Annal, Munst. » King, p.97. °ld. p. 87. War. Writers, p.77. “Burke, p.245-
*War. Mon. ‘Pembridge. & Burke. p.73. © King, p. 97. | Burke, p. 245.
& Burke, p. 244 and 245.

6 The Dominican Friary was situated on the left bank of the river, in the old
town, which was called Killowen. The old parish church is supposed to stand on
the site of the ancient church dedicated to St. John, from which the town derived
its name. One mile south of Coleraine is Afount Sandel, which originally bore
the name of Xil/santain, and probably had St. Sanctain for its patron. In the
year 1215, King John made a grant to Thomas Mac Uchtry, Earl of Athol (of
‘whom mention has been already made), of “ Killesantan and the castle of Culrath,”
&c.—(Hardy’s Rot. Chart., pag. 210; Rymer’s Foedera, pag. i., 140). An inquisi-
tion of 1605 describes this place as ‘Kil/santill, alias Mount Sandail,’ forming part
of the lands of the priory of Coleraine. Mount Sandel is at present ‘‘ one of the
largest and most perfect raths in the kingdom; it is 200 feet high, surrounded by a
deep dry fosse, and encircled near its summit by a magnificent terrace; in the centre
is a deep oblong cavity called the Giant’s Grave. There is also a very high and
perfect rath a little west of the Cranagh; another close to the church of Killowen ;
and a very curious fort near Ballysally.”—Lewis, Zo. Dict.

7 Derry, called in Irish Daire Calgaich, é.e., ‘‘the oak grove of Calgach,” dates
back to a very early period of our history. Calgach, which means a “ fierce war-
rior,” is supposed to be a form of the Latin name Ga/gacus, which occurs in Tacitus
(Agricola, cap. 29). In the Annals of Ulster, the foundation of St. Columba’s
monastery is placed in the year 545; ‘‘A.D. 545, Daire Coluim-cill fundata est.”
The old Irish life of the Saint presents the following narrative :—‘ Columcille went
then to Daire, that is, to the royal fort of Aedh, son of Ainmire, who was king of

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-191.png ---
County of Derry. 165

Inquisition 10th November, 1603, found that the ancient in-
habitants of O’Cahane’s country granted to St. Columb and
his successors, Ardmagiligan, containing twelve quarters of
land ; where two chapels, now destroyed, were erected ; the
said lands paying the annual rent of 40s. sterling to the bishop
of Derry, and the said twelve quarters were only of the annual
value of 135. 4a.*«

Abbey of Canons Regular; St. Columb, of noble extraction,
was born at Gartan, in the county of Donegall, in the year

“* Chief Rem.

Treland at that time. The king offered the fort to Columcille, but he refused it
on account of the command of Mobi (Clarainech of Glasnevin). As Columbcille,
however, came out of the fort, he met two of the religious of Mobi, bringing to him
Mobi’s girdle, with his consent that Columcille should accept a grant of territory,
Mobi having died. Columcille then settled in the fort of Aedh, and founded a
church there, and wrought many miracles in it.” The same narrative is substantially
repeated in the Liber Hymnorum, part second, and in the Irish Life by
O'Donell. These authorities must more than counterbalance the objections made
by Lanigan, Ec. Hist. I1., pag. 122, and Ordnance Memoir, Londonderry, pag. 18.
The original small church erected by St. Columcille was called in later times the
Dubh-regias, or ‘Cella Nigra,” to distinguish it from the 7emple-mor, or great ca-
thedral, erected under his invocation. Tighernach preserves an ancient quatrain, in
which St. Columba is said to have passed three years in silent retreat within the
enclosure of this church. Derry seems to have been particularly loved by the
Saint, even when he was engaged in his Apostolical career among the Picts. There
is a very ancient Irish poem, written in the name of Saint Columba, in which he thus
eulogises this abode of pict . It is given in full, together with the original text, in
Reeve’s Adamnan, page 285, seqq. :—

“The reason I love Derry is,
For its quietness, for its purity,
And for its crowds of white angels,
From the one end to the other.

‘‘ The reason why I love Derry is,
For its quietness, for its purity,
Crowded full of Heaven’s angels.
Is every leaf of the oaks of Derry.

““My Derry, my little oak grove,
My dwelling, and my little cell ;
O eternal God! in Heaven above,
Woe be to him who violates it.”

The prophecy contained in these last lines, that Divine punishment should fall on
those who would violate the monastery of Derry was more than once fulfilled in
aftertimes. Thus, in 1195. when a body of the Norman invaders plundered the abbey,
they were immediately after intercepted and cut off at Armagh ; and two years
later, when a large body of the same troops again devastated Derry and desecrated
its churches, they were defeated with great slaughter in the adjoining parish of
Faughanvale. To pass over other instances, when Derry became the centre of the
English military operations in 1596, the cathedral was converted into an arsenal ;
but on the 24th of April the gunpowder blew up, bringing destruction on many of
the garrison, and utterly dismantling the fortifications of the town, so that it had
to be immediately abandoned by the army. For further Panes regarding this
venerable See, we may refer to the ‘‘ Ordnance Survey of the County of London.
derry, 1837,” vol. I. ; and Dr. Reeves’ ‘‘Cotton’s Visitation of the Diocese of
Derry,” published for the I.A.S. in 1850.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-192.png ---
166 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

521, and was educated under St. Finian in the great school of
Clonard. The noblesse of Kinell-conuill'! granted Dorecal-
gach™ to their relation St. Columb in the year 535: but as
the Saint could not at that time be sixteen years old, the
foundation of the abbey cannot be placed before the year 546,
when he may be supposed to have founded it" for canons regu-
lar under the rule of St. Augustin ; this abbey was a daughter
of that of St. Peter and St. Paul at Armagh, and was in after
times dedicated to St. Columb himself ;° he is said by some to
have made a pilgrimage to the abbey of Glastonbury, in
Somersetshire,? and there® to have concluded his earthly pilgri-
mage A.D. 597, in the 76th year of his age;4 he was buried
in the abbey of Hy, but was afterwards removed to Down-
patrick.

A.D, 695. In a synod held about this time by St. Flann,
primate of Ireland, and by St. Adamnan ; St. Mochonna, or
Dachonna, subscribed the acts thereof, under the signature of
Antistes Dorensis ; this Saint died 3rd May, A.D. 704. *

720. Died St. Coechsculius, the scribe of Derry.*

783. The abbey and town was destroyed by fire.‘

812, The same event happened this year ; and the Danes
heightened the horrors of the conflagration, by putting to the
sword not only the students, but the venerable clergy."

832. Niell Callne, monarch of Ireland, and Murchard,
prince of Aileach,” fell upon the Danes who were besieging
this town, and put them to flight with great slaughter.*

839. Died the blessed Murchertach, the son of Niell; he
was abbot of Derry and other churches.”

885. The abbot St. Mailbrigid, the son of Tornan, was
promoted to the archepiscopal see of Armagh; he enjoyed
this dignity for the space of 40 years.*

903. Died the abbot St. Diermit.*

g1g9. Died St. Kined, the son of Domnald ; he was abbot of
Derry and Druimchliabh, and was esteemed the head and
light of religion throughout all Tirconnell ; his festival is
celebrated on the 19th of November.»

1 Or Tyrconnel, now the County of Donegall. ™ Tr. Th. p. 450. ° War. Mon,
edd, ». Steven's Monast., vol. 1, p. 421. ? Annal, Munst. * Tr. Th, p. 503
and 506. Act. SS., p. 566. *7r. Th., p. 503. ‘*id.and Index. % Annal.
Munst. * In Inisowen, about three miles North of. Dery. * Tr. Th. p.§03. Id.
8 Id. Act, SS., p. 107 and 383. * Tr. Th. p. 503. ° Jd. p. 503.

® This opinion has been long ago exploded. St. Columba died just after mid-
night, between Saturday, the 8th, and Sunday, the gth of June, in the year 597,
whilst kneeling before the altar of his monastery, in Iona: and the long chapter
in which Adamnan describes the last scenes of the Saint’s life, is as beautiful and
touching a narrative as any to be met with in the whole range of ancient biography.
Adamnan, ‘Vit. S. Columb,” iii., 235.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-193.png ---
County of Derry. 167

927. Died the blessed Cainchomrach, the son Moeluidhir,
abbot and guardian of the canons of St. Adamnan.°

937. Died the blessed Finnacta, the son of Kellach; he was
abbot of Derry, and was well skilled in the antiquities of
Ireland.4

948. The blessed Moelfinnian was abbot, and died the 6th
of February.®

950. Died the abbot St. Adhland, the son of Egnech ; a
man justly esteemed for hospitality and munificence.

967. The blessed Ainguss Hua Robhartaich, anachorite,
and Kineth Hua Cathmocil, the archidnach of Derry, died in
the same month#

973. Died the Abbot Fogartach,>

983. Died the archidnach Ossineus Hua Lupain.!

985. The blessed Malkyeran O’Maigne, abbot of Derry,
was inhumanly martyred by the Danes of Dublin ;* and this
year Maolseachline forcably carried away the shrine of St.
Columb!

988. The blessed Dubdaleth, archbishop of Armagh, was
elected, by the Irish and the Scots of Albany, supreme
moderator of the monasteries in Ireland and Scotland, of the
congregation of St. Columb. He enjoyed this honourable
office ten years, and died on the 2nd of June, A.D. 998, in the
83rd year of his age.™ :

989. The Danes spoiled and wasted this town this year,"
and inthe years g9I° and 996.P

to1o. On the 28th December, in this year or the following,
died St. Muredach, the son of Crichan, successor to St. Columb,
and professor of divinity at Armagh ; he was in his 74th year,
and was intended for the archepiscopal throne, being in high
estimation for his excellent qualities, his learning and purity
of manners,?

1022. Died Flanan, the vicar of Derry.”

1025. The abbot St. Moelonius Hua Torain, or Tornain,
died on the 2oth of October,* as did some time after the arch-
deacon Muredach O’Moelcholuim.t

1095. The abbey was consumed by fire.”

1096. The blessed abbot Eugene O’Kearnich died Decem-
ber the 15th.”

1100. Murchertach O’Brien, Prince of Munster, attacked
Derry with a large fleet of foreigners, but he was defeated
with a great slaughter; notwithstanding which the town was
pillaged that year.*

° Tr. Th., p. 503. %Jd. °Id., p. 506. ‘*1d., p. 503. Act. SS. p.107. & Tr,
Th., p. 500. *Id. ‘Id. * Act. SS.,p.107. ‘Annal. Munst. ™ Tr. Th., p.

. 503.
Td. °MGeogh. Tr. Th. supr. Id. * Annal. Ulton. *Tr. Th., supr. B
*Annal. Munst. * Tr. Th., p. 506. * Id. p.633-

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-194.png ---
168 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1112, The archdeacon Congalech, the son of Conchall,
closed an exemplary life in the 94th year of his age.”

1120, The archdeacon Gilla M‘Tieg, the son of Roderick,
was elected abbot, and enjoyed the dignity for sixteen years,*

1121. Domhnal, Prince of Tyrconel, having resigned his
kingdom, died in this abbey in the 73rd year of his age.*

1124. Ardgar, Prince of Ailech, was slain this year in an
assault which he made upon Derry.”

1126. Died the archdeacon Finn Hua Coningein.°

1129. Died Gilda Colman Hua Kellaich, a principal
presbyter of Derry.4

1134. The people of Munster plundered and burnt Derry ;*
and the following year the whole town, with all the sacred
edifices therein were set on fire and consumed; the cause of
this deed was (as we are told) to revenge the death of Ardgar.!

1136. The abbot Gilla M‘Tieg was chosen archbishop of
Armagh, and died in 1174.%

1146 On the 3rd of December a violent tempest happened
in this town ; sixty oaks were torn up by the roots, and many
people were kilied in the church, whither they had flown for
shelter.»

1150, Died the archdeacon Moelisa O’Branain, a man ~
famed for unbounded hospitality and munificence ; in these
virtues he excelled the whole of Ireland;' the same
year the blessed abbot Flathbertach O’Brolchain, brother
to Malbrige, archbishop of Armagh,* made a visitation through-
out Kinel-eogain,! and received from Murchertach Hua Loch-
luinn, King of Ireland, 20 oxen, together with the King’s own
horse and a gold ring, which weighed five ounces, and from every
nobleman he received an horse, from every two burgesses an
ox, one from each free person, and one from every four of the
rest of the people; this liberal contribution was made to repair
the abbey, which had been destroyed by fire the preceding
year.™ The following year the abbot made another visitation
throughout Siolcathasaich ; from Cuculad O’Flann, Prince of
that country, he received an horse, with a gold ring, weigh-
ing two ounces, from every nobleman an horse, and a sheep
from each master of a family."

1153. Died Murchoe O’Maolseachlinn, monarch of Ireland,
who had retired into this abbey.°

1158. Ina synod held at Brigh-mac-thaighe, in the county
of Meath, it was decreed, that the episcopal chair should be

¥ Tr. Th. p. 504. a p.505. Act. SS ~-779. Annal. Inisfal. * O’ Halloran,
vol. 2, p. 299. Th., p * O'Flaherty Mss. * Annal. Munst.
t Tr. Th, p. eon Che ibid. and 505. he ‘Id. * Id, p. 505. \ The present
County of Tyrone. ™ Tr. Th, p. 505. "fd. ° Annal. Munsi.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-195.png ---
County of Derry. 169

granted to the abbot of Derry, with the supreme rule over
all the abbeys of the kingdom; but it is to be observed,
that the bishops of Conaught were not present at this
meeting.P

1161. The same abbot visited the country of Ossory,
and collected from that people 420 ounces of pure silver.4

1162. Died Cathasach, the son of Comaltan, a celebrated
doctor and professor of Divinity in this abbey." The same
year the King Murchertach Hua Lochluinn, and the abbot
Flathbert, removed the buildings which crowded this abbey ;
the abbot afterwards erected the stone enclosure called Cassiol
anurlair.*

1163. In the space of twenty days the abbot built a lime-
kiln seventy feet in dimensions every way, for burning lime
to repair the abbey ;* and the next year King Murchertach
and the abbot extended the greater church eighty feet, and
finished the whole work in the space of eighty days ;" the
time is reduced by some to forty.”

1166. An act unheard of in former, ages was perpetrated
about this time by Rory Mackany Mackillmorey O’Morna—
he destroyed, by fire, the greater part of the town of Derry,
with the church called Duibh-regles.*

1170. The town was again consumed by fire, but it seems
to have been accidental.Y St. Muredach O’Cobthaigh, bishop
of Derry and Raphoe,was interred in the Duibh-regles.* This
Muredach was present, as bishop of Kinel-eogain, in the
famous synod of Kells, held A.D. 1152; it seems, therefore, as
if the abbot Flathbert was raised by the synod of Brigh-mac-
thaighe to the episcopal dignity at large.

1175.Died the abbot Flathbert, after a tedious illness; he was
so highly esteemed for his learning and exemplary virtues, that
he was raised to the episcopal dignity, and the government
of the abbey of Hy was offered to his acceptance ;* he was
succeeded by Gilla M‘Tieg O’Branain.” Donogh O’Carillan
perfected a treaty of friendship with the abbey and town of
Derry, and granted to the convent a betagh townland near
Donaghmore, and certain duties to be paid them for ever.°

1180. Moelisa Hua Muredhuigh, professor of divinity in this
abbey, died in a respectable old age ;4 and the same year
Amlave, bishop of Kineleoguin was interred in this abbey, near
to his predecessor St. Muredach ; from hence it appears, that
the church called Duibh-regles is the same with the abbey

Tr. Th, p. 505. %Annal. Munst. * Tr. Th., p. 505. ‘id. */d, “Id.
¥ O'Flaherty Mss. * Tr. Th., p. 505. Annal. Munst. 1 Annal. Munst.
"Tr. Th., p. 505, and O'Flaherty Mss. *Tr. Th. ~. 505. ” Annal. Munst.
°Id. 4 Tr. Th. p. 505.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-196.png ---
170 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

of St. Columb; and O'Flaherty remarks, that no church was
named Regles but where canons regular were placed.° Edvina,
the daughter of Hua Cuinn, a widow lady of Munster, died
about this time at Derry in her pilgrimage‘; and Moelcannech
Hua Fercomais, professor of divinity in this abbey, was
drowned between Ard and Iniseoguin.§ The gate of the
refectory in Duibh-regles was erected by O’Cahane of the
Krive, and the daughter of O’Nonorge.®

1195. The abbey was plundered this year by Rughruidhe,
the son of Donsleibhe, and the English; but we find that soon
after his whole army was cut to pieces at Armagh!

1196. Murchertach, the son of Murchertach, King of Ire-
and, was treacherously killed by Dunchad O’Cathain, and was
interred in this abbey with great funeral pomp.*

The altar of the great church was robbed the same year
by Mac Cienaght of 314 cups, which were esteemed the best
of their kind in Ireland, who also took the cups of Moydery and
O’Dogherty ; but they were recovered the third day after, and
Mac Cienaght was executed for the fact.!

1197. Rotsell Pitun came about this time to attack Derry,
but through the goodness of God, and the protection of the
Saints Columb and Cannech, he was defeated by Flathbert,
Hua Moeldoraid and others of the O’Neills, near Nuachong-
bail with a very great slaughter™ The abbot Gilla M‘Teig
O'Branain resigned this year, and Gilla Christ O’Kearnich,
with general consent, succeeded him;" he was afterwards pro-
moted to the bishopric of Connor, and died A.D. 1209.°

1202. Moyle Finin M‘Colman was erected arch-prior, but
he died this year ; and on the 27th of April following, O’Brol-
chain, the prior and great senior, paid the debt of nature; he
was in high estimation for his many virtues and extensive
learningP

1203. This town was consumed by fire, from the sanctuary
of St. Martin to St. Adamnan’s well.1 Amalgaid Hua Fer-
gail was then abbot; he was afterwards elected abbot of

r

1206. Died Domnald O’Muiredhuich, the principal professor
of divinity in this abbey.®

1211. The town was plundered by Thomas M‘Ughtry, with
the M‘Rannals and others in this year, and also in 1213.*

1213. Died the abbot Anmire O’Cobthaich, a man equally
admired for learning, piety, liberality, and charity."

* Ogygia. ' Tr. Th. p. 506. Id. %Annal. Munst. ‘Id. * Tr. Th., supr.
VAnnal. Boyle. ™ Tr. Th, supr. ™Id. Annal. Munst. °Annal. Munst.,
and War. Bps., p. 219. PY Annal. Munst. Id. and Tr. Th., p. 305
* Tr. Th. p. 305. *Jd. * Annal. Munst. “Id. and Tr. Th. sup.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-197.png ---
County of Derry. 171

1215. Doncha Duvdirma, the chief of Bredagh, in Inis-eoguin,
died in this abbey.”

1218. Moelisa Hua Doighre, who had been archdeacon
of Derry for the space of 40 years, and was beloved for his
hospitality and good works, died on the 8th of December.*

1219. Died the abbot Fanacta O’Brogan, and Flann O’Brol-
chain was chosen in his place

1221. Moel Columb, archbishop of Armagh, was interred
here.*

1229. Died the Canon Gerard O’Cahane, esteemed the most
learned of the whole order.*

1233. Died Geoffrey O’Doigre of this abbey.»

1250. The upper end of the great church fell to the ground
on the 8th of February.° ,

1397. Reginald O’Hegerty resigned the abbacy, and Odo
M‘Gillebride O‘Dochyrty was chosen in his room.?

1531. Conaght O’Fraghill was abbot ; for Sir Odo O’Donnell,
Lord of Tyrconnell, being prevented by sickness from per-
sonally renewing his oath of allegiance, did appoint the said
abbot and Richard O’Grayhan of Tredagh, to perform his
bounden fidelity to the King, which they accordingly did, on
the 5th of May this year, before the Lord Deputy Skeffington,
at Tredagh.°

Nunnery; The registry of the honour of Richmond says,
that an abbey for nuns of the Cistertian Order was founded at
Derry A.D. 1218 by Turlogh Leinigh O'Neil, of Strabanes

Dominican Friary ; Was founded here in the year 12745 by
O’Donnell, the younger, Prince of Tyrconnell, at the request
of St. Dominick; the number of friars in this house was
generally 150. Nicholas Lochlynnagh was prior in 1397.*

There are no remains of this building, which was situated on
the north side of the city!)

Franciscan Friary ; Burke alone mentions that the Friars
had a monastery here.

Dezertoghill ,° St. Columb founded the abbey of Desert,
which was generally called Disert Hy Thuachuill, in Oireacht
Hy Chathan.™ Dezertoghill is now a parish church, near

~ Annal. Munst. * Id. and Tr. Th., supr. ¥ Id., Act. SS., p. 108. * Tr. Th.,
p. 506. *Annal. Munst. Id. °Id. *% War. Mss.,vol.34. ° War. Annal.and
Cox. *War. Mon. & Allemande. Annal. Domin. de Trim. King, p. 84.

1 Walsh’s Prosp., p. 258. * War. Mss., vol. 34. \War. Mon. Burke, p. 182.
™ Tr. Th. p. 495-

® This place was called by the Irish inhabitants Disert-Ui-Thuathghaile, i..,
“© the place of retreat of the O'Tuohills.” The adjoining territory formerly belonged
to the O’Tuohills, and this name is still frequently met with in the neighbourhood
under the corrupt form of Zogéi//. The cemetery and site of the old church,
locally called Desert, which Colgan reckons among those founded by St. Columba,
are in the townland of Ballynameen.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-198.png ---
172 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

the river Bann, in the barony of Coleraine, and diocess of
Derry."

Domnachdolda, or Domnachmor ; A church built near the
Faughan water, in the barony of Tirekerin ; Bescna, a disciple
of St. Patrick, and also his brewer, was a presbyter of this
house.°

Donoghmore is now a parish church.P

Dunbo * St. Patrick founded Duncruthen for St. Beoan, or
Beoad ; it appears to be the same which is now called Dunbo
and is situated on the Atlantic ocean, in the territory of Mac-
hare, and barony of Coleraine.?

Dungiven;" A village in the barony of Kenoght, 13 miles
south east of Derry.

® Visitation Book. ° Tr. Th., p. 181. ” Visitation Book. Tr. Th., p. 181.

© The church of DomhAnach-dola, sometimes written Domhnach-dula, is supposed
to have been near the Moyola, _In the Tripartite Life of St. Patrick, we find St.
Beschna mentioned as his disciple and chaplain: ‘* Sanctus Beschna presbyter
de Domhnach-dola, sacellanus.”—( 7rias., page 167). An ancient poem, on St.
Patrick’s household, inserted in the Annals of the Four Masters, and also preserved
in the Book of Lecan, fol. 44, also mentions St. Beschna; ‘ The priest, Beschna,
sweet his verses, the chaplain of the son of Alprann (é.¢., St. Patrick).” Archdall
seems to have confounded St. Beschna with St. Mescan, who, in the poem just
cited, is styled: ‘‘The priest, Mescan, without evil, his friend and his brewer.
(Annals of F. Masters, i., 137). The Tripartite Life also describes him as ‘Sanctus
Meschanus de Domhnach juxta Fochmuine fluvium, cervicarius.”— 77ias, page
167. The church of Domhnach-Mescain seems to be that described in Archdall’s
text : it was situated near the river Faughan, in the county Derry. Domnachdulan
on the contrary, was in the plain of Magh-dula, through which the river Moyola
flows.—See Notes of O’Donovan, Four Afasters, i., 137. An interesting account
of the members of St. Patrick’s household may be seen in the new ‘‘ Life of St.
Patrick,” just published, by M. F. C. Cusack.

4 According to Colgan, 7rias Thaum., page 495, St. Adamnan was the patron
of Dunbo. The ruins of the old church, situate near Downhill, measure sixty-three
feet by twenty-seven and a-half. In this parish was situate the ancient fortification
of Dun Ceithirn, so called from Cethern, son of Fintan, one of the famous heroes
of the Red Branch, who flourished in Ulster in the beginning of the Christian
Era. The late Mr. O’Donovan was the first to identify this fortress with the hill
now known as the ‘‘ Giant's Sconce.” He thus writes in the ‘‘ Londonderry Let-
ters.” Ordnance Survey, page 60: ‘I visited the Giant's Sconce, and viewed it
with religious contemplation. I am perfectly satisfied that it is the Afunitio
Cethirni of Adamnan, and the Dun Ccithirn of Tigernach, and other annalists.””
Archdall errs when he confounds this place with the Dun Cruithne, or ‘ Arx
Cruthaenorum,” of which Colgan speaks, and where St. Beoaidh was placed as
bishop by our apostle, The townland of Duncrun still retains traces of the name
Dun Cruithne, and within its limits, not far from the modern parish church of
Magilligan, on the top of a hill commonly called ‘‘ Canon’s brae,” may still be
seen ‘‘ the foundations of a small building, thirty-five feet by nineteen, inside which
lies a long rude stone, having on it the figure of a cross in relievo. The cemetery
has not been used for many years, and has been partly tilled. A ditch, which has
been drawn across the hill, divides the sites of cemetery and the church. The
spot, however, can always be identified, for it is marked on the Ordnance Survey,

uins of an Abbey.” —(Reeves’ ‘‘ Cotton's Visitation, page 84.)

12 Dungiven (Dun Geimhin) and Glengiven have been Latinized Munitio pellium
and vallis pellium, and, by a curious coincidence, both places, at the time of the
Ulster plantation, fell to the lot of the ‘‘Skinner’s Company.” The ruins of the

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-199.png ---
County of Derry. 173

A.D. 1100. O’Cahane, Prince of the country, founded a
priory here for canons regular following the rule of St.
Angustin.”

1206. Died the prior O’Lathvertagh*

1215. Died the prior Paul O’Murey.t

1253. Died the prior Moyle Peter O’Murray."

1397. On the 16th October the archbishop of Armagh, at
the intreaty of the prior and convent, solemnly restored the
church and cemetery of this place, which had been polluted
by the effusion of Christian blood.'® Dungiven was the vil-
lage of Dermit O’Cahane.”

Magillagan »* At the outlet of Loughfoyle, in the barony
of Kenoght, five miles north of Newtown Limavaddy.

St. Columb, the great founder of churches, erected a monas-
tery at Ardia, which is also called Aird-megiollagain ; this
abbey was called the shrine of St. Columb," and in process of

* Allemande. * Annal. Munst. ‘War. Mon. % Annal. Ulton. © War. Mss.
vol. 34.

old church are situated a little outside of the village in the townland Dungiven.
They consist of a nave and chancel, which communicate by a lofty circular chancel-
arch. The nave measured forty feet by twenty. A round tower, about fifty feet in
height, stood at the S. W. corner, incorporated with the walls of the church: it was
undermined by some persons seeking for treasure, and fell to the ground in the year
1784. Drawings of the old church and round tower may be seen in Sampson’s
‘* Memoir of the Chart and Survey of Londonderry,” p. 328. In the Martyrology
of Donegal, at the 8th of January, we find the following entry : ‘‘ St. Neachtan of
Dungiven, in Cianacht of Glengiven, A.D. 678.” The death of Neachtan Neir is
recorded in the Annals of Ulster in A.D. 678; in the Annals of the Four Masters,
in A.D. 677.—See Reeves’ ** Cotton’s Vis.,” p. 41.

13 Archdall makes this statement on the authority of Ware, who derived it from
the Acts of Archbishop Cotton’s Visitation. This important record is itself now
accessible to every one, having been published in full by Dr. Reeves for the I. A.
Society in 1850. We are not told, however, when or by whom the wicked deed
was perpetrated which brought desecration on the church and cemetery of Dun-
given. It was probably something similar to that recorded in the Annals of
Ulster at A.D. 1121, when the cemetery of Banagher, about three miles from Dun-
given, was thus desecrated : “ Gilla-espoig-Eoghain O’Hennesy, king of Kianaghta,
was killed by his kinsmen in the middle of the cemetery of Banagher.”

“The parish originally called Zamdlaght-ard, became known in later times as
Ard-Mac_ Gillygen, from the family of the Magilligan’s, who were the hereditary
tenants of its church-lands. The Magilligan’s, according to M‘Firbis, were des-
cended from Oilioll, son of Foghan Breadach, and their church-lands, in 1615, con-
sisted of forty towns or balliboes, ‘‘ which forty balliboes or towns do contain ten
quarters, amounting to two-and-a-half ballibetaghs.”—(U/ster Znguis), The ruins
of the old church are in the townland of Tamlaght. Its patron saint was Cadan
or Catanus, ‘‘ whose tomb, nearly covered by the surrounding graves, lies close
under the east gable of the old church.” —Recves, page 84. In the Book of Leacan
this saint is called ‘‘ The Priest Cadan of Tamlaght-ard.” In the Tripartite Life
of St. Patrick, he is styled “ Catanus Presbyter,” and is named as one of the
household of our Apostle.— 7rias Traum, page 167. It was probably the similarity
of the name that led the able writers of the Ordnance Survey to mark this spot and
the neighbouring well, as ‘‘ Bishop Aedan’s tomb, and Bishop Aedan’s well.”

Hence the name Ballynascrine, or more correctly, Ballynascrine de Ardo.
The ruins of the old church of Ballenascrine, stand in the cemetery, on the north
side of the Moyola, in Moneyconey, which was one of ‘‘ the six towns of Ballyna-

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-200.png ---
174 Anctent Monasteries of Ireland.

time became very rich. It was plundered A.D. 1203, by
Diermit Hua Lochluinn, who at the head of a party of
foreigners attempted to plunder Kinel-eoguin, but the Lords
of that country pursuing them, Diermit with many of his party,
fell.x

Moycosquin ;® Three miles south west of Coleraine and in
that barony.

Moycoscain, or the abbey of the Virgin Mary of the Clear
Spring, was founded for monks of the Cistertian order’ A.D.
1172.2 The abbot John was made bishop of Derry by the
Pope in the year 1401, and he died in 1419."

Rathregenden ; Colgan says, that Rathregenden was a
church in the diocese of Derry, and that it was founded by
St. Columb for his disciple St. Baitan, or Boedan ;> it is now
unknown.

Templefinlaghan ;™ on Loughfoyle, in the barony of
Kenoght.

St. Columb founded Tamlacht-fionlugain, and made St.
Finnlugan, his disciple, abbot-; it is now a parish church in
the diocess of Derry,° and is named Tamlaghtfinlaghan, or the
church of Finnlugan.4

* Tr. Th., p. 493. % Wares Mon. * Pembridge’s Ann. * War. Bps., p. 289.
Tr. Th., p. 493. °fa., p. 495. °% Visitation Book.

screen."— Ulster Inguis. The shrine of St. Columba was executed at a very early
period, by Coula, the Artificer, and was preserved in Ard-M‘Giollagan down to
the sixteenth century. It was considered one of the most exquisite and elaborate
specimens of the artistic skill of the early Irish school. O’Donnel, in his Life nf
St. Columba, thus speaks of this precious shrine: ‘‘ Illud scrinium, quod usque in
hunc diem, tanquam nobilissimus thesaurus et unum ex praecipuis Sacrae Insulae
sacris monumentis in summa veneratione habetur, et asservatur in Ard-Miegiolla-
gan, quae est maritima portio regionis de Kilnnacta Glunne-Gemhin in Septemtri-
onali parte Ultoniae. Scrinium autem illud longe ante adventum S. Columbae ad
illa loca, et ut traditio est, vivente adhuc S. Patricio, elaborari coeptum est in
loco Dun-Cruithne priscis appellato, Fabro qui nobile et valde artificiosum opus
inchoavit, nomen erat Con/a cognomentum Artifex ; ex sua nimirum excellentia in
ea professione inditum.”— Trias Thaum. page 405.

16 See note 4, at Camus, page 161.

‘7St. Fionnlugh, patron of this church, is thus noticed in the Martyrology of
Donegal, at 3rd January: ‘‘Fionnlugh of Tamlacht- -—Fionnlogha in Cianacht of
Glen-giyen.” Colgan tells us that he was the son of Deman, and the brother of
St. Fintan, of Dumblesc, and that he made Scotland the field of his missionary
labours : ‘in peregrinationem exiit in Albionem."—Actfa SS., page 12. He was
probably the monk Find/uganus, who, according to Adamnan, interposed i in the
island of Hinba to save St. Columba’s life.—Vit. S. Col. ii, 24.”

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-201.png ---
175

COUNTY OF DONEGALL.

Astrath;! On the river Erne, near the town of Bally-
shannon’

A.D. 1178. An abbey was founded here for monks of the
Cistertian order! by Roderick O’Cananan, Prince of Tyrcon-
nell; he was slain in battle by O’Flachertach, who succeeded

° it was called anciently Ashro, Easroe, and Easruadh, and also the Abbey de
Samario, * Pembridge’s Annals.

1 Astrath, or Asharoe, is the name of a waterfall close to Ballyshannon. The
origin of the name belongs to a very remote date. The “Annals of the Four
Masters” set it down at the year of the world 4518, and give the following account
of it :—‘‘ Aedh Ruadh, son of Rodbarn, after he had been (the third time that he
assumed the government) seven years in the sovereignty of Ireland, was drowned
in Eas Ruadh, and buried in the mound over the margin of the cataract ; so that
from him Sith-Aedha and Aes-Aedhaire are called.” The cataract in which this ill-
fated prince, dedh Ruadh, lost his life, was from that time called Eas Aedh Ruadh,
now contracted into Asharoe, that is, the cataract of Red Hugh, for Zas isa
cataract, Aedh or ce is Hugh, and Ruadk or Rua is Red. This cataract is the
celebrated Fall of Ballyshannon, where the whole body of the river Erne is pro-
jected over a cliff of from fourteen to sixteen feet high. The salmon on their way
from the sea, rise there fourteen or fifteen feet at a spring, and bound up that
raging flood-gate. Sith-Aedha, that is, the grave of Aedha or Hugh, was the
name given to “the mound over the margin of the cataract” in which the body
was buried after it had been recovered. It is now Mullaghnashee, with a modern
English star-fort, erected in 1798, on the old mound or grave. The fate of this
Prince, and its consequences, head one of the most interesting chapters in the
romance of Irish history. Some three hundred years or more before the Christian
era, three cousins, the sons of three brothers, claimed each for himself the king-

- ship of Erinn. The dispute, however, was adjusted by the Fi/es, or Druids, who
engaged the three claimants in a solemn compact by which each should be allowed
to reign in turn for a period of seven years. Their names were Dithorba, Aedh-
Ruadh, and Cimbaeth, and they lived on amicably until each had enjoyed his
turn of the sovereignty three times, when Aedh-Ruadh was drowned in this cataract.
Aedh left but one child, a daughter, by name Macha Mongruadh, or Macha the
Red-haired. She claimed her father’s right to the seven years’ reign when his
turn came round, but the co-sovereigns refused to allow this privilege to a woman.
Whereupon, the strong-minded Macha raised an army, and, after a fierce contest,
made good her claim by force of arms. Dithorba having been slain in the con-
test, and his five sons banished into the wilds of Connaught, the victorious
Macha completed her triumph by marrying the remaining co-sovereign, Cimbaeth.
As, however, danger was still possible from the sons of Dithorba, this energetic
lady of the golden hair set out in quest of those luckless Youths, and did not give
over the pursuit until she had captured them among the rocks of the distant
Burran. te was suggested to her to put them to death, but she was pleased to
grant them their lives on the condition of their becoming her slaves, and she gave
them for a task to build her a court, ot rath, which should be thereafter the
chief residence of the princes of Ulster. The queen took a golden brooch, or
bodkin, with which she used to fasten her cloak round her neck, and traced out
with it the foundations of the court at a place about two miles west of Armagh ;
and thus was begun the palace of Eomuin, from Ze, a breastpin or brooch, and
Muin, the neck. Eomuin, Latinised into Emania, was the resort of the celebrated
Red-branch Knights, and the palace of the kings of Ulster for more than eight
hundred years. .

The abbey got its name from the waterfall, and is within easy distance of it.
There is, however, some difference of opinion as to its exact situation. Some

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-202.png ---
176 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

him ; some writers make O’Flachertach the founders This
abbey was a daughter of that of Boyle.»

1241. Donnell More O'Donnell, King of the countries of
Tyrconnell and Fermanagh, having secluded himself from the

& War. Mon.  Allemande.

fix it on Inis-Samer, a small island in the river very near the fall, and remarkable,
according to O’Flaherty in his Ogygya, for being the residence of Partholan, who,
it appears, had a favourite dog called Samer, but there is hardly a foundation
for this opinion, Local tradition places it on the river’s bank close to the fall,
and there is no stronger argument than local tradition in doubts of this kind.
Then, here are remains, scanty, yet sufficient to establish it as the site of the old
abbey. One of the side-walls is still standing, and a portion of the western gable,
which evidently belonged to a monastery ; and there is also the deep reverence
of the place which has always endured among the people, who long long ago made
it a resting place for the dead. The present Brimate, Dr. M‘Gettigan, when
Bishop of Raphoe, had a strong wall built round the precincts of this venerable
ruin, thus adding a fresh proof to the many he has already given of his anxiety to
preserve the relics of our past religious greatness.

But this difference of opinion is not confined to the situation of the abbey ; the
name of its founder and the date of its foundation are also controverted. Archdall
fixes this date at A.D. 1178, and attributes it to Roderick O’Cannanan, prince of
Tyrconnell, but Jongelinus, in his “ Notitia Ab. Ord. Cist.” tells us that high
authorities set it down at 1188, while the Annals of Boyle give 1184, which has
been adopted by the Four Masters, who say :—‘* The monastery of Asseroe was

anted to God and St. Bernard by Flaherty O’Muldory, Lord of Kinell-Connell,
for the good of his soul.” Should one be disposed to follow this authority—
weighty no doubt—he must conclude that Archdall has made a mistake both in
the name of the founder and in the date of its foundation.

It may be useful to note here, consecutively, the remarkable facts connected with
this illustrious monastery as they are given in the Annals :—‘* A.D. 1241. Donnell
More O’Donnell, Lord of Tirconnell . . . . died in the monastic habit, victorious
over the world and the devil, and was interred with honour and respect in the
monastery of Assaroe, in the harvest time. A.D. Thomas O’Heraghty, Abbot of
Asseroe, died. A.D. 1319. Thomas, son of Cormac O'Donnell, Abbot of Ash-
roe, was then elected to the bishopric of Raphoe. A.D. 1333. Hugh, the son
of Donnell Oge O'Donnell, Lord of Tirconnell, . . . . the most eminent man of
his time for jurisdiction, laws, and regulations, and the chief patron of the hospi-
tality and munificence of the west of Europe, died, victorious over the world and
the devil, in the habit of a monk, and was interred with great honour and solem-
nity in the monastery of Assaroe. A.D. 1377. The monastery of Assaroe (near
Ballyshannon) was bumed. A.D. 1398. A great army was led by Niall Oge
O'Neill, King of Kinel-Owen, and the sons of Henry O'Neill, against O'Donnell,
and arrived at Assaroe ; and they plundered the monastery of all its riches. A.D.
1422. Turlough, the son of Niall Garv O’Donnell, Lord of Tirconnell, took the
habit of a monk in the monastery of Assaroe, after gaining victory over the
present world. A.D. 1450. Edmond, abbot of Assaroe, died. A.D. 1502. Art
O’Gallagher and John O'Loiste, two abbots, who contended with each for the
abbacy of Assaroe, died on the one day. A.D. 1519. Edmond Duv O'Dwyer,
abbot of Assaroe, died. A.D. 1550. The abbot of Assaroe (John, the son
of Donnell Roe O’Gallagher) died on the 29th of April. A.D. Cosnahmach
O’Clery was buried under the asylum of God and St. Bernard in the monastery
of Assaroe.” Mr. Allingham, a poet of high repute, and a native of Ballyshannon,
has given us a true portrait of the Abbey Asharoe as it is at the present day :—

“A little rocky rivulet runs murmuring to the tide,
Singing a song of ancient days in sorrow not in pride ;
The borc-tree and the lightsome ash across the portal grow,
And heaven itself is now the roof of the abbey Asharoe.”

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-205.png ---
County of Donegall. 177

troubles of the world, expired on his bolster in this abbey,
and was therein interred this year!

1280. The abbot Laurence O’Laghtnan was removed from
this abbey to that of Boyle about this time.*

1319. The abbot Thomas M‘Cormac O’Donnell, a man
eminent for learning, hospitality, and every virtue, was pro-
moted to the bishoprick of Raphoe, and died in the year
1337-

1348. Nicholas O’Hedram, a monk of this abbey, was made
bishop of Achonry ; he died in 1373.™

1377. The abbey was consumed this year by fire.”

1379. O’Donnell, King of Tyrconnell, was killed by his
own brother, and buried in this abbey.°

1398. Neile Oge O’Neile plundered the abbey about this
time.?

1550. On the 24th of April died the abbot Edmund, the
son of Donogh.9

By an inquisition taken in the 31st year of Queen Elizabeth,
the abbot was found to have been seized of the site of this
abbey and willage, containing three acres, in which was a
cemetery, a church and steeple, partly covered with shingles
and partly with thatch, the ruins of a dormitory, three other
stone buildings, and four small cottages, with their curtilages,
and which, without repairing, were of no value. Fifty-three
quarters of land, and the fourth of half a quarter, being near
the abbey and the demesne thereof; it was divided into
various ballyboes (each containing the eighth part of a quarter)
and were called Laghye, Behy, Ardgyllew, Tullaghcorke,
Brownekylly Leghdaghtan, Cashill, alias Lack, Crevaghtartan,
Downeshiragh, Ballynageragh, Groghan, Musseboy, Crevemon-
nagh, Tawnagh, Irren, Killecroghan, Ardpatin Cashill Tully,
Dacoolcallows, Tullaghmore, Drumskilly, Laghye, Altyn,
Towre, Cavan Egarre, the castle of Bellyke, Ballynamannagh,
Carrowcashill, Carrowcorlea, Garvannagh, Carrowclough, Car-
rowtobber, Coughter, Knader, Grange of Daryragh in Tyre-
baan, Grange ‘of Tawnyshyntallen in O’Boyle’s country,
Grange near the mountain of Kyseure, Grange of Kilter-
nan in Fermanagh, being three ballyboes, the greatest part
thereof stoney mountain, of the value of 47 115, 4d. sterling,
an annual rent of 3s. 4d. out of the island Ilan Raghyn
Ivyme, in the country of Tyrebaan; ten weirs on the river
Erne, value £10 sterling. The abbot had the liberty, yearly,
of having two fishermen to take salmon during the season

' Annal. Munst. * M‘Geogk. » Tr. Th., p. 509. War. Mss., vol. 51. _™ War.
Bps., p. 659. ® Annal. Loughkee. °Annal. All Saints, King, p. 403. © M'Geogh.
4 Annal. Donegal.

N

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-206.png ---
178 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

at Asseroe, on the river Erne; he was also entitled to the
second draught of every one fishing there when they began
to fish, also to have a boat to take salmon and other fish
from the island to the sea, value yearly 3s. 4d., the rectory
of Tyreragh, extended from the abbey lands to the moun-
tain of Barnsmore, being the third part of all the tithes
(salmon excepted, which did belong to the bishop), which
rectory is valued at thirty shillings sterling ; the abbot and
convent had three parts of all the tithes of the quarter of
Callamurry, Cashill, Moyntir, Dooyne, five ballyboes of
Carroshee, the quarter of Carroshee, six ballyboes of Bally-
mayard, and the quarter of Kildony and Kilbanyn, which
were worth, besides the stipends of the curates, £11 35. 8d.
sterling.”

Bailemegrabhartaich ; This church, in Inisoen and diocess
of Derry, was founded by St. Columb ;* and another monas-
tery of the same name was founded by the same Saint in
Tir-zedha,* in the diocess of Raphoe, where the celebrated
relique of St. Columb, called Cathach, was said to have been
preserved."

These monasteries are now unknown.

Bally Mac Swiney; Near Castle Doe, in the barony of
Kilmacrenan.

A monastery was founded here by M‘Swiney, for friars
of the order of St. Francis.”

A few remains of this building are yet extant.*

Bellaghan ,* Near Lifford; there was a Franciscan friary
here,’ but we cannot find any particular account of it.

* King, p. 403. * Tr. Th., p. 495. * The Barony of Tyrhugh. %Tr. Th.,
2. 495. ~ War. Mon. * Pocockes Fournal, ¥ War. Mon. and Allemande.

* Bellaghan.—This, no doubt, is the present Ballaghan about a mile from
Manorcunningham, a small town in the heart of a rich and extensive territory
called the Lagan, lying between Letterkenny and Derry. The Lagan—literally
low country—is the identical Afoy-/tha, where /th, who led the first Milesian
invasion into Ireland, was met, defeated, and slain by the Tuatha-De-Danaans. It
was on this plain also, according to the Four Masters, was gained Tyrconnell’s
most complete victory over Tyrone. The battle is described at great length in
the Annals un‘ler 4.D. 1557, and may be read there with much interest. The
Tyrconnellian Chief, who inflicted this crushing defeat on Tyrone, was Calvagh
O’Donnell, the same who rose in red rebellion against his father, Manus
O’Donnell, the distinguished author of the Irish Life of St. Colum-Cille. The
unnatural Calvagh, aided by a body of Scottish auxiliaries, took the field against
his father, made him prisoner, and confined him in one of his castles. Shane
O'Neill, surnamed the Proud, thought this a favourable opportunity for humbling
Tyrconnell, and accordingly crossed the Foyle in great force. The ill-used
father quenched all vengeful feeling in his breast, and from his lonely prison sent
a message of affection to his ungrateful son. He counselled him strongly to
oppose the invader by stratagem, and not in a pitched battle. The stratagem
succeeded, for one night when O'Neill lay encamped at Ballaghan, Calvagh
stealthily approached, entered the camp without resistance, and slaughtered all

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-207.png ---
County of Donegall. 179

Bothchonais > In Inis-eoguin ; this was formerly a great
and celebrated abbey’, of which St. Coemgal, brother to St.
Cele Christus, who died a.D. 721, and a different person from
the Saint of Bangor, was abbot.*

1 Act, SS., ~. 108. *1d., p. 454.

that came in his way, O’Neill having narrowly escaped by the back of his tent,
and fled with but two or three ‘ his attendants to his own territory. But
O'Donnell was not permitted long to enjoy the fruits of his victory. He soon
after coquetted with the English whom he treacherously introduced into Derry,
where they pillaged and profaned the Monastery. For this crime, as well as for
his unnatural conduct towards his father, God visited him with signal punishment.
In A.D. 1566, his life was cut short by a sharp and sudden death. It is thus
described by the Four Masters under that date :—‘‘O’Donnell (Calvagh, the son
of Manus, son of Hugh Dey, son of Hugh Roe, son of Niall Garv, son of Tur-
lough of the Wine) fell (dead) from his horse, in the beginning of winter, #.¢., on
the 26th October, on the public road, between Baile-aghadh-chaoin, and the church
of Rath (Ryemoghy), in the midst of his cavatry, without the slightest starting,
stumbling, shying, or prancing of his horse, after his return from England, where
he had been that same year.” Bellaghan is the contraction for Baile-aghadh-
chaoin, that is, the place of the pleasant or beautiful aspect. Every trace of the
monastery is now removed, for the present ruin is evidently of a spacious Gothic
church, about which the people have no tradition whatever. The well Cabhartach,
mentioned in the ‘‘ Annals” as being near to it, must be the curious old well,
called Tober Slaun (healing well), in the townland of Drimoghill. The church of
Rath, or Ryemoghy, not far from it, and where O'Donnell met his sad fate, is
noticed by Colgan at page 510 of his Acta Sanctorum. He tells us that St.
Cruthnecants, the tutor of St. Columba, was, “on a certain solemnity of our
Lord’s nativity, invited by a certain holy bishop, Brujacius, son of Degadius, to
go to him to the church of Rath-Enaigh (now Rye or Raymochy), in the territory
of Tir-enna, and brought with him the holy youth, Columba. After they arrived the
office was recited, but the holy Cruthnecanus, worn with old age and the fatigue
of his journey, was obliged to stop in the middle of the long psalm, ‘ Miseri-
cordias Domini in eternum contabo,’ when the boy Columba, immediately took up
the psalm, just where St. Cruthnecanus left off, and continued to recite his every
alternate verse till the office was concluded, though he had neverbeen taught even to
read this or any other psalm.” Ryemochy is now the name of one of the three parishes
which make up the Lagan—a territory of large extent and great fertility. Here
the plantation of Ulster fixed its most permanent abode, for to this day it is almost
entirely occupied by the planter’s descendants, about whom O’Donovan makes
a very singular remark in his manuscript notes, which are to be seen in the Royal
Irish Academy. He says, that probably the Scotch Murrays came from this
territory, because its chief, in A.D. 1267, was Hugh O’Murray. Moreover, that
from an early period a considerable number of the Tyrconnell families emigrated
to Scotland and returned with the plantation; they emigrated as McSweeny's,
McLaughlin’s, &c., and they returned as Maxwells, McCleans, &c.

_® Bothchonais. This is a very old foundation. It was endowed by Conas, for
it is called after him, and he was the husband of Darerca, St. Patrick's sister,
and mother of two holy bishops, Mael and Maelchu. In the beginning of the
eighth century St. Coemgellus, the brother of St. Christicola, governed this monas-
tery, and from this time down to the middle of the eleventh century it is mentioned
in the ‘‘ Annals” under three distinct dates, viz.: ‘A.D. 850, Ceaunfzladh, son of
Ultan, wise man of Both-chonais, died; A.D. 987, Dubhdabhoireann, archinneach
of Both-chonais, died; and A.D. 1049, Tuathal Ua h Uail, archinneach of Both-
chonais, died.” Colgan has a very interesting chapter on it in his Acta Sanctorum,
page 108, where he speaks of it in connection with St. Melisa, as once famous
and celebrated, and his testimony is the more valuable because of the fact, that
he was himself a native of Inishowen, where this monastery flourished. ‘ Both-
chonais,” he says, ‘‘ was formerly a great and celebrated monastery in the diocese

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-208.png ---
180 Anctent Monasteries of Ireland.

A.D. 987. Died the archdeacon Dubhdaboirean.™

There are still preserved in the hands of the religious in
this neighbourhood, many books which formerly belonged to
the abbey, written by the hand of St. Mzelisa, who was edu-
cated here, and died 16th of January, A.D. 1086.*

Clonleigh ;* two miles north of Lifford, on the river Foyle,
and in the barony of Raphoe. St. Columb built the church

= Ann. Four Masters. * Act. SS., p. 108.

of Derry. It stood in the territory of Inishowen, but the place is now profaned,
and a great many of the books, written by the hand of St. Melisa, are still iu the
Possession of some pious men of the neighbourhood.” That Inishowen was the
territory in which this monastery was situated there is no doubt, but Inishowen is
a large extent of country, and hence the difficulty of identifying the exact spot
in it on which Both-chonais stood. O'Donovan, in one of his editorial remarks
on the text of the ‘‘ Annals,” confidently places it at Templemoyle, in the parish
of Culdaff, but he subsequently withdrew this pian to give place to another,
to the effect that Both-chonais is obviously the old grave-yard in the townland of
Binnion, parish of Clonmany, and barony of Inishowen. I see that this opinion is
the one adopted by the editor of a manuscript ‘‘by Duald Mac Firbis on some
Bishops of Ireland,” published in the proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, 1870.
In this manuscript the following entry is made :—“ Cele-Christ, of Cill-Cele-
Christ, 3 March.” I think, then, we may regard the old cemetery of Binnion as
the site of the monastery of Both-chonais, for O'Donovan made a personal in-
spection of the place, and what he saw in the old grave-yard must have forced
him into a correction of what he previously considered a well-grounded opinion.
The St. Melisa of whom Colgan speaks as the brightest ornament of Both-
chonias, was also a native of Inishowen, and of the royal Engenian line. His
family, it appears, gave many distinguished ecclesiastics to the churches of Derry
and Armagh. His learning was as remarkable as his sanctity, for he was the
distinguished author of a great many valuable books, some of which, Colgan tells
us, were in his own possession, and many more of them in the possession of pious
men in the neighbourhood. Not one of these books is now to be found ; they
have disappeared, and no one in Clonmany or Culdaff knows anything about
them. Why is this? Whence comes it that every record and every vestige of
some of the most celebrated ecclesiastical establishments in this land have been
literally wiped out? Colgan, in the passage I quoted, furnishes the answer.
He says they have been “ profaned.”

* Clonleigh—One of those numerous seats of learning which made Ireland the
teacher of Europe for many centuries, and which, in the language of the Vener-
able Bede, ‘‘induced people of every country to flock to Ireland, as to a
mart of learning.” The Monastery of Clonleigh was suppressed by Edward
VL. and there is a long account of this fact in the Inquisitions. ‘On the
toth day of December, and 27th of the reign of Henry VIII., late King of
England, there was a certain college or religious house called Clonleigh, situate,
lying, and being in the parts of Tirconnell, lately called the county of Dunagall,
near the river of Loughfoile, not far from the Castle of Liffer, and there are
situate and lying there the ruined walls of the same late college or the religious
house, which college, in the 2oth year of the reign of the late King Edward VI.,
was abandoned, dissolved, and suppressed. The Provost of the said late college or
religious house of Clonelighe, at the time of the abandoning, dissolution, and
suppression of the same, was seized in his lordship, as of fee. in right of the said
late house, and of two quarters of land, with the appurtenances to said college
adjacent, together with all tithes of the same, and of two parts of the tythes of
the fish taken in the river aforesaid, near the land aforesaid, and near the land of
Liffer. The said provost of the college aforesaid, and other inhabitants upon
the land of the college aforesaid, were a long time, before the dissolution of same,
accustomed, from time to time, to fish in and upon the river aforesaid, by license

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-209.png ---
County of Donegall, 181

‘ of Cluain-laodh, where St. Lugad, one of his disciples, is
honoured.» St. Carnech was abbot and bishop here about
the year 530, and was succeeded by Cassan, whose successor
was Massan. Clonleigh, we apprehend, was anciently called
Cruachanligean, or Druimligean,*® but we cannot determine
which.
This is now a parish church in the diocess of Derry.°
> Tr. Th., p. 495. ” Id., p. 494. °ld., p. 782.

from Lord O'Donnell, in that part, obtained with one small cyméa (cot) by night.
and only at ebbing of the water. The premises were of the yearly value, beyond
reprisal, of 3s. 4d. money of Ireland. By reason of certain statutes made, con-
firmed, and in this kingdom of Ireland established, all the premises appertain
to the now king, as annexed to his crown of Ireland. From the time of the
dissolution and suppression of the said late college or religious house of Clonlighe,
divers Bishops of Derry from time to time received, took, and raised all and sin-
gular the profits of the premises, until the time of the taking of this inquisition,
but of what right the jurors know not.” From this description it is evident that
Clonleighe was at the time of its suppression a vast and well endowed Ecclesias-
tical establishment, with Colleges, Schools, Religious House and a Church.
It was but natural therefore that it should give its name to the present impor-
tant parish of Clonleigh, in which is situated Strabane (white plain), one of the
most prosperous towns in the North of Ireland.

The old church of Clonleigh is still standing, bearing on its aged walls evidences
ofits past greatness. Colgan, in his notice of St. Cairneach, patron of Hy-Niall, gives
a prominent place to Clonleigh :—‘ Hagiographers.” he says, “ generally record
that St. Cairnechus was a bishop, but in what see he discharged his episcopal func-
tions they have not made known. I think, however, it was inhis monastery. For
that he was an abbot and had his monastery either in the place called Cruachan
Lighean, situated at the frith or arm of the sea, commonly called Loch Febhail,
and near the town of Liffer, or surely in some adjacent place, an ancient writer
has stated, who says that the land of Cruachan Lighean was bequeathed to him in
the will of Erca, his mother's sister, and daughter of Loarnus. Wherefore, since
in that land there are two churches, one called Donaghmore De Magh Jthe, and
another C/uain Laodh, the one towards the west, and the other towards the north,
not far from each other. I think that in one or other of these churches he dis-
charged the office of abbot and bishop also.”—Act. SS. p. 782. In the parish of
Clonleighe there is a townland called Croaghan, and a hill of the same name
about two miles from Lifford ; this, undoubtedly, is the land of Cruaghan Lighean,
which Colgan says was bequeathed to St. Carnechus. The hill is memorable in
the brightest period of our history; it was upon its great slopes Red Hugh
O’Donnell drew out his army in 1599. and challenged Dowcra. the English general,
to battle. The men of Tyrconnell still regard this hill with a deep feeling of
veneration. It stirs up within them, as they pass near it, the memory of their
illustrious chieftain who, to use the words of a brilliant writer, ‘‘is one of the
brightest and purest characters of any history.” The lamented D'Arcy M‘Gee, in
his ‘‘ History of Ireland,” p. 450, closes his beautiful sketch of Red Hugh in these
words :—‘‘ His youth, his eaily captivity, his princely generosity, his daring
courage, his sincere piety, won the hearts of all who came in contact with him.
He was the sword, as O'Neill was the brain, of the Ulster Confederacy—the
Ulysses and Achilles of the war—they fought side by side, without jealousy or
envy, for almost as long a period as their prototypes had spent in besieging Troy.”

But Colgan, in speaking of Clonleighe, makes special allusion to another church,
whichhecalls Donaghmore De Magh the, and places its situation to the west of Clon-
leighe. The ruins of this church also exist. It isa very old church, older than Clon-
leighe, for its name occurs in the Tripartite Life of St. Patrick, and its foundation is
attributed to him. This fact I have found in the following passage :—'‘ The man
of God (St. Patrick) determined to visit another son of King Niall, whose name
was Eugene, and to announce the faith of Christ unto him. He, therefore, began

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-210.png ---
182 Ancient Monasteries of freland.

Cluainenach ; an abbey was founded here by St. Columb,
who made St. Columb Crag, his disciple, abbot of it. This
is now a chapel in Inisoen, situate three miles north of Derry,
near the ruins of O’Cahane’s castle.4

Clonmany; situate near the sea, in the barony of that
name. St. Columb built the abbey of Cluainmaine, which
was formerly a very rich monastery’, but is now a parish
church in the diocess of Derry.‘

Conwall ;® has its situation on or near the river Swilly, in
the barony of Kilmacrenan.

Fiachry was abbot of Congbail, in the territory of Gleann-
suilige, in Tyrconnel, and of Clonard, in the county of Meath;

4 Liber Visit. * Tr. Th. p. 373, 489, and 494. * Liber Visit.

his journey through that great gap which is called Barmesmore Tire Aodha (the
great gap of Tyrhugh), and through the territory called Afagh /the, and came to
the place in that country where he built the church commonly called Donaghmore,
over which he appointed one of his disciples, Dubdubaun, the son of Corcan.”

In the manuscript of Duald Mac Firbis, which has been noticed already, Clon-
leigh is called Tech-na-Comairce, and the fact is recorded therein that seven
bishops came from it. The following is the entry :—‘‘ The seven bishops from
Tech-na Comairce, May 28.”

5 Comwall ; O’Clery says this is Con-baile, that is, Compagns in the original.
Like other famous monasteries in ancient Ireland, this of Conwall created the

‘owth of a considerable town around it, but unlike Glendalough or Clonmacnoise,
it has left hardly any remains of its former greatness. Of the monastery nothing
now remains but a few old walls in the centre of the graveyard, which occupies
the space on which Conwall stood. These walls have crumbled under the wasting
action of time, and are at present almost level with the ground. Close to one of
them, on the south side, is a very curious tombstone shaped like the lid of a coffin,
with a cross and other sacred emblems—evidently the result of a very old style of
art—engraved upon it. Some illustrious men are mentioned by the Four Masters
as having died in this monastery. Under A.D. 913. ‘‘ Scannlan Airchinneach, of
Congbhail-glinne-Suilighe, died ;” and under A.D. 1204, ‘‘Sitric O’Struthen,
Erenagh of Conwal, that is, head of the Hy-Murtele, and chief man of all the
Clann-Snedhgbile for his worth, died, after exemplary penance, and was interred
in the church which he had himself founded.” As I said, a considerable town
grew up around the monastery ; this town demands a special notice, for it was the
theatre of one of the most remarkable events recorded in the history of Tirconnell.
This extraordinary incident is related by the Four Masters under A.D. 1258, with
all its details ; I shall give the substance of this narrative :—The famous battle of
Creadran-Cillé, in northern Sligo, was fought between Geoffrey, or Godfrey,
O’Donnell, Lord of Tirconnell, and the renowned Maurice Fitzgerald, the then
Lord Deputy of Ireland. Both leaders met in a personal encounter. O’Donnell
gained the advantage, but he carned his death wound from the combat. About a

ear after, while he was still lying ill of his wounds on an island in the secluded

ugh Beathath, or Lough Veagh, messengers came from O'Neil, demanding
hostages and other tokens of submission. O'Donnell’s answer was to summon the
men of Tirconnell from all quarters to wait on him. Having assembled at his
call, he ordered them, as he was not able to lead them, to prepare for him the
coffin in which his remains should be buried, to place them therein, and to carry
him into the very midst of his people. He told them to fight bravely, as he was
amongst them, and not to fear the power of their enemies. They then proceeded
in battle array at the command of their lord, to meet O’Neil’s force, till both armies
confronted each other on the banks of the Swilly. After a hard-fought battle the
Tyronians were routed, and the men of Tyrconnell, returning from the field, laid

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-211.png ---
County of Donegall. 183

he died on the 8th of February, between the years 587 and
6528 i and Sitrick O’Trutle, archdeacon of Congbail, died in
1204.

This also is a parish church, in the diocess of Raphoe.!
¢ Cnodain ; \ies to the North of the river Erne, near Astrath,
in the barony of Boylagh and Bannagh. St. Conan, or
Connan, was abbot here about the end of the 6th century.*

© Act. SS., p. 406. » Ann. Munst. ' Liber Visit. * Act. SS., p. 563.

down the coffin in which Godfrey lay on the street of the village of Conwall, and
the brave chieftain immediately expired. The incident is thus expressed in a
thrilling and popular ballad :—

“Now proud and high Tirconnell shouts, but bleeding, on the gale
Upon the ear ascendeth now asad and sullen wail ;
For on that field, as back they bore, from chasing of the foe,
The spirit of O’Donnell fled !—oh, woe for Ulster, woe !

“* Yet died he there all gloriously—a victor in the fight—
A chieftain at his people’s head, a warrior in his might.
They dug him there a fitting grave, upon that field of pride—
And a lofty cairn raised above, by fair Lough Swilly’s side.”

Within easy distance of Conwall is the Scariff-Hollis, made memorable by the
Annals, It was the chief pass into the Highlands of Tirconnell, and therefore the
scene of many a deadly conflict. Shane O’Neill (the Proud) fled across it with the
remnant of his gallant army after his signal defeat by Hugh Duv O’Donnell, and
in the now ruined castle on the bank over it that “Caffar, the son of Manus, son
of Hugh Duy, son of Hugh Roe, Tanist of Tirconnell, a man of a bounteous,
munificent, and truly hospitable character, and the favourite of the distres~ed and
the learned of the North of Ireland, died in his own mansion seat of Sgurd/sholis,
on the 15th of October, and was buried at Donegal,” (Annals). But a melancholy
interest is attached to Scariff-Hollis from the fact, that here Bishop Heber
McMahon was driven to fight or surrender to the English under Sir Charles Coote
and Colonel Venables on the 21st of June, 1650. The bishop chose to fight rather
than surrender, whereupon the English cavalry, more than twice as numerous as
his, all but annihilated his little army. A most interesting account of this
terrible fight is given in the Curiosa Hibernica; it is from the pen of Colonel
Henry McTully O'Neil, who served under General Owen O’Neil, the commander
of the Irish army at this time. “ Being,” he says, “under cure of my wounds, I
was not an eye-witness of the action at Letterkenny ; but what I have by hearsay,
and by an officer that was in the action, who assured me that the bishop was 4,000
strong when he marched to Tyrconnell. When the army came to Letterkenny,
Colonel Miles Swiney made an humble request of the bishop to give him and his
regiment leave to march to Castledoe to try if he could gain it for their future
security in that part of the country, which was granted, but was wanting after-
wards, as many others were that were left in garrisons up and down in those parts,
which very much weakened the army the day of the action. It appeared to this
gentleman that the enemy’s horse of Scotch and English were as many as the Irish

ad of horse and foot. The Scotch who were protected by the bishop in those
parts, and particularly Colonel Saunderson, bore a great share in defeating him
the last day, the first day’s engagement being a fortnight before, was thus :—The
bishop’s army coming to a pass on the river between Lifford and Derry, the tide
beginning to flow, the colonels were commanded to cast dice as to who would
venture over the ford with his regiment first. Phelim McTuol O'Neil, though
his turn was that day to be in the rear, said he would cast no lots, but would
venture over, which he did with some difficulty, and beat off the horse on the other
side, whereby he gave the whole army liberty to march over leisurely, some being

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-212.png ---
184 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Domnachglinne Tochuir ,6) St. Patrick founded this church,
and made Maccarthen, brother to the Saint of Clogher, bishop
of it. This is now a parish church in Inisoen, and remarkable
for the great resort of pilgrims on St. Patrick’s day; there
is still preserved here the Saint’s penitential bed, and many

1 Was called anciently Domnach mor muighe tochuir.

forced toswim. All that night they were forced to stand to their arms ; next day
Sir Charles Coote appeared with his formidable army, and drew them up by a
Danish fort upon a narrow pass leading to Derry. The bishop also drew up
his army in battle array, both armies being within musket-shot of each other. Capt.
Taylor and Capt. Cathcart, two of the best horse officers the enemy had, marched
with two strong brigades of horse towards the rear of our army in a full career,
who were repulsed bravely by our horse and some foot, and beaten back into their
own body, with the loss of both their fine captains, which aided most of this day’s
action, both armies withdrawing till the fatal day at Letterkenny, some while after.
The enemy in this interval preparing and increasing till the last blow was given,
wherein we lost, after quarters given, Colonel Henry Roe O'Neil, Colonel Hugh
Maguire, Colonet Hugh McMahon, Art. Oge O'Neil, McShane Deveny, and
Colonel Phelim McTuol O'Neil. Quarters were made good to move but for
George Sexton, Quarter-Master General, who was put to death afterwards at
Carrickfergus by order of the High Court of Justice ; Major-General O’Cahan was
killed on the spot, with a great many prime officers, and about 1,500 private men ;
the bishop taken two days after by Major King, near Inniskillen, and executed
afterwards in Inniskillen. After this, every one shifted for himself the best he
could, except some parties who kept out about Sleive Russell, im Ulster, no
eneral protection granted.” The place occupied by the monastery of Conwall

as, as 1 remarked, been long used as a burial-place, but sadly neglected until the
present Bishop of Raphoe, Dr. McVevitt, a short time ago, repaired the wall
around it, furnished it with a fine gate, and, I believe, intends building a mortuary
chapel under the walls of the old monastery.

6 Domnagh-glinne Tochuir, This is another of the foundations of St. Patrick
in these parts. The fact is recorded in the second part of the Tripartite Life of
our National Apostle, chap. cxx., and as the narrative abounds in so much inte-
resting detail, I have thought it worthy of a place here. ‘‘ Returning,” the
writer is speaking of St. Patrick, ‘‘into the territory of Eugenius, which is called
Inis-Eoguin (the island of Eugenius), he came into that part of it which belonged
to Fergusius, the son of Eugenius, and there set about measuring at Achadb-
Droman, a site for a church, but Coelbadius, son of Fergusius, prevented him
and drove him off by violence. Whereupon St. Patrick foretold to him the
disagreeable news of his future punishment, and that one of his race should never
build a dwelling on that site. This prophecy was fulfilled soon after in the

son of Comanius, son of Algasacus, a descendant of the same Coelbadius, for

e began ta build a house at as-wrac-eric, but before he got the roof on, some
of the clergy belonging to the church of Domnach-Mor-Minghe Tochair pulled
it down and rooted up its very foundation. Aidius, the son of Caelbadius,
grieved at the treatment St. Patrick received from his father Coelbadius, went to
the Saint, and pressed him to accept a site for a church in his territory which was.
separated from his brother's patrimony neither by wall nor mound. St. Patrick
readily accepted the kind and pious offer, and at once set about measuring the
site, and laying the foundation of the Church of Domnach-Mor Minghe Tochnir,
in the disposition and arrangement of which he spent forty days, and then leav-
ing therein as bishop, Maccarthen, one of his own disciples, he proceeded east-
wards to Bredach, and there established the Church of Afach-Bile or Moville.”

The spot on which St. Patrick ventured at first _to lay the foundation of this
Church, and from which he was violently thrust by Coelbadius, was, according to
the account given above, close to Zas Mac Eric. According to O'Donovan,
Eas Mac Eric is a ledge of rock in the channel of a river, over which the flood
bounds to precipitate itself again into a basin below. The river, with this inter~
ruption in its channel, still courses through a district in Inishowen. It rises at

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-213.png ---
County of Donegall. 185

other ancient monuments of that kind ; fit objects for the de-
votion of pilgrims. The church is near to Eas-mac-eirc, a
remarkable cataract, which falls from a very high mountain
called Sliabh-snechta, or the Mountain of Snow, into the bay
called Traighe-brege.™

™ Tr. Th., p. 181.

the base of a mountain called Sliabh Sneachta, flows through the parish of
Donagh, and empties itself into the bay or estuary of Trawbreaga. In their
rapid flow the waters at a certain place meet with a rocky obstruction, which
makes them fret and leap over in a sheet of white foam; here, on the bank,
stood the Church of Domnach-Mor-Tochair. It is a lovely little glen where
the antiquarian will still find something to engage his attention. At the head
of it there is an odd-looking stone, and with it is connected a curious local
tradition. This glen, it appears, was enchanted ground, and was guarded by a
terrible serpent called Zochair. The story runs, that St. Patrick, on venturing
to enter the glen, was confronted by the serpent, whereupon he seized his crozier,
and, with the sharp end of it, cut some sacred emblems on a rough stone,*,which
he no sooner fixed at the entrance of the glen than the serpent disappeared. The
church of Domnach-Mor-Tochair has fallen from its ancient dignity and impor-
tance. St. Patrick made it an episcopal seat ; it is now, and has been for a long
time, the parish of Donagh in Inishowen. This parish, however, has been amply
compensated for the loss of its ancient dignity by the fame it has acquired from
being the birth-place of Colgan, the distinguished author of the Acta Sanctorum.
He was proud of his native parish, for he gives it a prominent place in one of his
writings, and mentions, with evident satisfaction, the fact of himself having been born
in it. In one of his notes on the “ Tripartite Life of St. Patrick,” he says, speaking
of Donagh :—‘ This was formerly a Bishop’ 's see of which the first bishop was
Mac Catthen, the brother of Mac Carthen, bishop of Clogher. /# the lands of this
very church Iwas born ; it is at this day only a parish church in the diocese of
Derry, and commonly called Domnach Glinne Tochair. It is frequented yearly
by a great concourse of people from the neighbouring country, and by pilgrims,
especially on the festival of St. Patrick, patron of the place. Here is to be seen
the penitential bed of St. Patrick, enclosed by rough stones, and there are other
ancient baat of that kind, which are frequently visited by a great number
of devout peo; The ancient monuments and relics of St. Patrick, which
Colgan here met des to with a sort of enthusiasm, as being numerous and well-
preserved in his time, hardly exist now. What has been done with them I can-
not imagine, unless we suppose that they were dug up, shattered and scattered
abroad to make room for the foundation of a Protestant church, which is now the
tomb of what remains of the once famous Domnach Glinne Tochair. In the tower
of this church there is a bell which the people believe to be the identical one used
by St. Patrick in the old church, but this is a groundless and a foolish impression,
for the bell does not possess a single mark that could lay claim to such antiquity.
In the townland of Carrowtemple close by, there is a very old stone slab with
figures sculptured on it, but they are worn into indistinctness by the wasting
action of time.

Among St. Patrick's disciples were two brothers of the same name, MacCarthen;
one he appointed to govern this church of Dommach Glinne Tochair, and the
other that of Clogher. In the Acta Sanctorum, p. 737, an incident is told of these
two brothers, which, because of its connection with the churches they governed,
is worth giving. The two brothers, when engaged in preaching with St. Patrick
in Connaught, ventured, without consulting their master, to consecrate a bishop.
The saint soon heard of the fact, and he then gave expression to the following
prediction :—“ Sedes unius vestrum pace et concordia, alterius vero potentia et
divitiis carebit.” And Colgan adds:—‘ Quod oraculum esse veracissimum rei
probat eventus : nam sedes Clocharensis discordia et contentionibus ; Domnachen-
sis vero rerum augustia et egestate laborat.”

I think there can be hardly a doubt as to the truth of Colgan’s conclusion, at all
events as regards Domnach Glinne Tochair.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-214.png ---
186 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Donegall ;" is situated in a bay to which it gives name, in
the barony of Tyrhugh, and is a market town and borough
sending burgesses to parliament.

A monastery for Franciscan friars of the strict observance"
was founded here, in the year 1474, by Odo Roe, son of Nial
Garbh O’Donnell, Prince of Tyrconnell; and by his wife
Fionguala (Penelope), daughter of Connor na srona O’Brien,
Prince of Thomond.™" Odo, the founder, died July the 28th,

2 War. Mon. ™ Ann. Four Masters.

7 Donegall. The abbey of Donegall may be fairly considered the most famous
in Ireland, for it was the dwelling place of the ‘‘ Four Masters,” and in it they
compiled their celebrated ‘‘ Annals.” The late lamented O’Curry, who was a
distinguished professor in the Catholic University, has left us, in one of his lec-
tures delivei in that institution, a beautiful sketch of this remarkable work and
its illustrious authors. ‘‘In whatever point of view,” says the lamented Professor,
“‘we regard these Annals, they must awaken feelings of deep interest and res-
pect, not only as the largest collection of national, civil, military, and family his-
tory ever brought together, in this or perhaps any other country, but also as the final
winding-up of the affairs of a people who had preserved their mationality and
independence for a space of over two thousand years, till their complete over-
throw about the time at which this work was compiled. It is no easy matter
for an Irishman to suppress feelings of deep emotion when speaking of the com-
pilers of this great work, and especially when he considers the circumstances under
which, and the objects for which, it was undertaken. The chief of these now
called Four Masters, was Michael 0'Cleary, and his collaborators were Ferfessius
O'Maelchonaire, Peregrime or Cugory O’Dubhghennain, men of consummate
learning in the antiquities of the country, and of approved faith, and to these,
subsequently. was added the co-operation of other distinguished antiquarians.
‘The great object,’ says Doctor O’Connor, ‘of the Four Masters is to give
chronological dates, and, with the exceptions above, nothing can be more accurate.
The years of foundations and destructions of churches and castles, the obituaries
of remarkable persons, the inaugurations of kings, the battles of chiefs, the con-
tests of clans, the ages of bards, abbots, bishops, &c., are given with a m
fidelity which leaves nothing to be wished for but some details of manners. which
are the grand desideratum in the chronicles of the British Islands.’ With all
that Doctor O’Connor hasso judiciously said here I fully agree,” continues O’Curry.
“ A book consisting of 11,000 quarto pages, beginning with the year of the world
2242, ending with the year of our Lord’s incarnation 1616, thus covering the im-
mense space of 4500 years of a nation’s history, must be dry and meagre of detail
in some, if not in all parts of it. And although the learned compilers had at their
disposal, or within their reach, an immense mass of historic details, still the
circumstances under which they wrote were so unfavourable, that they appear to
have exercised a sound discretion, and one consistent with the economy of time
and of their resources, when they left the details of our very early history in the
safe keeping of such ancient original records as from remote ages preserved them,
and collected as much as they could make room for of the events of more modern
times, in which they lived themselves. . . . The last part of the Annals was
evidently intended to be a history.”

When I said, in the beginning, that this famous chronicle was compiled in the
original abbey, I was wrong ; it was written not in the original monastery, but
in a few cottages built out of the debris of its calcined ruins, after it had been
burned by the English in the September of 1601, nearly two centuries after its
original foundation. The circumstances of this conflagration are a matter of
history. The young Red Hugh O’Donnell, after a successful escape from his
Jong and dreary imprisonment in Dublin Castle, hastened to his native mountains of
Tyrconnell, put himself at the head of his brave clansmen, who gathered to
welcome him, and was soon sweeping the English from the positions they had

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-215.png ---
County of Donegall. 187

1505.0 Menelaus M‘Carmacan, the bishop of Raphoe, died in
the habit of a Franciscan on the 9th of May, 1515, and was
buried in this monastery’. Roderic O’Donnell, bishop of
Derry, died in the same habit, on the 8th October, 1550 or 1551,
and was interred here.1 There was in this house a well-chosen
library.”

At a small distance from the town, the remains of this
monastery may be seen. The cloister consists of small arches,

° War. Ms., vol. 34. ? War. Bps., p. 274. %1d., p. 291. * War. Mon.

gained. But he was suddenly stopped in his career of triumph. English gold
and not English valour paralyzed the smashing might of this gallant young
chieftain. Dowcra, the English general, was established with a powerful force in
Derry, and Red Hugh had arrived before the city to dislodge him, when he was
suddenly summoned away to crush the English armies in Connaught. He left
his brother-in-law, the active Nial Garv, to watch Dowcra, and taking with him a
division of the army, marched into Connaught, purposing to return as soon as he
accomplished his mission thcre. But he was sadly disappointed. He had not
been long absent when his base-souled kinsman, ial, betrayed him for a bribe,
which he accepted from Dowcra. To consummate his traitorous defection, Nial
actually put himself at the head of the English troops, marched to Lifford, where,
having occupied O’Donnell’s castle, he proceeded to Donegall, seized the monastery
and threw up fortfications around it. The friars fled. The sad intelligence
reached Red Hugh in Connaught. Swearing vengeance against the false Nial he
hastened to Donegall and laid siege to the monastery. Nial was brave, and re-
sisted with stubborn courage. On the night of the 19th September a fire broke
out in the building. Hugh Roe seized the occasion for an assault. The men on
both sides fought like lions. All through that night did the fierce struggle last,
the conflagration adding a ghastly horror to the wild work of death, till at length,
in the early morning, Nial, with the survivors of the garrison, retreated, keeping
along the strand, under cover of an English ship in the harbour, and took
refuge in the neighbourhood abbey at Magherabeg. Donegall Abbey never
recovered from the ruin of that night. After some years, when the terrible war
between Hugh Roe and the English had come to an end, the friars began to
creep out from their hiding places, and by degrees establish themselves in some
cottages which they built among the ruins of their late home. In these cottages
was written the Annals of the Four Masters. O’Donovan, at page 29 of the In-
troduction to his edition of the Annals, gives a curious account of the flight of
the friars from the abbey on the approach of the treacherous Nial Garv. He
tells us that it is taken from a manuscript history of the Franciscans, written by
a Father Purcell, and in the possession of the Franciscans at Louvain. It rans
thus :—‘‘ In the year 1600 we were in the convent of Donegall, forty brothers in
community, and the Divine offices for the night and the day were chanted with
great solemnity. I myself had charge of the sacristy, in which I had forty suits
of vestments with all their appurtenances, and many of them were of cloth of
gold and of silver, some were interwoven and ornamented with gold, all the rest
were silk. There were eighteen silver chalices of large size, all gilt except two ;
there were two ciboriums (or the most holy Sacrament.” Father Purcell then
proceeds to tell that at the approach of the English the brothers fled away, and
that he himself carried with him this altar furniture in a boat, all which, not
long after, fell into the hands of Oliver Lambert, the English Governor of Con-
naught, who converted the chalices into profane uses, and destroyed the vest-
ments.

After the peace made between Roderick O'Donnell and the King of England,
the former set about rebuilding the monastery, but, notwithstanding that his life
was in danger, he fled with O’Neill to Flanders, and thus the work was not pro-
ceeded with. Ware says this convent was famous for a well-stored library, which

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-216.png ---
188 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

supported by couplets of pillars on a basement ; in one part
are two narrow passages, one over the other, about four feet
wide, ten long, and seven high; they seem to have been
places, for depositing of valuable effects in times of danger ;
the upper one is covered with stones laid along on the beams
of stone that cross it, and the lower one with stones laid
across on the walls; each of them are exactly after the
Egyptian manner of building ; and ina building over it are
plain marks of a regular Roman pediment, although some
other building had been erected against it.*

" Bp. Pococke’s Fournal,

O'Donovan conjectures was destroyed in the conflagration which has been
described. When, and by whom this venerable abbey was first founded is
recorded in the Annals under A.D. 1474, where the following entry is made:—
‘*The Monastery of Donegal was commenced by the O’Donnell, :.¢., by Hugh
Roe, son of Nial Garve O’Donnell, and his wife, Finola, the daughter of O’Brien
(Conor-na-Srona), and was granted by them to God and the friars of St. Francis,
for the prosperity of their own souls, and that the monastery might be a burial
place for themselves and their descendants, and they not only granted this, but

, also conferred many other gifts upon them.” Its foundation, therefore. belongs to

Nuala O’Connor, the pious wife of Hugh Roe O’Donnell. She died, however,
before it was finished, but Fingalla, O’Donnell’s second wife, caused the works to
be continued until the building was completed. It was richly endowed by
O’Donnell—indeed it seems to have been from the first specially favoured by that
rincely family, some of whom took the habit of St. Francis, and many of whom
ie buried there. Among the illustrious persons who sleep within the abbey
precincts a few are mentioned by the Four Masters :—A.D. 1481; Hugh Maguire,
a general, and perfect gentleman for hospitality, knowledge and nobleness. A.D.
1487; Maurice O’Mulconry, teacher of poetry. A.D. 1494; Gillpatrick Maguire.
A.D. 1503 ; Maguire, #.¢., John, son of Philip, son of Thomas More, #.¢., Gilla-
Duy, the choice of the chieftains of Ireland in his time, the most merciful and
humane of the Irish, the best protector of his country and lands, the most warlike
opponent of inimical tribes and neighbours, the best in jurisdiction, authority,
and regulation, both in church and state, died in his fortress of Enniskillen,
on Sunday, the 7th of the calends of April, after having heard mass, and after
the victory of Unction and Penance, and was buried in the monastery of the
friars of Donegal, which he had selected.”

Other remarkable men also lie buried here ; but not to be tedious, I will select
only one name—a remarkable bishop who governed the diocese of Raphoe in the
beginning of the sixteenth century. He was Menelaus MacCormac, and was
educated at Oxford, where, as Anthony Wood tells us, he went by the coe

Carmgan Hibernicus. After having been Dean of Raphoe for some years, he w
consecrated Bishop of that See, on the 16th of July, 1484, and when he had
fulfilled that high trust with distinguished zeal and ability for thirty-one years,
he died on the 9th of May, 1515. Before his death he begged to be clothed with
the habit of the order of St. Francis, and by his direction he was buried in the
Abbey of Donegal.

What remains at the present time of this famous Abbey is lamentably scanty.
Little though it be, it is, however, sufficient to enable us to determine that it was
a large cruciform building, with a central tower and graceful windows. Of the
cloisters, too, there is left a memorial of thirteen arches, which, with their support-
ing couplets of pillars, yet retain evidences of great beauty and variety of design,
and admirable execution. They are of the small size common in examples of
Irish monastic architecture. But though the material lineaments of this building
are fat sadly effaced, it has left an impress on Irish history indelible as that history
itself.


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-217.png ---
County of Donegall. 189

Drumhome ,? on the bay of Donegall, in the barony of
Tyrehugh.

St. Ernan, who was named also St. Ernoc, or Mernoc, as we
are informed, was abbot of Druimthuoma. He died a very
old man on the first of January about the year 640. This
house had been a celebrated monastery.t Flahertach O’Mal-
dory, King of Tyrconnel, was buried here in 1197."

Drumholm is now a parish in the diocess of Raphoe.”

* Tr. Th., p. 938 and 940. "War. Annal, ~ Liber Visit.

8 Drumhome; in the Irish language it is Druim- Thuama, and in the Latin Dorsum
Thome, the name by which it is designated by Adamnan in his Life of St.
Columba, at the 23rd chap., Book ili., where he narrates the circumstances of
the happy death of St. Columba. He tells us that directly the saint breathed his
last, angels swept down from heaven filling the air with heavenly music, received
the pure soul after it had left its earthly tenement, and brought it with them back
through the clouds into the realm of light from which they had just descended.
While this was being enacted in Iona, a holy old monk, Eman or Emanus, for-
merly adisciple of St. Columbas, had a vision in his monastery of Dorsum Thome,
away in a remote corner of Ireland, in which he distinctly saw the angelic proces-
sion bearing the soul of St. Columba up through the clouds into heaven. Manus
O'Donnell, in his Life of his kinsman, St. Columba, gives an account of this vision
with the same attendant circumstances of its having occurred to St. Ernan of
Dorsum Thoma. To the name is annexed an explanatory note by Colgan, in
which he identifies the monastery. He says :—‘‘ Dorsum Thome was formerly a
celebrated monastery, now called Drumholme in Tyrhugh, a territory of Tircon-
nell, and now only a parish church of the diocese of Raphoe.” In another place
he gives a short biographical sketch of St. Ernan, and states that it was in the
monastery of Dorsum Thome he laboured, died, and was buried. In the Acta
Sanctorum, p. 7, he has the following :—“ St. Ernan, also called Ferreolus, of an
illustrious family, but more illustrious for his sanctity of life. . . . . . He,
with his brother Cabtachus, became a monk in Ireland under the direction of his
relative, St. Columba, and both were soon among the most distinguished of the
Saint’s disciples, Hence, when St. Columba resolved to go to convert the Picts
and Scots, he took with him twelve disciples, and among them the two brothers,
Eman and Cabtachus. But after the holy man Ernan had laboured many years
in spreading the Gospel, and had reaped a rich harvest, he returned, with tne per-
mission and blessing of St. Columba, to Ireland, and fixed himself at a place called
Druim Thuoma, in his own country of Tyrhugh, where he performed many labours,
until worn out by fasting and old age, he died and was buried in the church of
Druim Thuome. It was, therefore, a monastery of mark in those days, which is
also evident from the mention of it made in the ‘‘Annals” under the following
dates :—‘* A.D. 919, Cuisdh, son of Domhnall, abbot of Doire-Chalgaigh, and of
Drumi Thuama, head of the Council of Cinel-Conaill, died ; A.D. 1197, Flaherty
O’Muldory, Lord of Kinel-Connell, Kinel-Owen, and Oriel, defender of Tara,
heir-presumptive to the sovereignty of all Ireland, a Connell in heroism, a Cuchul-
lin in valour, a Guaire in hospitality, and a MacLughach in feats of arms, died on
Inis Saimer on the 2nd day of February, after long and patient suffering, in the
thirtieth year of his reign and fifty ninth of his age, and was interred at Drumhome
with due honour.” Nota trace of this monastery is now to be found in the parish ;
not a particle of local tradition exists regarding it ; even the memory of St. Eman
is forgotten, for all that remains of him now is his name given to a neat residence,
belonging to a Mr. Hamilton, built onan island at the mouth of Donegal harbour,
which is connected with the mainland by a causeway. How creditable to Mr,
Hamilton, a Protestant himself, is this practical expression of respect for the
memory of the old Irish Catholic Saints !

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-218.png ---
190 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Fahan ,° six miles North West of Derry, on Loughswilly,
in Inisoen.

St. Columb founded the church of Fathenmura, called also
Fothenmor.*

St. Colman Imromha was abbot of Fathenmura, as was St.
Murus, or Muran, the son of Feradach; who was also
esteemed the patron of the place’

A.D. 637. The abbot St. Kellach, the son of Saran, died
on the 7th of October.*

716. Tradition says, that this year a shower of hail, like
silver, fell upon Fathen major, as did honey in like abundance
upon Fathan minor, and that in Leinster it rained blood.*

* Act. SS., p. 334. Tr. Th. p. 495 and 510. *Jd., p. 510. “Jd.

°Fahan—The following entries of this old and venerable monastery are made by the
Four Masters :—‘‘ A.D. 657, Ceallach, son of Saran, abbot of Otham-Mor, died ;
A.D. 716, a shower of silver fell here; A.D. 757, Robhartach, son of Cuana, abbot
of Athain-Mor died.” From this, it appears, the abbey of Fahan was known by the
names Athain-Mor and Othain-Mor. It was called Fathain-Mura from St. Murus or
Muranus, an illustrious abbot, who once governed this monastery with great suc-
cess, and left a distinguished name behind him. The life and character of St.
Muranus, the ancient glories of Fahan, and the utter obliteration of its interesting
remains, as well the destruction of its relics by the fury of the Reformers, are de-
scribed at length, and eloquently, by Colgan in his Acta Sanctorum. ‘In the northern
parts of Ulster, in the peninsula commonly called Inis-Eogan, in the beginning of
the 7th century, flourished a holy man named Murus, or Muranus, who was des-
cended from most noble ancestors, but he far surpassed the nobleness of his family
by the splendour of his virtues. Though this holy man is ranked among the
chief Saints of his own province, so that even at this day in the fresh observances
among our people his memory and veneration flourish, and his festival is cele-
brated ; we have not as yet seen his acts, which certainly were formerly in
existence. I have, however, resolved to produce the very few notices which I have
collected about him in the following points. He derived his descent from the
most illustrious family of the O’Neills, s.¢., Kinel-Owen, being the son of Freda-
cius. Eugenius was Roman’s father; but this is not the Eugenius who was the
great progenitor of this famous family, but his grandson, by his son Muredacius,
who, for distiction sake, was surnamed Merchrom. The mother of St. Muranus
was called Derimilla, famous for her descent from the first rank of nobility, but now
renowned for the happy and blessed fruit of her womb. This happy woman was
the mother of six children, who were all engaged in the service of God, and
honoured by posterity with the veneration and respect of saints, though all were
not the fruit of one marriage. Their names were St. Mura, abbot of Fahan; St.
Mochumna, abbot of Drumbo ; St. Cillenus, of Achadh-Cail ; St. Domangard,
son of Eochadius; St. Ailanus, or Ailevius, and St. Aidanus. Though the want
of ancient monuments and the injury of time have withdrawn from us the know-
ledge of the masters and disciples, and acts of this saint, enough, however,
remains to show that he was an abbot, and ruled a convent of monks in the monas-
tery of Fathen, in the diocese of Derry, at the distance of five miles towards the
west from the see and city of Derry. ‘That monastery, which was endowed with
much lands, was, for several centuries, held in great veneration both on account
of the reverence for the most holy Muranus, to whom, as patron of the place, the
great church or cathedral was dedicated, on account of the noble monuments of
antiquity which were preserved there until the time the heretics got possession of
the place, when they, with abhorrence and rabid fury, carried off and destroyed all
its sacred things. But by the ravages of time and the neglect of the rulers that
monastery, formerly celebrated, but afterwards dilapidated and demolished, at
length became a parish church. There existed one little book in which St. Muranus

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-219.png ---
County of Donegall. Igt

720. The abbot St. Killen, or Killian O’Colla, died
January the 3rd.>
769. Died the abbot St. Ultan Hua Beroderg,*
788. Died the blessed abbot Aurothulius.¢
850. Died the abbot Fergal, or Vergil, Hua Laignein.*
1070. Died the abbot Cucarrgius Hua Kellaich.!
1098. Died the abbot Malcmartin, or Martinian Hua
Kellaich¢
1119. Died Roderic, the archidnach of Fathen.*
1136. Died the archidnach Robarthach Hua Kellaich.!
This noble monastery was richly endowed, and for many
ages was held in the highest veneration, as well for the rever-
ence paid to St. Muran, to whom the great church is dedicated,
as for the many monuments of antiquity which remained here,
till they were destroyed after the reformation; among the

> Act. SS. p. 331. © Tr. Thy p. 510. 41d. *Id. id, 8Id. Id. ‘Td,

had written, in the metre of his country’s language, the Acta of St. Columbkille,
and fragments of it are extant at this day, and are often quoted in
other acts of the same saint. There was also another large and very old
manuscript of chronicles and other histories of the whole country which
was always held by antiquarians in great esteem, and often highly praised
by them. Besides there were extant until lately various relics of St. Muranus and
of other saints, who inhabited the same place, but how many of them were saved
from the fury of the heretics, and preserved to the present time, is altogether un-
known to me, who am now living in Belgium, at a great distance from my
native land, though I was formerly intimately acquainted with this very place. There
remains at this day, and is preserved asa most valuable treasure, the crozier or
pastoral staff of the holy prelate, which is commonly called Bachal/ Mura, the staff
of Murus, which is studded over and adorned with gems, and laid in a case which is
gilt with gold. By this several miracles were wrought, and by it were accustomed
to swear the pious people and the nobles, particularly those descended from the
family of the O'Neill’s ; in short, all those who wished to vindicate virtue and
revenge falsehood, or to remove all ambiguity from their assertions, and termin-
ate angry dissensions by the solmnity of an oath. There existed also, before the
troubles of these times, the offce belonging to this saint, of which we formerly
saw fragments, and in which many of his miracles and virtues are recordéd, but
now not even this nor any other monastery are to be found in which his miracles
or acts are to be seen. It is well to remark that St. Muranus is the great patron
of the family of the O’Neill’s, from whom he is descended, and that in the church
of Fathen, in the county of /nis-Zoghan, his festival is celebrated as the patron of
the place, on this day the 12th of March.” Not a trace exists at the present
day of this celebrated crozier, which Colgan says he saw. It is idle to speculate
about its fate, but in all human probability it was brought to the Continent by
some pious Catholic, or destroyed in the Revolution of 1688. Even St. Muranus
himself has dropped out of the memory of the people of Fahan. The only
knowledge they have retained of him is a silly tradition that he began to build
his church on the top of the hill, but was warned off by some blessed birds, who
instructed him to erect it in the valley below. Fahan is now a lovely valley
teeming with the richest vegetation. It was a howling wilderness when the
monks entered and established themselves in its great solitude. Soon, however, a
noble monastery was raised in it, and what was barren waste became green with
waving meadow or yellow with golden corn. This rich vegetation is all that now
remains of the famous home of St. Muranus and his monks. The noble monas-
tery, once its pride, has crumbled into dust.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-220.png ---
192 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

few reliques that were preserved was the book of the acts of
St. Columb, written by St. Muran in Irish verse, some frag-
ments of which yet remain; also a very large and ancient
chronicle, held in great repute, &c., &c.: and the pastoral staff
of St. Muran, richly ornamented with jewels and gilding, is
still preserved by the O’Neils ; many miracles, it is said, have
been wrought by it, and the people of that country,
especially the family of the O’Neils, take their oaths upon it in
the decision of controversies.® _

Fahan is now a parish church in the diocess of Derry.'

Fanegaragh ; a small house for friars of the third order
of St. Francis™ was built here by M‘Ruinifaig."

Garton ; lies two miles West of Kilmacrenan, where St.
Columb founded a monastery,? which is now a parish church
in the diocess of Raphoe.P

® Act, SS., p. 587. ' Liber Visit. ™ War. Mon. "Allemande. ° Tr. Th.
BP. 494. P Liber Visit.

10 Garton—This is now the name of a parish about ten miles from Letterkenny,
and the centre of the most enchanting scenery. It has two charming lakes of the
same name, and known as the Upper and Lower Lakes. In nature, I venture
to say, there is hardly anything to excel them for beauty. They are broad,
sparkling sheets of water, enclosed by green and well-wooded banks, looking like
a monster diamond set in a circle of emeralds. On the western side of the Upper
Lake, there is a broad slope, and upon it are to be seen the remains of a chapel
and abbey, covering the spot where St. Colum-Cille or Columkille was born, in

21. ‘* The father of the Culdees,” says the Rev. Cesar Otway, in his Sketches
in Donegal, “could not come to birth in a more appropriate place. The lake is
one of the finest of those numerous sheets of water which are interspersed through
the valleys and mountains of this highland district; either in the midst of the
mountains, forming the sources of rivers, or in the lowland valleys expanding as
their receptacles or reservoirs. High or low, small or large, they form interesting
objects for the tourist; and I am not sure whether, in this way, our Irish lake
may not be found as worthy of a visit, as one in Cumberland or Scotland, or even
Switzerland.” From this we can easily understand the cause of that unbounded
affection which, we are assured, Saint Columkille always entertained for his
native place, Adamnan, his biographer, tells us that this affection was intense,
and he goes on to relate a very touching incident illustrative of it:—‘‘On a
certain occasion, while Columba was in Iona, he told one of the brothers that a
crane, driven about by various winds, should come, weary and fatigued, and lie
down on the beach of the island quite exhausted. ‘Treat that bird tenderly,’
said the Saint; ‘bring it to some neighbouring house, where it may be kindly
received and well nursed for three days and three nights. When the crane is
refreshed after that time, unwilling to sojourn any longer in this strange land, it
shall fly back directly to its /ovely home in Ireland. I am very anxious about
this bird. because it comes from my native place.’ The good brother obeyed,
for the bird came, and after three days of gentle nursing, rose on its wings to
a great height, and marking its path through the air homewards, it directed
its course across the sea to Ireland, straight as it could fly ona calm day.” To
this day St. Columkille is the pride of Tirconnell. He has given his name to
one of its most important parishes, and all over the country are scattered relics
and traditions of him in rich profusion. These traditions, together with a life of

+ him, written by St. Adamnan, and another by Manus O’Donnell, who belonged
to the saint's family, enable us to give the following notice of St. Columba,
which has already appeared in an interesting little work on Donegal :—‘“ St.

Patrick’s visit to Ireland, and the ready acceptance of the gospel by the inhabit-

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-225.png ---
: have endured on inscribed stone.

County of Donegall. 193

Hilfothuir ; an abbey was founded here for monks of the
Cistertian order A.D. 1194 by O'’Dogharty ; it was a daughter
of the abbey of Asrhoe, and in process of time was united to it.4

9 Allemande.

ants, and the fervour of the proselytes, form perhaps one of the brightest and
Most interesting chapters in the history of Christianity. Tyrconnell shared in
the general blessing. There is a beautiful tradition connected with the great
saint’s visit to this district. The Apostle, in his progress through the island, after
resting on Magh-Ith in Cuil-Chonaillhe, went in his chariot the next day to the
stream which is called Daol. The spindles of the chariot broke, were mended,
and_ broke again ; and then Patrick, addressing those with him, said, through the
spirit of prophecy, ‘Do not wonder, for the land from the stream northwards
does not stand in need of a blessing, for that a son shall be born there who shall
be called the Dove of the Churches (Collum-cille), who shall bless the land to the
north, and it is in honour of him that God has prohibited my blessing this land.’
Ath-an-Charpaid (ford of the chariot) on the Daol, is the name of that ford. St.
Patrick also blessed the south side of the cataract (Eas) of Ballyshannon, and said
that he left the north side to be blessed by Collum-Cille. About a century after-
wards this Dove of the Churches having gone out from Cinel-Conall, returned to give
the blessing, which, according to St. Patrick, had been reserved for him. He was a
youth of princely descent. His name was Crimthain. His father was Felim, the
grandson of Conal-Gulban, and his mother, Ethnea, a daughter of the royal house of
Cahir-Mor, of Leinster. Born in 521, he was, according to the usage of the time,
placed in fosterage with a relative at Kilmacrenan. From boyhood he had been instruc-
ted in the love of Christ, and by the grace of God, and his zeal for wisdom, had so
preserved the integrity of his body, and the purity of his soul, that, though dwelling
on earth, he appeared to live like the saints in heaven.! He passed from his fosterage
to the school of St. Finian, and made a course of studies under the famous master
in the school of Moville, at the head of Strangford Lough. Thence he passed to
another celebrated Finian at the famous school of Clonard, and thence through
other schools ; for already had there risen in Erinn many institutions in which
sanctity and learning were taught together. Famed throughout the length and
breadth of the land for his learning, and still more for his sanctity, abundant
attested by splendid miracles, he took priest’s orders, and returned to the north
about the year 544. He traversed Cinel Conall, leaving monuments of his piety
and zeal on the hill of Doire Calgaigh (Derry),on the rock of Torry, in the remote
Seanglean, everywhere, on sea-cliff and in deep glen, and though these monuments,
like all that is perishable, have yielded to the corrosive action of time, and in but
too many instances, to the more destructive fury of man, the traveller of to-da
will be able, from the traditions still clinging to the rude cross, or the blessed well
or the grass-grown remains of a ares to gather a better record of him than could
is blessing went beyond the lands of Tyrcon-
nell. His wonderful sanctity of life, and his many miraculous tokens of divine
favour, marked: him out as indeed a man of God, and drew disciples around him.
Thus he became the father of an order of monks, distinguished, even in that fer-
vent age, for the severity of their rule. Among the many abbeys which he founded
in Ireland were those of Doire Calgaigh, Durrow, Swords, and Kells, all houses
famous in the ecclesiastical annals of Erinn. In the forty-second year of his age,
St. Columba, resolving to seek a foreign country for the love of Christ, sailed from
Treland to Britain. as Scotland was then called. He was graciously welcomed by
Conall, king of the Albanian Scots, anda relative of his own, who gave him
the island of Hy or Iona. St. Columba had twelve disciples with him, and laid
the foundation of the monastery of Hy, which soon became the most famous in
northern Europe, and, for centuries after, the recognised head of his order. From
Tona he ventured to carry the light of Christianity among the heathens, and with
God’s blessing, he planted the standard of Christ in the Orkney Isles, in the

1 Life of St. Columba, by Adamnan.


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-226.png ---
194 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Inver 5“ on the sea-shore, in the barony of Boylagh and
Bannagh, and five miles east of Killybegs.

St. Natalis, who died A.D. 563, was abbot of Inbernaile in
Tyrconnell, and also of Kilnaile, in Breffiny, and of Daminis,
or Devenish."

' Tr. Th., p. 169.

Hebrides, among the Northern Picts, and away south beyond the mountains, over
the Lowlands, and into Northumbria. Amidst all these labours he found time
for the cultivation of letters ; and his litera: roductions, are a title only second
to his imperishable services in the cause of , to the gratitude and veneration
of mankind. He is said to have built three hundred houses devoted to God's
service, which have survived to the present day, and are even now specimens of
marvellously fine workmanship. Adamnan, his biographer has left us the portrait
ofhim. ‘Angelic in appearance, eloquent in address, holy in work, with talents
of the highest order, and consummate prudence, he lived a soldier of Christ
during thirty-five years in his adopted island (Iona). fe never could spend
the space of even one hour without study or prayer, or writing, or some other
holy occupation ; and soincessantly was he engaged night and day,in the unwearied
exercise of watching, and of corporal austerities, that the weight of his singular
labour would seem beyond the power of human endurance, and still he was
beloved by all, for a holy joy ever beaming in his face revealed ecstasies with
which the Holy Spirit filled his inmost soul.”

1 Jnver, known in Irish ecclesiastical history as /ader-Natle, from St. Naalis or
Nataiis, who governed a monastery here, and distinguished himself so much by
his sanctity of life that he is still remembered in the traditions of the people, and
has given his name to the most extensive parish in the diocese of Raphoe. St.
Naalis is thus commemorated in the Martyrology of Donegal :—‘‘ Naalis sive
Natalis de Inber Naile Abbas fuit de Kill-Naile et Dominisensis postea, Ejus
meritis Deus indulsit ut aquam e dura produxerit petra. Cum enim ipse et
Maidocus Fernensis cum eorum discipulis die quadam magnis sitis cepissent

remi augustiis, vir sanctus baculo suo feriit perduram petram, et ex ea aqua viventis
Pavia elicuit : fons autem ille hodie visitur Kilnaliz.”

The Saint was of royal blood, for his mother was the daughter of the king of
Leinster, and his father was Aengus, king of Leinster. The latter received his
baptism from the hands of St. Patrick, and during the ceremony he is said to have
given signal proof of fervour and recollection. The Saint, while engaged in
the administration of the sacrament, let the sharp end of his crozier rest upon the
ground ; in its descent it fell upon the king’s foot and pierced it. The pain was
excruciating, but the king moved not nor winced till the ceremony had ended.
Colgan, in his Acta Sanctorum, under January 27th, gives a brief sketch of St.
Naalis :—‘‘ There are not wanting,” he says, ‘‘other very weighty testimonies of the

eat sanctity of St. Natalis or Naalis, and the solemn venerafion formerly paid to
fim in different parts of this kingdom. For some of our menologies relate that he,
by merit, derived the fountain of his faith from the rock, and that he is venerated
on the 27th of January with solemn festivity, and the honour due to a patron, at
three places where he discharged the office of abbot. These places are the church
of Jnber-Naile, in the county of Tirconnell, the church of A#/-Naile, in the
territory of Breffny (Fermanagh), and the monastery of Damsh-inis, in the govern-
ment of which he is said to have succeeded St. Molassius. He was the son of
Aengus, king of Munster, and of Athnea, the daughter of Crumthen, king of
Leinster.” No one at present can point out even the spot on which this monastery
stood. Its ultimate fate is best known from an Inquisition taken at Lifford in
the 7th of James I—‘‘ The jurors, upon their oathes, say and present that in the
saide baronie (Tirew) is also the parish of Zmivernaile, containing in all three
ballybetaghs, whereof Loses is churchland and now in the possession of
the Busshop of Raphoe, and that the usual rent thereof is fiftie meathers of butter,
and thirteen shillings and foure pence Irish in monie.” From the time that the
monastery and its lands were thus confiscated the ecclesiastical establishment of
St. Naalis has dropped out of notice, at least as regards the people of Tirconnell

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-227.png ---
County of Donegall. 195

A small monastery was founded here, in the 15th century,
for friars of the third order of St. Francis,*.and probably on
the very site of the ancient abbey of St. Natalis. It was
granted, by King James I., to James Viscount Clandeboys,
who assigned it to Arthur Lord Chichester.

Inis Keel ;* an island lying off the coast of the barony of
Boylagh and Bannagh. St. Conald Coel was abbot of Inis-
coel, and is honoured here on the 12th of May; St. Dallan

* War. Mon.

13 /niskeel.—An island in the mouth of the Gweebarra bay, in the barony of Boy-
lagh, on which stands to this day the venerable ruin of a monastery and church.
St. Connell, to whom the foundation belongs, is mentioned in the Martyrology
of Donegal under the 22nd May as follows :—‘‘Connall, abbot of Inis-Caoil, in
Cinel Connaill, and he is himself of Cinell Connaill.” His name also occurs in
the Festology of Aengus Céle Dé in the ‘‘ Leabhar Breac,” fol. 34 a., at 11th
May, and, indeed, there is hardly another name more celebrated in Irish eccle-
siastical history, because of the Saint's connection with the celebrated Cain Dom-
naig—a rule for the observance of Sunday as a day free from all servile work.
This rule enjoins, under severe penalties, that every class shall abstain from all
kinds of work on Sunday, and that none shall travel on that day; but wherever
one happens to be on Saturday evening, there he shall remain till Monday
morning. To this there were some exceptions, such as bringing a physician to
a sick person, relieving a woman in labour, saving a house from fire, &c.... A
priest was forbidden to travel on Sunday or Sunday night, or from vesper time on

jaturday night till Monday morning, unless to attend a sick person supposed to
be likely to die before the following morning, in which case the rule pre-
scribes :~-

‘* A priest may journey on a Sunday
. To attend a person about to die,
To give him the body of Christ, the chaste,
If he be expected to expire before morning.”

To see a priest travelling on Sunday was considered an omen of disaster, or of
immediate death to some member of the Ferie or tribe unto whose house or terri-
tory he came; and hence King Diarmit’s astonishment at perceiving the young

riests approaching him on Sunday morning. This curious document is given in
the ‘ Yellow Book of Lecan,” T.C.D., class H. 2, 16, col. 217, and begins with
an account of its being brought from Rome by St. Connall, which runs thus in
translation :—‘‘ This is the knowledge of the Cain Domnaig, which was brought
by Conall, son of Ceolnian, who went on his pilgrimage to Rome, and was written
by the hand of God in heaven, in the presence of the men of heaven, and which
he placed upon the altar of Peter the Apostle in Rome.” There is also a
metrical version of this rule given in a manuscript copy of the ancient laws
preserved in Cod. Clarend., Brit. Mus., vol. 15, fol. 7, p. 1.4, 6; the two following
stanzas are taken from it:—

** A book placed by the hand of the great God
Upon the altar of Peter and Paul ;
It has been found in the appropriate book
That the Sunday should not be transgressed.

“It was the comarb of Peter and Paul
Who found the book first,
And he promulgated the book
As he had it well in memory.”

It gives me peculiar pleasure to state here that I have taken this interesting
notice of the Cain Domnaig, and its relation to St. Connell, from a paper by the

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-228.png ---
196 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

wrote a work in his praise ; he was killed by pirates about
the year 590, and was interred with his friend; his festival
is held on January the 29th. Here is a celebrated well
which, with the church, is dedicated to St. Conald, and
yearly visited by a great concourse of pilgrims on the 12th of
May."

Tais Samer ; an island in the bay of Donegall, at the mouth
of the river Erne. There seems to have been a religious
house on this island, for we find that Flaherty O’Maoldora,
King of Conall, or Tyrconnell, Inisoen, and of the districts of
Easdara and Loughgille, having renounced the cares of the
world, and dedicated himself to heaven, died in this island in
the year 1197.”

* Harris Tab. ° Butlers Fourncy. ~ Annal. Munst.

eminent Irish scholar, B. O’Looney, Esq., and given in the proceedings of the
Royal Irish Academy.

Colgan, at p. 204 of his Acta Sanctorum, says that the merits of St. Connell
are set forth in a beautiful panegyric pronounced upon him by St. Dallan, who
was his intimate friend and enthusiastic admirer. This St. Dallan was a very
distinguished scholar and antiquarian. He was the author of the celebrated
Amhra Coluim Cille, a written eulogium on the virtues and great parts of St.
Columba, which he recited at the famous Synod of Drumceat, at which St.
Columba himself was present.

The learning and ability of St. Dallan are praised at great length by Colgan,
who enumerates a good many of his works which he himself had seen and read,
but found very difficult to understand. These works, like others of the same
class, have disappeared, unfortunately, since Colgan’s time. Between St. Dallan
and St. Connell there existed, as I have already remarked, the closest friendship,
and hence we find St. Dallan often on a visit with St. Connell at Iniskeel. This
friendship grew at last into an intense affection, which made St. Dallan frequently
pray that he might be buried in the same grave with St. Connell, to whom he
mentioned the subject of this prayer, and accompanied it with a request that if he
were the survivor he would take care to have his remains laid in the grave which
he had prepared for himself in Iniskeel. On the occasion of one of these visits
of St. Dallan to the island, a band of pirates broke into the monastery, and in
their career of plunder seized St. Dallan, cut off his head, and flung it into the sea.
St. Connell, who contrived to escape the fury of the pirates, when he came forth
from his hiding place and heard the fate of his dear friend, fell upon his knees,
and prayed with great fervour for a short time, when the head of St. Dallan rose
out of the waters, advanced and replaced itself upon the trunk, and then St.
Connell buried the body in the grave destined for himself, where the two saints
now repose, under the walls of that monastery in which they had spent so man:
happy days together. Up to within six or seven years a very remarkable relic of
St. Connell was preserved in Boylagh. It was called the Bearnan-Chonaill, ox
bell of St. Connell, and was in the possession of the O’Breslens, a family in the
neighbourhood, who ciaimed the saint as belonging to their stock. Some twenty-
five years ago the representative of this family, who lived in the valley of Glen-
geash, near Ardara, sold the relic to Major Nesbit for £6 ; after the Major's death
it passed into the hands of one of his heirs, Mr. Evans, who carried it with him to
Birmingham. After his death it could not be found among his effects; he is
supposed to have sold it, but where, or to whom, has baffled inquiry up to this
resent moment. Dr. Petrie has a notice of it ina paper of his on the Ancient
rish Bells, in the transactions of the Royal Irish, Academy ; and O’Donovan, in
his unpublished papers for the Irish Survey, tells us that he saw it in the posses-
sion of Major Nesbit at Ardara. He describes it as a very beautiful and elaborate
telic, closely resembling the Armagh bell described by Dr. Stewart. It was, he

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-229.png ---
County of Donegall. 197

Kilbaron ;* on the bay of Donegall, in the barony of Tyre
hugh. St. Columb founded the church of Kilbharrind,* near
Easruadh. Barrind, who flourished about the year 590,” gave
his name to this church, and was bishop of it, and also of
Druimchulinn.* It is now a parish church in the diocess of
Raphoe.*

* Called also Kilbairrfhind and Kilbarrin.  % Usher. *Tr. Th., p. 458 and
495. * Liber Visit.

says, enclosed in a kind of frame or case which had never been*opened. Engraved
on it, with great artistic skill, was the crucifixion, the two Marys, St. John, and
another figure, and over it in silver were two other figures of the archangel
Michael, one on each side of our Lord, who was represented in the act of risi
from the tomb. There is a long inscription in Gothic or black letters, all of whieh
are effaced by constant polishing. except the words Mahon O'Meehan—the name,
probably, of the engraver. There are two large precious stones inserted, one on
each side of the crucifixion. and a brass chain suspended from one side of the bell.
The island is a great resort for pilgrims, who come here in large numbers during
the summer months to beg the intercession of St. Connell. The veneration for the
saint's memory is most striking. All over Boylagh, in the glens and mountains,
they pray to him in their difficulties, and in each returning season they come forth
in crowds, wending their way to Iniskeel to make the furris. The island is called
after St. Connell, for his paternal name was Cao#/, and it has given its name to the
parish, the most extensive in the diocese of Raphoe. The venerable ruin, and the
old graveyard in which it stands, are sadly neglected. This isa shame and a pity.
Let us hope that some effort will soon be made to save the ruin from utter des-
truction, and the old graveyard from being, what it is now, a preserve for sheep
and cattle.

13 Kilbaron.—This is the name of a locality about four or five miles north-west
of Ballyshannon. It possesses much antiquarian interest, for it has the remains
of the old castle or fortress of the O’Clerys, as well as those of the church or
monastery from which the parish derives its name. Let us first say a few words
of the church. Its foundation is attributed to St. Collum-Cille himself. Manus
O'Donnell, in his life of the saint, mentions the fact, and adds a long and
beautiful account of the circumstances which led him to establish it. St.
Barrann, whom he appointed to govern it, was a relative of his own and
a descendant of Conal-Gulban. He is commemorated in the Martyrology of
Donegal at 21st May. About a mile from the old church is all that is left of the
ancient fortress of the O'Clerys, a family renowned in Irish history for their skill
in science, try and other branches of literature. Two of the Four Masters were
members ‘of this illustrious family, and the fate of one of the two, Peregrine or
Cugory O'Clery, is thus given in the records of an Inquisition held at Lifford in
May, 1632, where it is stated of him—‘ that being a mere Irishman, and not of
English or British descent or surname, his lands were forfeited to the King.” It
was thus the profound scholar, and the last of the lords of Kilbarron castle, was
expelled from Vis heritage and forced to live on the charity of his friends. He
died in the year 1664, in the county of Mayo, where he had been enjoying an
humble shelter, and left a will behind him in which he bequeathed his books—the
only property he had—to his two sons. The following is an extract from this
interesting document “T bequeath the property most dear to me that ever I
possessed in this world, namely, my books, to my two sons Dermott and John.

t them copy them without injuring them, whatever may be necessary for their
Purpose, and let them be equally seen and used by the children of my brother
Carbry to instruct their children” The ruins of the castle of Kilbarron stand on
a cliff overhanging the sea. The student of Irish history will have melancholy re-
flections in wandering among them, but he will also have relief in the contemplation
of the magnificent view spreadeout before him. Onthe north he will have Donegal
bay, with its numerous inlets, and mountain barriers against the ocean ; and to the
south and west, the mountain ranges of northern Connaught.


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-230.png ---
198 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Kilchartaich ;“ St. Carthach was bishop of Killen, now
called Kilchartaich, about the year 540; his festival is observed
on the 5th of March. This church was situated in Tirboguine,
a territory in Tyrconnell, and is supposed to be Kilcarr, which
is now a parish church in the diocess of Raphoe.®

> Act. SS., p. 474. Vard. vita Rumol. Lib. Visit.

14 Kilchartaich.—This has been toned down into the more euphonious name Kilcar,
a romantic village about eight miles from Killybegs. At the end of the town there
is a mountain torrent brawling over its rocky bed; beyond it, a pleasant little valley,
with a neat church in the centre, and then a hill dotted with numerous cottages.
On one of the slopes of this hill are the remains of the old abbey. Its foundation
and its name are derived from St. Carthac, as we are informed by Colgan in his
Acta Sanctorum, p. 475, c. 8. The life of the saint is given very completely by
him. It appears he was the clder Carthach, Bishop of Lismore, and brother
or nephew of St. Natalis, whom we have mentioned in our notice of Inver. After
having studied under St. Kieran, he established and governed many religious
houses throughout the provinces. Not far from the ruined walls of the Abbey
are three holy wells, two of which are attributed to St Carthach and the third,
strangely enough, to St. Patrick! Pilgrims don’t flock here now as of old ; these
wells are abandoned ; they are in no esteem among the people, who seem to reserve
all their fervour in this respect for their annual visit to the not far-distant Sean-
Glean, or Glen of St. Colum-Cille. This may also account for the absence of those
crowds who, if tradition is to be relied on, toiled up the rugged sides of the giant
Slieve Leagne, year after year, to the hermitage of the holy recluse Hugh MacBracken,
and St. Asicus, the saintly Bishop of Elphin. to beg their intercession. Of these holy
men, whoretired from the world into this lofty mountain solitude, beneath which the
waves rage and roar for ever, Colgan and the Martyrology of Donegal give us a
most interesting account. St. Aodh MacBriec, or Hugh Breaky, or MacBracken,
is thus set down in the Calendar of Cashel under the roth November :—‘‘ Hugh,
the son of Brecii, of the race of Fiachii, son of Neill, bishop of Kildare, in Meath,
and of Slieve Liag in Tir-bochaine (Tyrconnell). The age of Christ when his
spirit went to heaven, 588.” Colgan adds that he is venerated in different churches
as patron, for instance in “‘ Znach Crinnin, in the country of Muscry (Muskerry), in
Munster, and in S/iabh Liag, in Tirconnell, where a chapel is consecrated to him,
and a solemn pilgrimage performed in his honour. He died in the year 588, ac-
cording to the Chronicon Cluanense and other Annals.” Of St. Asicus, who also
had a hermitage on Slieve Leagne, we have ample information. The Rev.
Mathew Kelly, in his notices of the ‘‘ Patron Saints of Ireland,” writes of him :
“*St. Asicus (Asaach), bishop, patron of Elphin. A disciple of St. Patrick,
who obtained from a Druid the land on which the church of Elphin was founded.
Asicus was its first bishop. Among the different members of St. Patrick's
household, to whom provision for all the ecclesiastical wants of the infant church
was committed, St. Asicus is described as an artificer in brass—‘ faber acris
Patricii.'. In a penitential spirit St. Asicus renounced the government of his
diocess, and retired to the mountains of Sliebh Liag, in the present county of
Donegal, from which he could not be. persuaded toreturn. He died in his retreat,
and was buried in the church of Rathcunga, in Tirhugh, Donegal. His name is
in the Martyrology of Tallaght on the 26th of April. His festival is observed
on the following day in the diocess of Elphin.” This notice is not so full as the
one given by Colgan, who writes :—‘‘The most holy and chaste bishop, Asicus,
when on a certain occasion it was necessary to state a certain fact, uttered a
falsehood, having spoken without sufficient reflection. In consequence of this
fault he became so great a penitent that he determined never to be seen in the
place where he had given so great a scandal. Wherefore, having resigned his
see, and the government of the monastery in which he lived, he retired to the
northern parts of Ireland, and on a certain moyntain, in the country of 7ir
Boghaine, called Stiabh Liag, he led a solitary life for seven long years. Mean-
while his monks, by their untiring exertions, discovered him in that desert, and


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-231.png ---
County of Donegall. 199

Killibeggs ;© A sea-port and borough town, sending burgesses
to parliament, in the barony of Boylagh and Bannagh
A small house was built here for friars of the third order
of St. Francis* by M‘Swiny-bannig.4
° War. Mon. * Allemande.

implored him to return to his deserted see and monastery, but he refused sternly,
because he considered himself guilty of a great scandal in telling a falsehood,
and that he therefore ought not be seen where he had given the scandal. They
prevailed however on him to remove to another solitary place, where he shortly
after slept in the Lord, and was buried by his disciples in the country of Serthe,
at a place called Rathcunga.” Not far from this hermitage on the mountain,
there is, in the townland of Rinnakill, another holy well, which is called the
“Well of the Female Saints.” Local tradition says that a convent of nuns stood
here at an early period, but not a trace of it can now be seen.

18 Killibeggs.—The Four Masters make the following entry of Killybegs under the
year 1513 :—‘* Owen O’Malley came by night with the crews of three ships into
the harbour of Killybegs, and the chieftains of the country being all at that time
in O’Donnell’s army, they plundered and burned the town, and took many
prisoners in it. They were overtaken by a storm. so that they were compelled to
remain on the coast of the country, and they lighted fires and torches close to
their ships. A youthful stripling of the MacSweeny’s, 4.¢., Brian, and the sons
of Brien, and a party of shepherds overtook them and attacked them courage-
ously, and slew Owen O’Malley and five or six score along with him, and
also captured two of their ships, and rescued from them the prisoners they
had taken, through the miracles of God and St. Catherine whose town they
had profaned.” “Fere we have recorded the fact that Killy! was at all times
under the special patronage of St. Catherine. Hence we find MacSwiney of Ba-
nagh placing under her protection a Franciscan friary which he built near the town,
on the western shore of the bay; and when, in darker days, this monastery had been
wrecked and its inmates banished, the people raised upon its ruins a beautiful pa-
rochial church, and called it St. Catherine’s, which, tradition says, stood there
down to a comparatively late date. The old friary and church are now a heap of
grass-grown remains. The green fields belonging to the monastery are converted
into a glebe ; a neat parsonage has succeeded to the abbey, and St. Catherine,
banished from her old abode, at present presides over Killybegs from an
abrupt and craggy height above the town. Here the faithful have raised a
splendid church, with a handsome tower, which casts its shadow on the placid
waters of the loveliest little harbour to be found on the coast of Ireland. The
parish priest of Killybegs, or Killaghtee, in the last half of the sixteenth century,
was the illustrious Donatus MacCongail or Macmonigle, who was also Bishop of
Raphoe, and in that capacity assisted at the closing sessions of the Council of
Trent. While pastor of Killaghtee he seems to have been regarded as one of the
most learned and zealous of the Irish clergy, for Father David Wolf, S.J., who was
sent in those difficult times as Delegate Apostolic into Ireland, selected him as his
companion and adviser in the discharge of his onerous duties, and in the year 1561
deputed him on a special mission to-Rome, with important letters on the work in
which they were engaged. These letters are given by Dr. Moran in his Introduc-
tion to the Lives of the Archbishops of Dublin, and furnish a truthful picture of
the state of the Irish Church at that time. I will give a few extracts from them to
show how high Dr. MacConghail stood in the opinion of the Apostolic Delegate.
The letters are addressed to the Cardinal Protector of Ireland, and in one of them
Wolf thus speaks of MacConghail :—‘“‘I addressed a letter a few days ago, through
Sir William Neon to your excellency, on the state of the church in this district of
Munster; but now I deem it better to send in person the bearer of this letter,
Donald MacConghail, to give full details to you, as he was the companion of my
journey through Ireland, and as he is a man of judgment, well acquainted with the
circumstances of this country, having also, as I will just now mention, some other
particular business there. . . . , The bearer of this letter, Donald MacCon-
ghail, was my companion in the district of Connaught, and there is no one in Ireland

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-232.png ---
200 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Kilmacrenan 6 on the river Gannon, though now a poor
depopulated village, yet it gives name to the barony.

who is better able to give you accurate information about everything, wherefore I
send him to Rome for atwo-fold purpose—1. To give you intelligence about my-
self, as well as about the bishops and archbishops, &c.; and 2. That as the Bishop
of Raphoe has lately been taken away from us, I know of no better suited to be his
successor; he is very learned according to the style of literature of this country, and
he is beloved by every one; he moreover spent some time in Rome last year.” With
Dr. MacConghail the Apostolic Delegate sent Dr. Crean and Dr. O’Hart, the
former to be raised to the see of Elphin, and the latter to the see of Achonry, In
the letter of introduction which he gave them the following passage occurs: —‘‘ The
name of the secular priest is Donald Macgongaill ; he is a man well versed in the
affairs of this nation, and I wish your Excellency would command him, in virtue of
holy obedience, to make known to you how Donatus, Archbishop of Armagh, and
the other prelates of this country deport themselves. . . . I will add no more,
as I leave everything in the hands of Donald.” Shortly after his arrival in the
Eternal City, Dr. MacConghail was consecrated Bishop of Raphoe, and at once he
proceeded to Trent where he threw himself into the deliberations of the Fathers of
the Council with great zeal, and rendered efficient aid in framing their decrees.
His name is set downin the catalogue of the Fathers with the epithet yusf attached,
and he is described as young in years but old in the practice of every virtue. In
the record of the voting he is always on the side of strict discipline. On his
return to Ireland he worked energetically for the immediate promulgation of
the decrees of the great Council in which he had taken such a distinguished part, and
was one of the leading spirits in a provincial synod convened in 1587 for that
object. There was no prelate in Ireland in those trying times that so much impressed
the public mind. This is set forth very distinctly in a manuscript in the British
Museum, where he is mentioned in these eulogistic terms:— ‘‘ He was the third great
bishop that was in the Council of Trent; he was an active and a well-qualified
man; he could write well, and speak both the Latin, English, and Irish tongues;
commonly he accompanied O'Donnell when he came to Dublin before the State ; he
dealt much for the business of the church, and at length he obtained letters under my
Lord Deputy Sir Henry Sydney's and the Council’s hands for the immunity of his
church, that neither English or Irish should have cess or press upon the church lands,
and ifany number of persons should offend contrary to the Lord Deputy and Council’s
order established in that behalf, that such delinquent shall pay into the church ten-
fold as much as should be thus wrongfully exacted.” The Four Masters tell us
that Dr. MacConghail surrendered his distinguished and useful life at Killybegs on
the 2gth of September, 1589. There is no stone to mark where he sleeps, no
monument in marble or brass to record his great deeds—a disgrace which, it is to
be hoped, will not continue long. There is an old ruin, with a decayed and disused
cemetery attached, not far from Killybegs, which are pointed out as the resting-
piace of the great bishop ; but local tradition is the only means we have of identi-
ying it. Sad result indeed! !
1S Ktlmacrenan.—This name is a modification of the old Irish Kill-mic-Nenain,
by which it is known in our ecclesiastical records. Nenain was brother-in-
law of St. Columkille, and father of four sons, all of whom died in the odour of
sanctity. He was lord or chieftain of this territory, resided at Kilmacrenan,
and largely endowed the abbey and church built there by his saintly relative.
Around this ecclesiastical establishment grew up rapidly, as was usual in those
times, a considerable town, which was called Kill-mic-Nenain in recognition of
the pious munificenee of Nenain. Nowhere perhaps in Ireland is the lesson of
fallen greatness taught more thoroughly than at Kilmacrenan. _It was the foster-
place of the great St. Collumkille, and, to mark his affection for it, he founded
there a large and important monastery. Of this the only thing left now is
a slender tower, pierced with one or two pointed windows and some few
ieces of crumbling walls. The O’Donnell’s, to whose family Saint Columkille
longed, always cherished a special regard for Kilmacrenan, and built there a
Franciscan Friary: it is now a Protestant church, with a fragment of sculpture
inserted in the wall over the principal door, representing the head of an abbot or

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-233.png ---
County of Donegall. 201

St. Columb founded an abbey here, which was richly en-
dowed.2. And O'Donnell founded a small house here,

* Tr. Th, p. 494.

bishop. Here, too, at a short distance from the town, on the rock of Doon, the
O’Donnell’s were inaugurated chieftains of Tircounell, but all this importance, all
this ancient splendour, is now reduced to a dilapidated village, contrasting miser-
ably with its pretty situation in a highland valley through which courses a broad
and deep river. Doon, the place where the ceremony of inauguration was held,
is a rocky eminence, rising sharply from the ground. The inauguration stone
was here, with the foot-prints of the first chieftain cut into it, in which the new
chieftain stood while he took the oath to maintain the laws of Tirconnell,
and defend her rights and privileges—a ceremony described by Spenser in his
“View of the State of Ireland.” By some it is stoutly denied that the ceremony was

erformed on the hill of Doon ; they say the inauguration stone was always kept
in the,old abbey church of Kilmacrenan, and in this they seem to be sustained by
the Four Masters, who speak of the stone being actually kept in the church.
How far this may be true or false is now matter of speculation. The stone has
disappeared, and how or where is also simple conjecture. There are persons of
grave and deliberate judgment who assert that it was stolen, and is still preserved
in safe keeping. Others, on the contrary, say that a pervert of the name of
MacSwiney, in a fit of fury against the relics of the old faith, smashed it into a
thousand small pieces, which he scattered abroad so as to prevent them from
being recognised or collected ever after. The sculptured head over the principal
“door of the present Protestant church is also battered and broken by the same
hatred which prompted the destruction of the inauguration stone. That the
ceremony of inauguration took place either at the rock of Doon or in the old
church is admitted on all hands, and is graphically described by a well informed
author called Lynch. He says ‘‘that when the investiture of the O’Donnell took
place at Cil-mhac-Crenain, he was attended by O'Ferghail, successor to Columb-

ille, and O’Gallachius, his marshal, and surrounded by all the estates of the
country. The Abbot O’Ferghail put a pure white, straight, unknotted rad into
his hand, and said, ‘ Receive, sire, the auspicious ensign of your dignity, and
remember to imitate in your government the whiteness, straightness, and unknot-
tiness of this rod, to the end that no evil tongue may find cause to asperse the
candour of your actions with blackness. nor any kind of corruption or tie of friend-
ship be able to pervert your justice ; therefore, in a lucky hour, take the govern-
ment of this peuple, to exercise the power given you with freedom and security.’””
Close to the rock of Doon is a holy well to which pilgrims come in considerable
numbers at all seasons of the year, and from the remotest corners of the country.
Proofs are advanced with day, date, and name of miraculous cures effected at this
well, and there is hardly in the whole county of Donegal a Catholic family that
does not always keep at home, in some safe place, a bottle of water from Doon
well, It was blessed by a holy priest, Lector O’Friel, whose memory is still in
benediction among the people of Kilmacrenan. It was under this rock of Doon
that Sir Cahir O’Doherty fell while fighting bravely for his rights against the
English. This dauntless young chieftain still lives in the memory of the men of
Inishowen. He was their hero, and because of the early period put to his career,
they speak of him in a tone of deep sorrow and regret. His sad and premature
end is thus recorded in an inquisition of James I.. c. 6:—“ The said Cahire
O'Doherty, knight, afterwards, to wit, on the 5th of July in the year aforesaid,
being in rebellion a¢ and near Kilmacrenan, in the county of Donegal, together
with the said other traitors, fought and contended with the army or soldiers of the
said king then and there remaining. The aforesaid Cahire O’Doherty, knight,
so contending, was slain, and the jurors saw the body and members of the said
Cahire then and there slain.” The fact of his being slain in red-handed rebellion
atand near Kilmacrenan, is here stated in a manner that precludes all doubt. The
details of the engagement in which he fell are graphically described by O’Sullivan
Beare in his “ History of Irish Catholics,” fol. 210, tome iv., lib. i. “ O’Doherty,”
he writes, ‘‘ considering his own unequal to the forces of the enemy, concealed him-

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-234.png ---
202 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

probably on the site of the ancient abbey, for friars of the
order of St. Francis! The present church is supposed to be

© War, Mon.

self with all his riches in the wood of Gleann Beatha (Glenveagh). Leading to
this valley there were three passes through which the enemy could advance to
attack him : these were at once seized by the royal army formed into three divi-
sions, commanded respectively by the English general, Niall Garve, and Mac
Swiney Doe. Sir Cahir hearing this, formed his comparatively small army also
into three divisions, and posted them at the three entrances into the wood to
prevent the advance of the reyal army. After the lapse of a few hours the enemy’s
musqueteers opened fire on one of O’Doherty’s divisions, and the cor
but rash young chieftain, advanced at the head of another division to drive back the
enemy. In the mé/ée he ceceived the stab of a double-headed javelin, and died in
the space of two hours without being expiated from his sins by sacramental abso-
lution.” This circumstantial account, along with the extract quoted from
the Inquisition, shows the utter groundlessness of a story current in
Inishowen, and which has found its way into print. Accordii to it
Sir Cahir did not fall in the engagement, but was foully and treacherously
murdered by a Scotchman. named Ramsay, under the rock of Doon. The story
goes that the young chieftain, attended only by his faithful friend and adviser,
Sir Phelim Reagh MacDevitt, had come to the rock of Doon to reconnoitre the
enemy's position, and, being worn with fatigue, they both lay down under the shelter
of the rock for a short sleep. In this state they were discovered by the infamous
Ramsay, who, recognising Sir Cahir, ran him through with his sword, and fled.
Sir Phelim MacDevitt was roused from his sleep by the moans of his brave and
lant young friend. He started up; saw the pale face, and the red stream flowi:
rom a wound in his side, on which the hand of the dying man was tightly pressed.
He saw that life was ebbing fast, and that no time was to be lost, so he raised
the dying form gently from the ground, placed it on his shoulders, and hurried
to the camp. He did not get far when the poor young chieftain implored him,
in faint whispers, to lay him down as he was dying, and, at the same time, gave
him, as his last injunction, to take off his head, as soon as he breathed his last,
bring it to Dublin, and there demand the large reward offered for it. Sir Phelim
carried out this dying request, but on his way to Dublin with the head, he hap-
pened to stay a night at Swords, where one of the Chichesters, who had learned
the object of Sir Phelim’s mission, also put up, contrived to steal the head during
the night, proceeded to Dublin, and got the reward. This story is exploded, as
has been already observed, by the united testimony of the jurors of King James
and of O’Sullivan Beare, which shows that Sir Cahir fell in the engagement at Kil-
macrenan, We have also the authority of the Four Masters to the same effect.
They state, under 1608, that Sir Cahir’s body was quartered between Derry and
Culmore, and his head sent to Dublin by the English commander, which proves the
story about Sir Phelim MacDevitt to be utterly false. And lastly, it is not true
that Chichester obtained the grant of Inishowen in reward for the head of Sir
Cahir O'Doherty, for in aninquisition taken at Donegal on the 18th of August, 1625,
it is affirmed by the jurors on oath that Inishowen was held by Chichester “as of
the castle of Dublin in free and common socage, by fealty only and not in capite,
nor by socage in capite, nor by knight's service” ercfore, Chichester obtained
Inishowen, not by stealing O'Doherty’s head from Sir Phelim MacDevitt, but by
Sree and common socage. But slander and invention, in regard to the young and
ill-fated chieftain of Inishowen, as well as his brave and faithful ally, Sir Phelim
MacDevitt, don’t stop here. Cox and other prejudiced writers, in their account
of Sir Cahir O’Doherty’s rebellion, say that his first act, namely the taking of
Culmore, was one of “cool and base treachery.” “Having.” writes one of the
most modern of these reckless historians, ‘‘ collected together [he is talking of
O'Doherty] his friend and a considerable number of his Irish fullowers, he invited
Captain Hart, the governor of Culmore fort, with whom he lived on terms of
intimacy, to come, with his wife, to dine with him, on the 3rd of May. O'Doherty
received his guests with profuse hospitality, but in the middle of the feast armed

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-235.png ---
County of Donegall. 203

part of the Franciscan friary ; over the door is a mitred
head in releivo£ Near to this town is a rock on which

© Pococke’s Fournal.

men were suddenly introduted, who seized upon Hart, and threatened him with
instant death unless he delivered up the fort of Culmore into their hands. This the
English officer, firm to his duty, refused. Theythen (O'Dohertyand MacDevitt) took
his wife, dragged her to thegate ofthe fortress, and through her fearsforher husband,
and the fears of the garrison for themselves, the fort was surrendered. The whole
garrison was immediately massacred, Hart and his wife alone being preserved alive ;
and O'Doherty and his Irish followers thus became essed of twelve pieces of
ordnance, besides a considerable store of arms and ammunition. All this had
been effected in the dead of the night, and no alarm had been given to the country.
After O'Doherty had armed his followers, he left Culmore fort under the com-
mand of an Irish chief named Felim MacDevitt, marched against Derry, and
attacking the place by surprise before day-break, made himself master both of the
city and garrison. Pawlett and most of his officers and men were put to death ;
many of the townspeople were slaughtered ; the bishop’s wife was carried away
a captive, and Derry was then plundered and burnt.” The charge of ‘‘cool
and base treachery,” in reference to the taking of Culmore, contained in this
passage, is just as unfounded as the story of Sir Cahir O'Doherty’s head. In
proof of this it is only necessary to produce the sworn statement of the jurors who,
under James I., held an Inquisition at Lifford, on the 13th of August. It is
thi: ““Cahire O’Dohertie, late of Birt Castle, in the county of Donegall,
knight, and Phelim Reagh MacDavid, late of the same county, together with
divers other most wicked traitors, in the year of the now king of England, the
sixth, at Buncranagh, in the said county of Donegall, traitorously, and as false
traitors to the now king, assembled in a warlike manner, and then and there by
violence and arms, viz.—swords, lances, and guns, designed, intended, and plotted
the death and destruction of the same now king, and then and there conspired
and designed to deprive and depose the same king of his royal power and govern-
ment of his kingdom of Ireland, and to take upon themselves, and thenceforth to
retain in their own power, against the will of the said king, the government of the
same kingdom ; and to prosecute that false, traitorous, and nefarious design, the
aforesaid Cahire O’Dohertie, knight, and Phelim Reagh MacDavid, with the
said other most wicked and criminal traitors and rebels, on the 20th of April,
in the year aforesaid, at Boncrenagh aforesaid, made insurrection, and every one
of them made insurrection, and then and there moved and excited divers lieges
and subjects of the king to a rebellion against the said king, and by violence and
arms, viz.—swords, lances, guns, and other arms, offensive and defensive, then
and there raised cruel and open war against the same king and his faithful
subjects, and from thence proceeded in a warlike manner as far as the fort of
Culmore, in the said county of Donegall, and took into their own hands, and
retained intheir own power, that fort, together with divers pieces of ordnance
and other warlike engines belonging to the same Lord King which were in the
same, and from thence afterwards, to wit, on the 21st of April, in the year afore-
said, advanced to the city of Derry, and took into their own hands and session
the aforesaid city of Derry, and two castles in it lying, and plundered, bumed,
and demolished it from the foundation ; and then and there cruelly and traitor-
ously murdered George Paulett, knight, then vice-governor of the said city of
Derry, and divers other faithful and liege subjects of the king, and so they stood
and every of them stood in open and actual rebellion against the king and his
faithful subjects, and against the peace of the said now king, his crown and
dignity, and against the form and effect of divers statutes in the same case
made and provided. The said Cahire O’Dohertie, knight, afterwards to
wit, on the 5th of July, in the year aforesaid, being in rebellion af and near
Kilmacrenan, in the county of Donegall, together with the said other traitors,
fought and contended with the army or soldiers of the said king, then and
there remaining. . . . . . . . On the 2oth of April, in the year of
the said now King of England the sixth, the aforesaid Cahire O'Dohertie, knight,


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-236.png ---
204 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

the O’Donnells, Princes of Tyrconnell, were always in-
augurated.®
» War. Annal.

being in rebellion, as is before mentioned, wasseized as of fee of that whole barony,
country, or territory of Inishowen, a/ias O’ Dohertie’s country, in the said county
of Donegall, and of all the castles, manors, demesnes, messuages, lands, tenements,
and hereditaments lying within the same country or territory, excepting all the
lands, tenements, and fereditaments which are parcels of the possessions of the
Erenaghs of churches, rectories, or any abbeys or religious houses, lately dissolved
and lying within the barony or country aforesaid. The said Cahire O’Dohertie,
knight, at the time of his being killed or in actual rebellion, as is before said, was
seized of the aforesaid country, territories, castles, manors, lands, tenements, and
hereditaments, and of every parcel thereof, except as before excepted, as by the
survey lately taken thereof, to which the jurors refer themselves, appears. But of
what goods and chattels the aforesaid Cahire was possessed at the time of his being
killed aforesaid, the jurors aforesaid have not the least knowledge.” According
to this sworn statement, the rebellion broke out not at Culmore, but at Buncrana,
and thence the victorious rebels, under Sir Cahir and Sir Phelim, proceeded ina
warlike manner to the fort of Culmore, and took it into their own hands. This is
very different from the act of ‘‘cool and base treachery” to which the taking of
Culmore is generally, but falsely, ascribed. Sir Phelim MacDevitt, the firm friend
of O'Doherty, and the chief actor with him in this rebellion, was betrayed into the
hands of the English soon after the battle of Kilmacrenan. Pardon, the restora-
tion of his vast property. and some of the highest honours at the disposal of the
English Crown, were offered to him by the Lord Deputy if he consented to renounce
the old faith of the Catholic Church and embraced the new one of the Reformation.
This offer was rejected with scorn, and Sir Phelim refused to accept life at such a
price. His constancy through the inhuman tortures to which he was subjected, has
gained him a place by the side of the most illustrious martyrs in the Church, while his

levotion to the young chief of Inishowen and to the popular cause, at a time when
it became the fashion of the Irish chieftains to stand well with the English, has
won for him the lasting admiration of his countrymen. He was executed at Lifford
on the 27th of September, 1608, and the circumstances of his glorious death are
related by O’Sullivan Beare, an historian who had taken part in, or was con-
temporaneous with, the facts he relates, and one whose testimony is pro-
posed as “second to none in historical value.” He writes as follows :--
“After the death of Doherty and the defeat of his brave little army at Kil-
macrenan, Sir Phelim MacDevitt hid himself in the mountains. He was
soon tracked by Government informers, and though still suffering from
the effect of his wounds, was dragged before the Lord-Deputy, who, in loud
and angry tones, demanded of him ‘where is the immense plunder taken by
yourself and O’ Doherty from the king’s subjects?’ Sir Phelim answered : ‘the spoil
taken by O'Doherty is all in my possession, but of what was taken by our soldiers
I know nothing.’ “Give up then what you hold,’ said the Lord-Deputy, ‘for it has
been taken by rebels from inoffensive and loyal subjects.’ ‘ Allow me to inform
your Excellency,’ ‘said Sir Phelim, ‘that the spoil taken by my young master is his
rightful property by the laws of war and of the holy Catholic religion,,but as he
is now in heaven, where he has no need of it, I will deliver it to you on condition
that you give me my liberty and permit me to emigrate to Belgium, Spain, or
France.’ ‘I will not only set you free,’ answered the Lord-Deputy, ‘and confirm
you in possession of the spoil you have taken, but will confer upon you the
most splendid reward, and the highest honour at the disposal of the crown, pro-
vided you renounce your religion, acknowledge the king head of the Church, and
swear allegiance to him.’ ‘ Never,’ said Sir Phelim, ‘will I renounce, for any human
favour however great, for any wealth however enormous, or for any position
however exalted, the holy Catholic, Apostolic, Roman faith, brought into this
land by St. Patrick, established by his miracles, professed unto blood and death by
my fathers, reccived by me in baptism, and maintained by me in unfaltering prac-
tise.” ‘ Fool,’ said the Lord-Deputy, ‘you refuse to accept a religion which will
secure to you the favour and affection of a powerful king, one who will be

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-237.png ---
County of Donegall. 205

Kil O'Donnell“ near Rathmellan, in the barony of Kilma-
crenan. About the beginning of the 16th century O’Donnell
built a small monastery here for friars of the third order of
St. Francis.!

! War. Mon, Allemande.

to you a kinder and more munificent master than the hair-brained young chieftain
who has just perished in his crimes.’ ‘ Your offer,’ replied Sir Phelim, ‘is a damn-
able one, and let me remind you that in making it to me now, after the loss of my
beloved master, and of all my fortune and inheritance besides, is a crime of
unfathomable guilt, because it suggests the terrible wickedness of making God
my enemy, and thus lead a life here of racking misery, and hereafter commit
myself to eternal punishment. Proceed at once to employ your executioners in
torturing this body of mine, already enfeebled by wounds. I rejoice to be able
to make an offering of it to Jesus Christ in satisfaction for my sins. Yes, I rejoice
and give thanks to God for the ineffable favour of having afforded me this oppor-
tunity of shedding my blood for that loving Saviour who poured out his blood,
even to its last drop, for me.’ The Lord-Deputy, fired with rage at these defiant
words, ordered a gallows to be erected, and all the preparations for immediate
execution to be got ready. Sir Phelim ascended the ladder with intrepid step, and
having advanced to the front of the platform, spoke in nervous and feeling language
to the Catholics who were there assembled. He implored them to pray fervently
for him to get grace to seal with his blood the glorious confession of the faith
which Christ bequeathed to him and them. He then gently submitted himself to
the executioner, who, after pinioning his arms and fastening the rope around his neck,
withdrew the bolt, and let fall the drop. The body leaped out into the air with
a sudden jerk ; the rope snapped in two, and Sir Phelim fell heavily on his feet.
A cry of horror rose from the spectators ; the executioner rushed at his victim with
a hatchet; Sir Phelim only staggered under his blows ; two soldiers ran to the assist-
ance of the executioner, and in a short time felled the powerfully-built man to the
ground. The mangled victim, with dying voice, again implored the Catholics to
pray for him ; his fine figure and handsome face elicited the admiration and pity of
the crowd ; there were exclamations of shame, subdued curses, angry menaces, and
long low wailings during the progress of this butchery. The executioner soon
brought his work of blood to a close ; he plunged a knife into Sir Phelim’s breast,
cut it open, tore out his heart, and flung it into the fire kindled near him, and
thus put a glorious end toa grand and glorious life.” This tragic account reads
like a chapter in the history of the early Christian Church. The Roman tyrants
and their infamous minions, in their thirst for Christian blood, did not torture their
victims with more refined cruelty than what was exercised at Lifford, in a
civilized age, on this noble Irish chief, for refusing to renounce the faith bequeathed
to him by his fathers. The early Christian martyrs, like Sir Phelim, were
offered glittering honours and dazzling wealth if they renounced the faith of Christ ;
like him they flung back the offer with scorn; and like him their bodies were
hacked, they were disembowelled. their hearts were torn out and cast into the fire.

The clan MacDevitt had to fly from the face of the English after the execution
of Sir Phelim. Their castle of Aielach, near Derry, and the lands they possessed
on the banks of the Swilly and Foyle, and away in the distant Inishowen, were
confiscated and handed over by James I. to the ‘‘ undertakers.” The famil
took refuge in the remote glens of Donegal, where their descendants fondly cheris
the memory of their illustrious chieftain and martyr.

17 Kill O'Donnell, There is a record in the ‘‘Annals” of this abbey under
A.D. 1538. | ‘‘ Hugh Boy O’Donnell. son of Hugh Duv, son of Hugh Roe, heir
to the lordship of Tirconnell, a man who was well skilled and learned in every
science, who was most distinguished for munificence and hospitality, for prowess in
the field of battle and the gap of danger, and who was expected, from his steadiness
and other characteristics, to attain to the lordship of his own country (Tirconnell),
died at Cill O’d’Tomhrair on the 22nd of March, after having received the
communion and extreme unction.” O'Donovan, in a note on this passes;
tells us that Cill O’d’Tomhrair rendered into English is ‘‘ Church of the Towers.”

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-238.png ---
206 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Oughteran, the last warden, surrendered the friary,
and was found seized of the three quarters of Kilcrean, Kil-
macowle and Killodonnell; annual value, besides reprises, 3s.*

Inquisition 6th November, first King James, finds, that the
warden of this friary was seized of three quarters of land,
called Kilcrean, Kilmacowle and Kil O’Donnell ; annual value,
besides reprises 35.

8 Loughdearg ,' in the parish of Templecarn, and barony of
Tirhugh ; in this Lough there are several islands, the largest
is called the island of St. Dabeoc, some call it St. Fintan’s
island, and others the island of Saints.™ In this island was a
priory of canons regular following the rule of St. Augustin,
which was dedicated to the Saints Peter and Paul," and
founded, as some say, by the great apostle of Ireland, but
others give the foundation to St. Daboec,° who was also called
Mobeoc and Beonan; he was brother to St. Canoc, who
flourished about the year 492. St. Dabeoc is patron of this
church, where three festivals are held to his honour yearly, on

* Chief Rememb. ** Id. 1 Or the Red Lake, and said to have been called formerly

Finlough, or, the White Lake. ™ Richardson's Folly of Pilgrimages. ™ War. Mon.
° Annal. Munst.
From this we are to infer that it was largely endowed by the Tower family, and in
gratitude was called after them. O’Donovan adds, in the same note, that the abbey
was the present Killymard in the barony of Raphoe and countv of Donegal. This,
however, he subsequently acknowledges to be an error into which he had fallen
inadvertantly, and says it is really situated close to Fort Stewart, near the upper
end of Lough Swilly, in the barony of Kilmacrenan. The ruin is there to be seen,
and is regarded by competent judges as the purest specimen of early ecclesiastical
architecture to be found among the numerous old abbeys of Ireland. A large por-
tion of the side walls of the chapel still remain, and a turret or gable, pierced
with a splendid and well-preserved gothic window. The general impression among
the best authorities on such matters is, that it was built in the sixteenth century by
an O'Donnell, as a chapel of ease to the ecclesiastical establishment of Kilmacrenan.
There is a very pretty legend among the people here about the bell of the abbey.
The story goes that a party of marauders from Tyrone attacked the abbey, and
carrying off,amongst other things, the bell, put it on board a vessel which they had
waiting off the shore below, and departed with their booty across the lough. But
God’s justice overtook them, for a storm arose, and the sacrilegious robbers were
all drowned, and thus the sacred bell never entered Tyrone. It is kept somewhere
at the bottom of the lough, whence its muffled tones proceed once every seven years
at the still hour of midnight.

18 Lough Dearg.—This is commonly known by the name of “St. Patrick's Par-

tory,” and why it is so will appear from a very interesting account, given in a

ttle work intituled ‘‘ Mirror of Penance,” and published in Louvain about the
middle of the 17th century. It is as follows :—“ St. Patrick entered a cave in the
island of Lough Dearg in order to pray more fervently to God, being removed
from all the abstractions of the external world in that gloomy Derc, and while his
mind was earnestly directed to the Divinity, he prayed that the pains of Purgatory
might be shown unto him. His request was granted, and lo! before his heaven-
touched fancy the region of Purgatory sprang into existence, and he saw the souls
of millions undergoing the process of purification, each placed in such a crucible
as was fitted to soften and remove the terrestrial dross that stained the etherial
essence of the spirit ; some marked with a deep hue, which much destroyed their
heavenly radiance, but which blackened them not wholly; others half-dimmed,
half-bright, and in the rapid progress of becoming spirits of light from the action

ey eg eee

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-239.png ---
County of Donegall. 207

the 1st of January, 24th of July, and 16th of December.’ St.
Dabeoc is said to have been buried in this abbey, which he
made subject to the great abbey of Armagh; it had aefine
chapel, with convenient houses for the monks, the remains of
which may yet be seen.1 One of the Saint Patricks was prior
here about the year 850."

Notwithstanding the reputed holiness of this celebrated
monastery, it was plundered and reduced to ashes by Brat-
achas O’Boyle and M‘Mahon, A.D. 1207." John was prior in
1353.

St. Patrick’s purgatory, as it is called, was first fixed in this
island, but it being near to the shore, and a bridge from the
mainland giving the people a free and easy access into it, the
cave was closed up, and another was opened in a lesser island,
about half a mile from the shore. Some people have given
the invention of this purgatory to the great St. Patrick, but
others, with more probability, ascribe it to Patrick who was
prior here about the year 850." This purgatory continued a
long time in high repute both at home and abroad. We find,

? War. Mon. % Richardson, supr. *War. Mon. *Annal. Munst. * Ogygia.
" War. Mon.

of the Purifying element of fire ; some becoming effulgent by slow and almost im-
perceptible degrees, as having no friends to pray for them; while others glowed
in the furnace, and cast off the foul crust with amazing rapidity by the force of the
prayers and alms which their friends offered for them on earth. Some he saw
escaping from the flames and winging their course to heaven ; others almost bright
enough to attempt the same. But deep buried in the abyss he perceived others
who were destined to converse with the groans of ten thousand years for having
been guilty of venial sins, which, though they bordered very closely on mortal, did
not stain the soul through and through, as mortal sin doth. These looked up with

iteous eyes towards earth expecting the prayers of their children and friends, and
eeling the punishment of one second there longer and more severe than that of a
hundred years on earth. St. Patrick, awed by this vision, departed from the cave,
and ordered that henceforward the island should be a terrestrial purgatory, where
sinners could wash off all their sins by prayer and fasting. They were all to be
confined in the cave, and should they see the same vision vouchsafed to St. Patrick
(which many did), it was a favourable sign of the acceptability of their prayers
and mortifications.” St. Dabheog, or Davoc, a disciple of St. Patrick’s, re-
mained behind to carry out his master’s design, which he did by establishing on
the island that penitential retreat which has been famous for fourteen
centuries, and where from ten to fifteen thousand pilgrims come to do penance
every year, from the Ist of June to the 15th of August. St. Babheog
founded here also a church and monastery, and thus in a short time it became
one of those celebrated centres whence issued that broad and deep stream of
piety and learning which made Ireland, before the Danish invasion, highest
among the nations of Europe. In the Martyrology of Donegal, we have,
under the Ist of January, the following notice of St. Dabh and his establish-
ments on Loughderg :—‘‘ At the eastern extremity of that lake are Patrick's Pur-
gatory and Dabheog’s Island ; there is also a monastery, in which there were
canons, at the eastern extremity of the same lake. . . . There are five beds of hard
penance there, round which the pilgrims the bed of Patrick, of Columbkille,
of Brigid, of Adamnan, of Dabheog.” Ecigan, in his Acta Sanctorum, tells us
* food deal, too, of St. Dabheog and Loughderg. ‘ Dabheog,” he says ‘‘is
called Dabeocus, in general, and often Beoanus, in Latin. He is the patron of

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-240.png ---
208 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

in our records, several safe conducts granted by the Kings of
England to foreigners desirous to visit it, and particularly in
the year 1358, to Maletesta Ungarus, knight ; another, bear-
ing the same date, to Nicholas de Beccario, a nobleman of
Ferraria ;¥ and in 1397, one to Raymond Viscount de Perilleux
and Knight of Rhodes, with a train of twenty men and thirty
horses.* But this purgatory must have fallen afterwards into
disrepute, for we find, that by the authority of the Pope,
Alexander the VIth (he having considered the same in the light
of imposition), it was demolished on St. Patrick’s day, in the
year 1497, by the father guardian of the Franciscans of Done-
gall, and some other persons of the deanery of Loughern,
who were deputed for this purpose by the bishop. A canon
of the priory of St. Dabeoc usually resided on the island, for
the service of the church and pilgrims.

~ Rymers Fadera, Tom. 6, p. 107. * Id., Tom. 8, p. 14.

a very celebrated church in a certain lake in Ulster, called Loch Gerg, in which is
that celebrated Purgatory of St. Patrick, whence either the lake itself or the
place in which it lies is called Géeann Gerc, where, in the adjacent territory,
St. Dabeocus is held in the greatest veneration among our people to this day ;
and his festivity is observed three days every year in our Festologies, viz. :—on
the 1st January, 24th July, and 11th December, according to Marianus Gorman,
Cathaldus Maguire. in the AMartyrologies of Tallaght and Donegall. But the
Calendar of Cashel fixes his festival on the roth of December. It is stated in the
beginning of his Irish life that he had foretold several things about the holiness
and virtues of St. Columb many years before the latter was born, from which it
follows that he flourished in the time of St. Patrick. He is ranked among the
chief saints of Ireland by Comineus of Connor in his book on them.” The lake
is a large melancholy sheet of water, being about six miles from north to south,
and four miles from west to east. In its eastern corner there is a small green
island known as the ‘‘ Saint’s island ;” the bridge which connected it with the
shore has disappeared, but the basis of solid masonry, on which the arches rested,
are still to be seen in the clear water. On this island it was that St. Dabheog
built his monastery, and established the famous “ Purgatory,” or penitential retreat.
In an inquisition taken at Donegall in the first year of James I., the following
notice of it is given :—‘ In the parts of Ulster, near the territory called O’Donnell’s
countrie, are the walls and monuments of a certain monastery or priory, late house
of the Canonical friars, called the priory of Lough Derg, alias commonly called
* St. Patrick’s Purgatory,’ which priory now is very much on the decay, and has,
these many years past, been totally abandoned and dissolved. The aforesaid
Prog, lies and is situate in a certain small island in the middle of a lake, called

ghdarg, about fifteen miles from the village of Donnagall aforesaid. The
prior of the monastery aforesaid, at the time of the dissolution and aban-
doning aforesaid, was seized as of fee in right of the priory aforesaid, of the
site, circuit, ambit, and precinct of the said late house, with the appurtenances, in
which are one old church, very ruinous, and walls of stone lately levelled, with
small pieces of land circumjacent, containing 14 acres of land, and of the whole
island aforesaid, containing about 10 acres, and of certain lands and hereditaments
to the said house and island adjacent, called Termon Magrath and Termon
McMonghan, containing 4 quarters of land of the great measure . . . . .”
The barren island-rock where the ‘‘station” is now held, is not 10 acres in
extent, nor is it and, and therefore we conclude that the island described in the
Inquisition is the ‘‘ Saints’ Island.” ‘‘In_ 1632,” Mr. Otway, in his Sketches in
Donegal, writes: ‘‘the State ordered Sir James Balfour and Sir William Stewart
to seize unto his Majesty’s use this island of Purgatory, and accordingly we find

,

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-241.png ---
County of Donegall. 209

The extent of this island is scarcely three-quarters of an
Trish acre ; the cave of the purgatory is built of free-stone, and
covered with broad flags and green turf laid over them; in
length, within the walls, it measures sixteen feet and a half,
and in breadth, about two feet and an inch; when the door
is shut, no light can be discovered save what enters at a small
window in the corner’ In 1630 the government of Ireland
thought fit to have it finally suppressed, and it was accord-

ingly dug up, to the no small distress and loss of the Roman
Catholic clergy.”

Movill; on Loughfoyle, in Inisoen. St. Patrick founded
the monastery of Domnachbile, commonly called Maghbile,
and placed there A-ngussius, the son of Olild. For some time

this was in high repute,* and we meet with the following
abbots of it :—*

A.D. 590. St. Finian flourished about this time ;> as did St.
Siollan in 618.°

Y War. Mon. * War. Annals. * Tr. Th., p. 145 and 181. » Act. SS., p. 347.
© Ann. Four Masters. .

that Sir William proceeds to the island, and reports that he found an abbot and
forty friars, and that there was a daily resort of four hundred and fifty pilgrims,
who paid eight pence each for admission to the island. Sir William further
informs the Privy Council, that in order to hinder the seduced people from going
any longer to this stronghold of Purgatory, and wholly to take away the abuse
hereafter, he had directed the whole to be defaced and utterly demolished ; there-
fore the walls, works, foundations, vaults, &c., he ordered to be rooted up, also
the place called St. Patrick’s bed, and the stone on which he knelt. These and
all other superstitious relics he ordered to be thrown into the lough, and he made
James McGrath, the owner of the island, to enter into recognizance that he should
not in future permit the entrance of Jesuits, friars, nuns, or any other superstitious
order of Popery, to enter therein.” The venerable Monastery of St. Dabheog,
was at this time inkabited by Augustinian friars. They were expelled, the
monastery pulled down, and the whole penitential establishment ‘‘defaced and
demolished.” In consequence of this thorough ‘‘ rooting up,” by Sir William
Stewart, the locale of the station was changed to the present Station Island, which
is smaller and farther removed from the shore. It is a barren strip of rock,
without a single green patch to relieve the eye, and the few buildings built
upon it look, from the distance, like portions of the rock on which they stand.
Between it and the shore a ferry-boat plies, from the 1st June to the 15th of
August ; it carries the pilgrims to and from the island, and for this privilege pays a
handsome sum to the lord of the soil. These pilgrims or penitents retire to this
remote retreat to withdraw themselves more thoroughly from the distraction
and bustle of temporal affairs. They make three days’ spiritual recollection,
fast on bread and water, keep vigil for one whole night in the church, and finish
by approaching the holy sacraments of confession and communion. The mountain
solitudes, the vast desolation, the wild screaming of the trumpet announcing the
ceparture of the ferry-boat, and other mournful surroundings of the place—all
kindle in the soul feelings of awe and reverence, and fill it with a keener sense of
the power of God, and of the strict account he will require of each one, when his
brief term of life is brought to a close. The place is graphically described
by the Rev. Mr. Otway in his valuable work on Donegal, from which I have
already quoted at some length. In a sketch of his excursion to this famous
Lough he writes:—‘‘ The road from the village of Pettigo, leading towards
Lough Derg, runs along a river tumbling over rocks ; and then, after proceeding

P

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-242.png ---
210 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

953. Died Angus M‘Loingsy, archdeacon of this abbey.

1098. Died the abbot Haitheartagh M‘Tiarny.c*

Movill is now a parish church in the diocess of Derry.?

Magheribeg ; or the Little Plain, near the town of Donegall.
A monastery was founded here by O’Donnell, about the middle
of the fifteenth century,® for friars of the third order of St.
Francis.

Malin ; on the sea-side in Inisoen; here we find a very
ancient church, which is said to have been a monastery.&

Muckish ; appears, in the map, to be four miles and a half
from Castle Doe, in the barony of Kilmacrenan; yet bishop
Pococke observes, that when he visited that country he could
not hear of such an abbey.

Raphoe ;* a small town which gives name to the barony.
St Columb founded an extensive monastery at Rathboth, and

Ann. Four Masters. °° Id. “Liber Visit, ° Allemande, ‘War. Mon.
§ Pococke’s Journal.

for a time over a boggy valley, you ascend into a dreary and mountainous
tract, extremely ugly in itself, but from which you have a fine view indeed of the
greatest part of the upper lake of Lough Erne, with its many elevated islands,
and all its hilly shores. . I had at length, after
travelling about three miles, arrived where the road is discontinued, and, by
the direction of my guide, ascended a mountain path, that brought me through a
wretched village, and led to the top ofa hill. Here my boy (guide) left me, and
went to look for the man who was to ferry us to Purgatory, and on the ridge
where I stood I had leisure to look around. To the south-west lay Lough Emme,
with all its isles and cultivated shores ; to the north-west Lough Derg, and truly,
never did 1 mark such a contrast. Lough Derg under my feet; the lake,
the shore, the mountains, the accompaniments of all sorts presented the very
landscape of desolation—its waters expanding in highland solitude, amidst a wide
waste of moors, without one green spot to refresh the eye, without a house or
tree, all mourntul in the brown hue of its far-stretching bogs, and the grey
uniformity of its rocks ; the surrounding mountains even partook of the sombre
character of the place ; their forms without grandeur, their ranges continuous and
without elevation. The lake was certainly as fine as rocky shores and numerous
islands could make it, but it was encompassed with such dreariness . . o

I said to myself ‘1 am already in Purgatory.’ A person-who had never seen the
picture that was under my eye, who had read of a place consecrated to the
devotion of ages, might imagine that St. Patrick’s Purgatory, secluded in its
sacred island, would have all the venerable and Gothic accompaniments of olden
time, and its ivied towers and belfried steeples, its carved windows and cloistered
arches, its long, dark aisles and fretted vaults, would have risen out of the water,
rivalling Iona or Lindesfarne ; but nothing of the sort was to be seen ; the island
about half a mile from shore presented nothing but a collection of hideous slated
houses and cabins,” True, its ancient glory has fled from Lough Derg. Its fine
monastic buildings, its church with carved windows and noble arches, its cells,
and its cave have been demolished, but the spirit of persecution which effected
this work of destruction, served only to stimulate Catholic piety, and St. Patrick's
Purgatory is now as frequented by Penitents as in the days of St. Dabheog.

19 Raphoe, otherwise Rath-Both (the rath of the cottages) has also lost its
ancient glory. The hand of the destroyer fell heavily upon it, and all that
remains of its ecclesiastical greatness is a portion of the old cathedral incorporated
with the present one. The famous monastery built here by St. Columbkille, and
subsequently enlarged by St. Adamnan, has been levelled to the ground, and its
site is hardly known at present; the town itself, which was once so important as

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-243.png ---
County of Donegall. : 211

died the 9th of June, A.D. 596 :* St. Adamnan, abbot of Hy,
and patron and restorer of this monastery, died the 23d of
September, A.D. 703,! about which time Raphoe became and
continues to be the seat of a bishop.

Rathcunga; in the barony of Tyrhugh. St Patrick
founded an abbey here, in which St. Assicus and five other
bishops were interred.*

= Tr. Th., p. 494. ‘TId., p. 509. *Id., p. 176.

to give its name to the diocese, and to hold the episcopal residence, has declined
into a dilapidated village, and the bishop of the diocese now resides in Letter-
kenny. The patron and first bishop of Raphoe is commonly set down as St. Eunan,
but éru/y and correctly. St. Adamnan, for Eunan or Aoonan is the Irish pronunci-
ation of Adamnan. The late Rev. Mr. Kelly, professor in Maynooth College, in
his ‘' Notices of the Patron Saints of Ireland,” calls attention to this fact. Writing
of the patron saint of Raphoe, he says :—‘‘ His festival was formerly observed in
that diocese on the 7th of September. It is now on the 23rd of that month. the
day on which all the ancient calendars commemorate the illustrious abbot of Hy.
St. Adamnan, é.c., WSd€mndn, correctly pronounced Eunan.” Colgan, in his Acta
Sanctorum, nowhere insinuates the existence of a St. Eunan as distinct from St.
Adamnan, but invariably writes of Adamnan as bishop of Raphoe. From all
this, however, we are not warranted in concluding that this Adamnan, first bishop
of Raphoe, is the same as the illustrious abbot of Hy, who was abbot also of the
monastery at Raphoe, and enlarged it. Ware was the first to write Eunan; he
was unacquainted with the native pronunciation, and hearing the people sayi
Aoonan, he concluded it must be Eunan. This mistake of his caused serious ae
ficulty and much anxious research to scholars who followed him in Irish antiquities.
Harris, for instance, in his work, says :—‘‘ It seems it was St. Eunan, who erected
the church of this abbey into a cathedral, and who is looked upon to be the first
bishop of this see. But, upon the strictest inquiry I could make, I have not been
able to discover the exact time in which he lived.”

St. Adamnan, who enlarged and governed the monastery of Raphoe, has left
us the most perfect biography extant of St. Columbkille. He was himself a saint,
and one of the most remarkable men of his time. Springing from the stock of
the renowned Conall-Gubben, he seems to have devoted himself from his earliest
years tothe service of God, in the order of his more renowned kinsman St.
Columbkille. In due time he was elected to the abbacy of Hy, being the ninth in
order from the holy founder. His talents and accomplishments, as wellas his extraor-
dinary sanctity, made themselves known under the rude garb of the monk, and king
and legislators often invoked his assistance in matters of difficulty. He seems to have
lived much in Ireland. He was the intimate friend of the famous Alfrid of North
Britain. Ata legislative assembly at Tara, in the year 697, he procured the

assing of the law of the innocents. viz., a law protecting women and children
rom the barbarities of war—a law afterwards known as the Canon of Adamnan, a
memorial which a conqueror might envy. The venerable Bede bears testimony,
and a more competent witness there could not be, that he was ‘‘a good man, and
wise, and a peer in the knowledge of the Scriptures.”

The following entries in the ‘‘ Annals” will show the immense historic interest
and importance which surround the ecclesiastical centre of the venerable diocese
of Raphoe :—‘ A.D. 813. Maelduin, son of Ceamiaoladh, Bishop of Rathboth,
died. A.D. 925. St. Maelbrighda, son of Tornan, successor of Patrick, Colum-
Cill6 and Adamnan, head of the piety of all Ireland, and of the greater part of all
Europe, died at a good old age. A.D. 952. Robhartach, successor of Colum-
Cillé, and Adamnan, died. A.D 1016. Muireadhach, son of Crichan, successor
of Colum-Cille and Adamnan, a learned man, bishop and virgin, lector of Ard-
macha, and intended successor of St. Patrick, died, after the 74th year of his age,
on the fifth of the calends of January, on Saturday night precisely ; and he was
buried with great honouy and veneration in the great church of Ardmacha before
the altar. A.D, 1057. Robhartaich. son of Feardomhnach, successor of Colum

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-244.png ---
212 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Ratheanich ; in Inisoen. St. Brugach, the son of Degad,
was bishop of Ratheanich about the beginning of the sixth
century ;! from which period we can learn nothing of it.

1 Act. SS., pp. §01 and 597.

Cillé and Adamnan, died. A.D. 1173. Murray O’Coffey, Bishop of Derry and
Raphoe, a son of chastity, a precious stone, a transparent gem, a brilliant star, a
treasury of wisdom, and a fruitful branch of the canon; after having bestowed
food and raiment upon the poor and the destitute, after having ordained priests
and deacons, and men of every rank, rebuilt many churches, consecrated many
churches and burial-places, founded many monasteries and regleses, and fulfilled
every ecclesiastical duty ; and after having gained the palm for piety, pilgrimage,
and repentance, resigned his spirit to heaven in the Drubhregles of Colum-Cillé
in Derry, on the roth day of February. A great miracle was performed on the
night of his death, namely, the dark night was illumined from midnight to day-
break ; and the people thought that the neighbouring parts of the world, which
were visible, were in one blaze of light ; and the likeness of a large globe of fire
arose over the town and moved in a south-easterly direction, and all persons arose
from their beds, imagining that it was daylight, and it was also thus on the east
side of the sea. A.D. 1198. Gillamacliag O’Branan resigned his abbacy ; and
Gillachriest O’Kearney was elected coarb of St. Columbkille by the universal
suffrages of the clergy and laity of the north of Ireland. The church of Raphoe
was plundered and destroyed by John De Courcy this year. A.D. 1261. Mael-
patrick O’Scannal, bishop of Raphoe, was elected to the archbishopric of
Armagh. A.D. 1266, The dignity of bishop was conferred at Armagh on a friar
of the order of St. Dominic (z.¢, O’Scoba), and he was appointed to Raphoe.
A.D. 1299. Farrell O’Freel, bishop of Raphoe, died. He was the most celebrated
man of his time for charity, humanity, piety, and benevolent actions. A.D. 1306.
Professor Thomas O’Naan, archdeacon of Raphoe, and bishop-elect of the same
church, died. A.D. 1319. Henry Mac-an-Chrosain, bishop of Raphoe, died ; and
Thomas, son of Cormac O’Donnell, abbot of Ashroe, was then elected to the
bishopric of Raphoe. A.D. 1366. The bishop of Raphoe, s.¢., Mac Mongail, died.
A.D. 1397. Hugh MacMahon recovered his sight by fasting in honour of the
holy cross of Raphoe, and of the image of the B. Virgin Mary at Athtruim.
A.D. 1411. The holy crucifix of Raphoe poured out blood from its wounds. Many
distempers and diseases were healed by that blood. A.D. 1420. The bishopric of
Raphoe was procured for O’Gallagher (Laurence). A.D. 1438. O’Gallagher, i-c.,
Loughlin, bishop of Raphoe, died. A.D. 1543. Edmond, the son of Brian
O’Gallagher, bishop of Raphoe, died on the 26th of February, after having received
opposition respecting the bishopric. A.D. 1561. Art, the son of Felim Fin
O’Gallagher, bishop of Raphoe, died at Ceann Maghair on the 13th of August.
He was much lamented in Tirconnell. A.D. 1597. A dispute having arisen this
year between the monks of Assaroe and the friars of Donegal, respecting the body
of Baron Inchiquin, who had been drowned in the river Erne, it was decided by
Redmond O’Gallagher, bishop of Derry, and Niall O’Boyle, bishop of Raphoe,
in favour of the friars.” The jurisdiction of the bishop of Raphoe originally in-
cluded more territory than it now controls, It was measured by Tirconnell’s
boundaries, which embrace the large and important district of Inishowen. Its
limits have been contracted; Inishowen has been taken from it, and why or
wherefore, does not appear. Reasons are assigned off-hand by some who pretend
to a knowledge of the matter, but what amount of historical foundation they have
is hard to know. What we do know is, that in 1266, ‘‘German O’Cherballen,
bishop of Derry, seized by violence, and appropriated a part of the diocese of
Raphoe.” Ware, in his antiquities, states this fact, and for his authority refers us
to the Registry of Clogher, which the writer of this has never been able to see.
The part thus violently appropriated is Inishowen. or the peninsula of Eoghan,
one of the sons of the famous Niall of the Nine Hostages, and founder of Kinel
Owen, or the O'Neill family, who possessed it down to the fifteenth century, from
which time the O’Doherty’s, descendants of Conail Gubban, were lords of the
district, till the death of Sir Cahir O’Doherty in 1610. «

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-245.png ---
County of Donegall. 213

Rathene ; a church in the diocess of Raphoe, and commonly
called Rathnanepscop; St. Aid Glass fixed his residence here,
where his festival is observed on the 16th of February ;™ and
the feast of St. Fidmunius of Raithen, brother to St. Fidhar-
leus, who flourished A.D. 750, is observed here on 16th of
May.? :

Rathmullin ;* a small town on Loughswilley, in the barony
of Kilmacrenan. An house was built here for Carmelites, or

™ Vard, p.158. "Calendar.

%® Rathmullan has still its monastery standing, and in tolerable order, thus form-
ing an exception to the rule of thorough ‘‘ rooting up” which has been pursued, as
we have seen with vandal effect towards the fine old historic ecclesiastical estab-
lishments of Tirconnell. The monastery of Rathmullan was a Carmelite priory ;
it exhibits some fine specimens of pointed Gothic architecture. and over its eastern
window there is a figure of St. Patrick, large and in a very good state of preserva-
tion. Adjoining the priory are the remains of a strongly-built castle, and in one
of its gables a slab is inserted with the armorial bearings of the family of the Mac
Swines, or Mac Swineys, sculptured on it, showing thereby this to be the ances-
tral castle of that family, once powerful in those parts. In 1618, or thereabouts,
Turlogh Oge Mac Swine was compelled to deliver up possession of this castle, and
manor attached, to Dr. Knox, who had been then appointed Protestant bishop of
Raphoe. Dr. Knox repaired it, and introduced many improvements, with the
view of turning it into an episcopal palace. The present is a solid building, and
entirely built after the Elizabethan style of architecture. The town itself does not
possess any of its ancient importance, a thing to be deplored, for there is no more
charming situation than that of Rathmullan, on the edge of Lough Swilly’s
pleasant shore. Two of the most deeply interesting incidents in the history of

irconnell occurred here, and thus added to the fame of Rathmullan. Towards
the end of the sixteenth century there was growing up in Tirconnella prince, ‘‘ whose
youth and renown,” say the Four Masters, ‘spread through the five provinces of
Ireland, even before he had arrived at the age of manhood, for his goodly growth,
wisdom, sagacity, and noble deeds, and the people in general used to say that he
was really the prophesied one.” This was Hugh Roe, heir presumptive to the
throne of Tirconnell—his father, then an old man, being the reigning chieftain.
Sir John Perrot, the then Lord Deputy of Ireland, determined to get possession of
the young prince, and with this view had a ship fitted up and well stored with
Spanish wines. The vessel sailed round from Dublin, and put into Lough Swilly,
in which neighbourhood the young O’Donnell was staying with his foster-father,
MacSwyne-na-Thua, and the crew, representing themselves as Spanish traders,
opened a traffic in wines with the people on the shore. The scheme succeeded.

ugh Roe and some young companions coming into the neighbourhood of Rath-
mullan, were invited by MacSwyne of Fanad, the lord of the castle at Rathmullan,
to an entertainment in which they should try the quality of the wine newly im-
ported. A messenger was sent from the castle for a good supply, but word was
sent back by the captain that all the wine they had for sale had been disposed of ; if,
however, the noble company at the castle would condescend to visit the ship, he
should take it as a great honour to treat them to the choicest samples in his stock.
There was no need to press the warm invitation.

‘« The generous prince, Red Hugh,
Unguarded quits the fortress walls and stands amidst the crew.
Down with the hatches, set the sails, we have won the wished-for prize;
Above the rebel’s prison-cell to-morrow’s sun shall rise,
Untasted foams the Spanish wine, the board is spread in vain ;
The hand that waved a welcome forth is shackled by a chain ;
Yet faster, faster through the deep, the vessel glideth on—
Tirconnell's towers like phantoms fade, the last faint trace is gone.”

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-246.png ---
214 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

White Friars, and dedicated to the Virgin Mary by M‘Swine-
fannagh.?

Inquisition 15th September, 43rd Queen Elizabeth, finds
that this friary, containing a church and steeple, a cloister,

° War. Mon.

The ship stood out to sea, and in due time arrived at Dublin, where the young
prince was consigned to the dungeon of the castle, from whence he escaped through a
sewer five years afterto the Wicklow mountains, and with great difficulty reached his
father’s castle at Ballyshannon. Another incident far more important and far more
touching than the kidnapping of the young Hugh Roe, was witnessed hy the little
town of Rathmullan. This event is known as ‘‘the Flight of the Earls,” which
recently became the subject, as well as the name, of an able and popular work, by
the Rev. C. P. Meehan, Dublin. ‘‘A ship carried from Rathmullan, the Earl
O'Neill,” write the Four Masters, ‘‘(Hugh, son of Ferdorah), and the Earl
O'Donnell (Rory, son of Hugh, who was son of Manus), and many other nobles
of the province of Ulster. These are the persons who went with O’Neill,
namely, Tis countess, Catherina, daughter of Magennis. and her three sons, Hugh
the baron, John, and Brian. . . . . . . . These were they who went
wth the Earl O’Donnell, namely, Caffar his brother, with his sister
Nuala ; Hugh, the Earl's child, wanting three weeks of being one year old;
Rose, daughter of O'Doherty, and wife of Caffar. . . . 1. - sss ee
They embarked on the festival of the Holy Cross, in autumn (1607). This was
a distinguished company ; and it is certain that the sea has not borne, and the
wind has not wafted, in modern times, a number of persons in one ship more
eminent, illustrious, or noble in point of genealogy, heroic deeds, valour, feats of
arms, and brave achievements than they. Would that God had but permitted them
to remain in their patrimonial inheritances until their children should arrive at
the age of manh 1 Woe to the heart that meditated, woe to the mind that
conceived, woe to the council that recommended the project of this expedition,
without knowing whether they should to the end of their lives be. able to return
to their native principalities or patrimonies !” Amongst Mangan's translations
from the Irish is a touching elegy, said to have been composed by O'Donnell’s
own bard, Owen Roe MacWard, who accompanied the chieftain in his exile.
This beautiful poem is addressed to Nuala, O’Donnell’s sister, whom the bard
finds in solitary grief, at the grave of her illustrious relatives, on St. Peter’s Hill,
at Rome.
L
‘*O woman of the piercing wail,
Who mournest o’er yon mound of clay,
With sigh and groan ;
‘Would God thou wert among the Gael !
Thou wouldst not then from day to day
~Weep thus alone.

13m
“°'Twere long before, around a grave
In green Tirconnell, one could find
This loneliness ;
Near where Beunn-Boirche’s banners wave,
Such grief as thine could ne’er have pined
Compassionless.

ql,
» What do I say? Ah, woe is me!

Already we bewail in vain
Their fatal fall !

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-247.png ---
County of Donegall. ary 5

hall, three chambers, an orchard, and a quarter of unprofit-
able land, called Killenecrosse, and another quarter of the
same kind called Romullen, a/ias Farenebraer, were in
M‘Swinefannet’s country, and of the annual value of 6s. 8d.
Irish money.—Chief Rememb.

Seinglean ;» was a celebrated abbey found by the great St.
Columb ; in process of time it became a parish church, and
is in the diocess of Raphoe?P

» Tr. They p- 494-
Iv.
“ Then, daughter of O’Donnell ! dry
Thine overflowing eyes. and turn
Thy heart aside ;
For Adam's race is born to die,
And sternly the sepulchral urn
Mocks human pride !
Vv.
“ Look not, nor sigh, for earthly throne,
Nor place thy trust in arm of clay—
But on thy knees
Uplift thy soul to God alone,
For all things go their destined way
» As he decrees.

vi.

“«Embrace the faithful crucifix,
And seek the path of pain and prayer
Thy Saviour trod ;
Nor let thy spirit intermix
With earthly hope and worldly care,
Its groans to God. td

vit.
“ And thou, O mighty Lord ! whose ways
Are far above our feeble minds
To understand,
Sustain us in these doleful days,
And render light the chain that binds
Our fallen land !

VL
“‘ Look down upon our dreary state,
And through the ages that may still
Roll sadly on,
Watch Thou o'er hapless Erin’s fate,
And shield, at least, from darker ill
The blood of Conn !”

2 Seangleann, or Glencolumbkille, as it is now commonly called, is a peaceful
valley, enclosed by two walls of bare mountain, and terminating in a strand on
which the waves of the Atlantic break for ever. The mountain that encloses it on
the northern side presents a fine escarpment breaking into precipices, where it
runs out and forms the noble ocean cliff called Glen Head. It is in very truth a
retreat to the mind of the pious contemplative, who in this remote vale, shut in be-
tween Slieve League and Slievatooey, may have his meditations on the Divine
attributes quickened and elevated into higher contemplations by the presence of

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-248.png ---
216 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Taughboyne ; St. Baithen, the son of Brendan, a disciple and
‘kinsman of St. Columb, and his successor in the abbey of Hy,

the sublimest and most awful aspects of nature. A place so favourable to prayer
and retirement could not fail to attract the notice of St. Columba ; he chose it for
the situation of one of his principal monasteries, and made it his favourite retreat
when he visited his native mountains. It appears his first visit to this glen was
suggested by an angel who, appearing to him on one occasion, told him to pro-
ceed to the solitude of Seangleann, expel the evil spirits who established them-
selves there, and consecrate it to God. Manus O’Donnell, the Saint’s biographer
and kinsman, relates this fact, and adds, in very beautiful narrative, the circum-
stances which attended the visit made by St. Columba in obedience to this Divine
command. He begins by a description of the Seangleann :—‘‘It is,” he writes,
“‘the extreme western portion of the sovereignty of Tirconnell; it stretches into
the ocean, and terminates in rugged mountains and cliffs, which hang high
over the boiling sea, and was then notorious for being a stronghold of evil-spirits.
They came there from Cruachan Oigli (Croagh Patrick, on the Connaught coast
directly opposite), whence they had been expelled by St. Patrick. Having estab-
lished themselves in the Seangleann, they remained there until the time of St.
Columba, covering it with a black cloud, dense and impenetrable to human
sight, and making the boundary river impassable by infecting its water with a
poisonous stench. In obedience to the angel’s admonition, Columba set out for
this place, accompanied by a numerous retinue of holy men, and having
penetrated to the bank of the poisoned river, one of the evil spirits hurled a
heavy pole from the opposite bank, which struck one of the Saint’s com-
anions, called Cearc, and killed him on the spot. Columba, inflamed with
oly indignation at such a daring act of the demon, flung back the pole,
chasing away the thick darkness and the devils in its course, until it fell
on a spot where it struck its roots into the soil, and turned into a fine holly
tree, which continues to flourish even to the present day. After this the Saint
blessed the river, and having crossed it, he was met by the angel, who handed
him a large blue stone, with angles upon it, and told him to cast it into the
Egyptian darkness before him. He did so, when lo! the sun shot its bright
beams into the gloom, and the evil spirits were seen crowding on a precipitous
cliff impending over the sea. Again St. Columba, by the angel's direction,
wielded the stone, and his own bell called dubs Duaibseach, and hurling them at
the crowd of infernal spirits, bade them in the name of Christ to precipitate them-
selves into the sea, and injure no one for the future. At the Saint’s command,
and his invocation of the sacred name, a violent shock was felt in the mountain, a
chasm was opened in the cliff, and through it the evil spirits disappeared into the
sea. After this the Saint prayed for the recovery of the stone and the bell, and
directly he perceived both bore through the air and falling at his feet. By
the great force of the fall the bell lost its tongue, and sank many fet deep
into the earth. The bell and stone are carefully preserved, and regarded wit!
deep veneration in this district, which the Saint blessed, and ordained that
it should henceforth possess immunity from secular power. With the stone
many miracles were afterwards performed, and the tongueless bell lies still
buried in the hole which it made in its fall, and will remain there to avenge
any and every violation of the immunity of the place.” Such is the curious
narrative of St. Columbkille’s first visit to the Seangleann, and some of the
incidents mentioned in it are recorded in enduring memorials, which are
pointed out to this day. For instance, the grave of Cearc, one of the Saint’s
companions who was crushed by the pole hurled across the river by the evil
spirit, is shown on the Kilcar side of the Glen river, and the townland in
which it is situated is called Stranakirke. The cleft in the precipice through
which the demons disappeared into the sea, and the hole in which the bell lies
buried are pointed out too, but the tongue of the bell is said to have been found
only a few years since by a farmer in the neighbourhood, and to have been sacri-
legiously converted into nails in a neighbouring forge. In the same biography
O'Donnell informs us that long before St. Columbkille’s birth, and the introduction
of Christianity into Ireland, Finn, the son of Cubhal, and the most celebrated

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-249.png ---
County of Donegall. 217

founded Teghbaoithin, that is, the house of Baithen, in Tyr-
connell ; this saint flourished A.D. 584, and 593.9 Taugh-
boyne is now a parish church in the diocess of Raphoe.’
Torre Island ;* an island extremely fertile, situated about
eight miles from the mainland of the barony of Kilmacrenan.

Act. SS. p. 369. Index, Tr. Th p. 495 * Liber Visit.

soothsayer among the Pagan Irish, foretold the Saint’s connexion with the
Seangleann. Speaking of the remarkable prophecies that existed regarding St.
Columbkille’s birth, he has the following :—‘‘ Not only did these and others who
were advanced in Christian perfection, and men full of God, foretell the birth and
holiness of St. Columb, but also many heathen soothsayers, long before the light of
Christianity blazed in Ireland. Of these, perhaps the most renowned was Finn
Mac Cubhall,a man whose great physical strength and numerous victories over his
enemies, have rendered him famous not only inhistory, butin story. He, in oneofhis
hunting expeditions, dropped upon a swift and noble stag, and let loose his best and
fleetest hounds in pursuit of the animal. On went the stag bounding over the
plain towards the river which divides the Seangleann from the surrounding country,
and arriving at the water's edge, plunged in and swam boldly to the opposite
bank. This Seangleann is in the extreme west of Tirconnell, running out far into
the ocean, rising into lofty bare mountains, and terminating in steep cliffs ; it has
been long sacred to St. Columb, and one of his principal monastenes stood there.
The hound in pursuit, though never before vanquished in the chase, did not follow
the stag into the water, but arrested his course and stood immovable on the river's
bank. Finn, astonished at this unusual faltering in his invincible dog, employed
his powers of divination to discover the cause, which, by God’s permission, he
succeeded in finding, and then announced it to his followers:—‘ There shall be
born in this country a child, by name Columba, in the ninth generation from Cor-
mac, now reigning ; he will be endowed by the great God with many graces and
gifts ; many churches and monasteries will be dedicated to him, and that region to
which the stag fled for refuge will be sacred to him, as well as a safe asylum for all
who avail themselves of it.’ The path traversed by the stag is at the present
time called Bealach-Damhain, i.e., ‘path of the stag.’" So far O’Donnell, and,
I may add, what will lend further interest to the story, namely, that the place
where the giant Finn started the stag is Loughros, in the parish of Inniskeel, and
the course of the chase is Croagh-Ballaghdown.

This and many another “tale traditionary” hangs around Glen Columbkille,
and still related by the pious and simple people of the glen, where the lover of
Irish traditions will find the most intelligent story-tellers among the primitive
inhabitants of this remote valley. Far down the glen stood the monastery built
by St. Columba, but a Protestant chapel now occupies its site. Some six or seven
years since this site was excavated in search of relics by Rev. Dr Todd, T.C.D., and
Dr. Petrie. gentlemen to whom the Irish literature of our age is deeply indebted,
but with what result is not known. At a turn in the road, which passes through
the middle of the glen, is a stone cross, which there is every reason to believe, from
the evidence of the monument itself, as well as from the traditions of the place,
was placed there by Saint Columba. A little further down, on a slope on the
northern side, is the Saint’s well, and adjoining it is the Saint's bed, where
probably there was a cell to which the Saint withdrew from time to time, at a
short distance from the monastery.

32 Torry, sometimes written Tory, Torree, and Inis-Torry. It is a desolate
island, lying out in the Atlantic some nine miles from the mainland ; its extent is
about three miles in length,very narrow, and affording but a very small area capable
of producing crops of any kind, which imposes on the wretched inhabitants the
terrible necessity of depending on the precarious life of fishing. To this inhospit-
able island St. Columba, as in the case of the Seangleann, was directed by the
voice of an angel to proceed and bless it. He received this command in the north
of Tirconnel, where he had been devoting himself to his pious duties, and having
taken a few companions with him he set out at once for his destination, Whenhe

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-250.png ---
218 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

There was an abbey here of which St. Ernan, the son of
Colman, was abbot about the year 650."

Tully [in the map], Tudlyaughnish [in the Visitation Book];
near Loughswilley, in the barony of Kilmacrenan. St Columb

“8 Act. SS., p. 17. Tr. Th., p. 490.

arrived on the top of a high mountain, from which the island was seen out in the
ocean, a discussion arose between himself and his companions as to who should
purify the island and become its patron. At last it was decided that each should
throw his staff in the direction of Torry, and that he whose staff came closest to
the island should bless and possess it. The staff of St. Columba distanced the
others by miles, it reached even the island itself, and the Saint having obtained the
permission of the chieftain, Ailild, entcred and erected a magnificent church and
monastery there. Being obliged soon after to be elsewhere, he committed the
government of the monastery to St. Eunan, one of his disciples, and left him strict
injunctions to allow no dog into the island. This monastery continued to flourish
through a long lapse of ages down, till Queen Elizabeth's governor of Connaught,
the cruel Bingham, made a descent upon the place and destroyed everything that he
could not carry away with him. A round tower, called the Clog-teach—‘‘the Bell-
House”—still stands here, wanting a portion of the roof, and the foundations of a
series of seven little churches or cells can still be traced with the aid of the tradi-
tions of the place. In a lonely corner of the island there is a little mound from
which a quantity of the earth has been excavated, called the ‘‘Nun’s Grave,” about
which :he poor islanders have a beautiful tradition. Long, long ago, after a great
storm, it appears, the body of a lady was found high up upon the beach, near the spot
where the grave now is. The wild waves, in carrying it thither, must have dragged it
over the pointed rocks, which form a barrier round the shore, and still it lay there
undisfigured and untouched by the rude elements, which crush the strongest timbers,
and wear the hardest rock. ‘Ihe face was pale, but without a scratch; the eyes
were closed as if in calm sleep ; the hands were clasped in the attitude of prayer;
and the dress retained the same graceful folds that it had when the person lived.
To the simple people the dress was new—it was the habit of a nun, with the
leathern girdle round the waist, from which the beads were suspended—the air
was laden with the sweetest perfume, and gleams of light shot out at inter-
vals and illumined the pale face. Intelligence of the strange occurrence soon reached
the inhabitants, and the whole population rushed to the spot. Awe and astonish-
ment seized the spectators, but not one of them ventured to touch the body,
for though they had never seen the habit with which it was clothed, they had
a notion that there was something sacred about it. A discussion arose as to how
they should act, but all was doubt and uncertainty, until one of them, venerable for
his years and virtues, and of high repute in the island, invited them to fall on their
knees and to pray to God to direct them in their difficulty. The crowd obeyed on
the instant, and they bent low in prayer. Presently a supernatural voice was
heard announcing to them the fact that the body lying there was that of a holy nun,
and telling them to bury it just as it was, with great respect and veneration, under
the green turf close to where it lay. Accordingly, they opened a grave, laid the
body gently in it, then closed it, and having spent a short time in prayer, they re-
turned to their homes with great joy and deep gratitude to God for so great a
favour, From that time forward the grave became a great resort of the poor
islanders, who are still to be seen in large numbers praying at it, and begging the
intercession of the holy nun who sleeps there. The efficacy of her intercession
has been and is being always felt in every cottage in the island ; many a father of
a family and poor widow’s son has it rescued from a watery grave. Of
this, instances almost innumerable are related in Torry, and at the present moment
hardly a boat in the island is ever known to put out into the ‘‘ treacherous deep”
without having a handful of earth from the ‘‘ Nun's Grave ” carefully deposited in
the stern. The earth of the mound raised over the grave has been so much drawn
upon, that it has become law with the people now that no one should take more
than a small pinch of it at atime.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-251.png ---
County of Donegall. 219

founded an abbey at Tulachdubglaisse.t This is now a parish
church in the diocess of Raphoe.*

Tr. Th, p. 494. Liber Visit.

Antiquarians have alsoa good deal of Pagan interest in Torry. In remote
Pagan times it was one of the main strongholds of the Fomorians, one of whose
chiefs erected a tower on a cliff at the eastern extremity of the island, called Tor-
Connaing, celebrated in our pre-Christian annals as

“« The tower of the island, the island of the tower,
The citadel of Codnaing, the son of Toelar.”

Here was fought a famous battle, in which the fierce tribes of those early days
maintained the conflict on the strandat Port Doon tillthe returning tide buried nearly
all the combatants in the waves. Here the formidable “ Balor of the mighty blows”
had his head-quarters. This Balor isstill vividly remembered in the traditions of Torry
Island, where a very curious story is to!d of him, which Dr. O'Donovan, in his
learned edition of the Annals of the Four Masters, deemed worthy of a special
notice, The story runs thus :—In the days of yore there lived three brothers,
Gavida, MacSamthaim, and MacKineely, the first of whom was a distinguished
smith, who kept his forge at Drunnatinne, a place in the parish of Rath-Finan.
MacKineely was lord of that district, comprising the parishes of Rath-Finan and
Tullaghobegly, and owned a cow called Glas Gaizvlen, so lactiferous as to be
greatly coveted by the neighbours. At this period Torry Island was governed by
a famous captain called Balor, who had one eye in the middle of his forehead, and
another directly opposite it in the back of his skull. This latter eye, like that
of the basilisk, had a mortiferous power, and was kept constantly closed by Balor,
except when he wished to destroy an adversary with it. A druid had prophesied
that Balor should be murdered by his own grandson. To nullify this prediction
he shut up his only child, a daughter, in an impregnable tower built on the summit
of Tormore, a cliff on the north-east of the island, under the keeping of twelve
matrons, whom he strictly charged to keep her not only from intercourse with, but
even from the knowledge of the existence of the male sex. Time passed, and
Ethnea grew into a beautiful woman. Balor. now apparently secure against the
prediction ofthe Druid, at the head of an adventurous band of sea-rovers, swept the
neighbouring coast from thesea, but hisambition could not besatisfied unless with the
possession of the Glas Gaivlen. One day the MacKineely above-mentioned having

ad occasion to go to his brother’s forge to get some swords made, took with him
the Glas Gaivlen on a halter. Arrived at the forge, he entrusted the cow to his
brother, MacSamthain, who was there too on a similar errand. While Mac-
Kineely was within, Balor, in the form ofa little red-haired boy, came to Mac-
Samthain and told him that he had just heard his two brothers saying, inside the
forge, that they would use all his (MacSamthain’s) steel in making MacKineely’s
swords. MacSamthain, deceived by the boy, gave the cow in charge to his little
red-raired friend, and rushed into the forge. Balor, taking advantage of his
opportunity, carried off the Glas Gaivlen to Torry Island, and the place on which
he dragged her up on the island is to this day called Port-na-Glaise, or the harbour
of the green cow. MacKineely, suspecting that a fraud had been practised
on his brother by Balor, ran out of the forge, when lo! he saw the Fomorian chief
with the cow in the middle of the sound of Torry. Grieved to distraction at the loss
of his Glas Gaivlen, he made known his case to a friendly Druid living not far
from the place. The Druid told him that the cow was irrevocable as long as Balor
lived, as he could keep his basilisk eye always open to destroy any one who dared
approach her. Accordingly, MacKineely set about compassing the destruction of
this fatal eye, and for this purpose called to his aid his familiar sprite, ‘* Biroge of the
mountain.” She dressed him in the robes of a young girl, and wafting him across the
sound to the tower of Ethnea, where, by representing her ward as a noble lady just
rescued from a tyrant who attempted to carry her off, she succeeded in introducing
MacKineely to Ethnea, who immediately became enamoured of him. The result of this
intercourse was, that in due time Ethnea gave birth to three sons, whom Balor secured

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-252.png ---
220 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Uskechaoin ; in Inisoen ; an abbey was founded here by St.
Columb, which is now a chapel in the diocess of Derry, ac-
cording to Colgan.”

COUNTY OF DOWN.

Achadhcaotl ;\ near the bay of Dundrum, in the barony of
Lecale. St. Killen, who was abbot of this church, lived in the
fifth century ;* and St. Senan was also abbot of it about the
year 560.

‘Tr. Th., p. 495. * Act. SS., p. 73, and 541. "/d., p. 742.

at once, and rolling them up in a sheet, fastened with a dé/g, orpin. sent them in a
boat to be consigned to the deep. The ae/g, or pin. gave way as the boat crossed
the harbour. when one of the children fell into the water and disappeared ; the other
two were drowned at a spot which is, from this circumstance, called Port-a-delg.
The child that had fallen out and disappeared was invisibly carried away by the
banshee, ‘‘ Biroge of the mountain,” to his father on the mainland, who sent him
to his brother Gavida, to be brought up to his trade, which, in those days, ranked
among the most respectable professions,

Balor, hearing how MacKineely had deceived and injured him, crossed the sound
with a band of his fierce associates, and, landing at a place called Ballyconnell,
succeeded in taking him; and, laying his head on a large white stone, cut it clean
off with one blow of his ponderous sword. This stone, with its red veins, still tells
of this deed of blood, and gives its name to the present district of Cloganeely. It
may be seen now in the grounds of W. Olpherts, Esq., who has carefully
placed it on a pillar six feet high. The heir of MacKineely had, in the meantime,
grown up to be an able man and an excellent smith. Fully aware of the circum-
stances of his birth and escape, and his father's cruel death, he meditated revenge.
This he at length realized ; for Balor one day came to the forge when the young
MacKineely was alone working, and happened. in the course of conversation, to
allude with pride to his victory over MacKineely, never suspecting that he spoke
tohis son. ‘The young smith, fired with rage, watched his opportunity, and
taking a glowing rod from the furnace, thrust it through the basilisk eye of Balor,
thus amply avenging his father’s death, and fulfilling the prediction of the Druid.

1 Achadhcaoil— Among the possessions of the see of Down at the end of the
twelfth century, which are recited in a patent roll of the Tower of London. as
quoted by Dr. Reeves, are ‘‘ Rathmurvul along with Rathscillan.” The former
is Maghera, but there is a difficulty in identifying Rathscillan. as there is no place
in that neighbourhood known by the name; and yet. as is evident by the
grouping of the names, it must have been in the neighbourhood of Maghera, and,
like Magh-ra, it must have been in early t'mes the scene of the piety and labours
of some eminent ecclesiastic. _ Rathscillan signifies ‘‘the Rath of Cillan.” St.
Donard had a brother named Cillen, whose church was somewhere in the neigh-
bourhood. Engus the Culdee, in his tract on the ‘‘ Mothers of the Saints of
Ireland.” refers to Cillen (Killen) in a passage which I translate from Co!gan’s
Latin translation of the original Irish :—“ Derinilla, called Cethuir-Chicheach
(i.¢., of the four provinces), was the mother of SS. Doman; (Donard), son of
Eachachand Aillean, and Aidan, and Muran of Fathen (now Fahan in Inishowen),
and Mochumma of Drumbo, and Cillen of Achadhcail, in the territory of Lecale,
at the bank of the estuary of Dundrum.” Ina field in Wateresk belonging to Mr.
Savage, and immediately adjoining his house, are the remains of an ancient ceme-

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-253.png ---
County of Down. 221

Ardicnise ;? there was a friary of Franciscans here,? but
the time of its foundation is not known.

Bangor ,* or the White Choir ; it was called anciently the
Vale of Angels ; it is a seaport, market, and borough town in
the barony of the Ards.

Abbey of Canons Regular; A.D. 516. St. Comgall was
born in Ulster of noble parentage, and was educated under
St. Fintan, in Clonenagh.*

555. About this time he founded here a celebrated abbey ;>
where in this year Cormac, King of South Leinster, took on
him the cowl ; and died A.D. 567.°

St Flann was abbot here, we cannot say at what time ; but
his feast is cornmemorated on the 15th of December.?

* War. Mon. * Usher. »Id., p. 451. ° Walsh's Prospect, p. 227. 4 Butler,
vol. 12, p. 246.

tery which once was enclosed in a rath. The bodies were interred in graves lined
with flag-stones, and a large granite stone stood in the cemetery, but it has been
rolled into a stream which bounds the field ; on this stone is inscribed a simple
cross formed by the intersection of two.pair of parallel lines. Mr. Savage, who
is not accountable for the barbarous removal of the incised stone, has promised to
have it rolled back to its original position, This site exactly corresponds with
that of the Church of St. Cillen, as described by Angus, the Culdee. It is in the
territory of Lecale, and it is close to the estuary of Dundrum, while it adjoins the
lands attached to the Church of Maghera, which would account for the expression
in the Patent Roll, “ Rathmurvul (Maghera) along with Rathscillan.”

The name Cillen assumes among our Irish saints the forms of Kelan and
Caolan, the latter of which, as derived from Caol, ‘‘ narrow,” is stated by Colgan
to have been a common appellation, denoting ‘*‘slenderness of figure ;” and no
doubt the diminutive form Caolan was used to express affection towards the saint.
This change of the name accounts for the name given to the site of St. Cillen’s
Church, by Aingus, the Culdee, who calls him ‘‘ Cillen of Achadhcail (the field
of the slender man.”)

It seems probable that St. Senan belonged to some other place called Achadh-
caoil.

3 Ardicnise, now called Holywood, which see.

3 Bangor —Keating. in his History of Ireland—that wonderful repertory of bardic
stories—thus accounts for the origin of the name Bangor :—‘ Breasal Breac, King of
Leinster, went with an army to plunder Scotland, and he brought many cows and
herds of cattle with him’ into Ireland; and, after he and his forces landed, they
formed an encampment in the place which is now called Bangor, and
slaughtered a great number of the cattle there, until a considerable number of
the Beanna, i.¢., the horns of the cows, were scattered over the plain; so that
the place ever since bore the name of Magh Beannchoir—the plain of the
horns. A long time after that, when the holy abbot Comgall erected the monas-
tery of Bangor in the same spot, he gave the name of the place in which it
was erected to it, viz.—Beannchor, so that it has retained it ever since.” Bangor
is popularly supposed to mean White Choir, and is so explained by Ware,
Harris, De Burgo, and I may even add Colgan; but the learned Dr. Reeves is.
inclined to believe that the true root of the name is to be found in the Celtic word
Beanna—horns. A monk who had come to Ireland with the Anglo-Normans,
named Jocelin—an industrious collector of all the strange traditions respecting St.
Patrick, that had floated down the stream of time, tells the following story regard-
ing him :—‘‘ He turned, for the sake of rest for himself and his holy company,
unto a certain hill situated in a valley, where afterwards was builded the monas-
tery of Beannchor, and, sitting there, they beheld the valley filled with heavenly
light, and with a multitude of the host of heaven, and they heard, as chanted forth

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-254.png ---
222 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

601. St. Comgall being worn out with extreme old age,
and the cares of his monastery, which he had superintended
fifty years and upwards, surrendered up his soul in his goth
year on the 1oth of May, on which day his feast is observed.*
He was succeeded by St. Finnchuo, who died the 25th of
November, on which day his feast is also celebrated ; this
abbot was remarkable for his austerities.!

605. Died the abbot St. Beogna; his feast is observed on
the 22nd of August&

St. Sillan, the son of Comyn, principal master and rector
of the schools of Bangor, succeeded him; and died on the
28th of February following." .

St. Cumian was abbot about the beginning of this century,!
and his festival is observed on the 17th of September.*

¢ Usher, Act. SS., p. 424. Calendar. * Fleming, p. 314. © Act. SS. p., 424.
™ Jd, and M'‘Geogh. ‘ Act. SS., p. $9. * Fleming, p. 314.

from the voice of angels, the psalmody of the celestial choir.” This legend may
have suggested the tanciful origin of the name. To it is to be attributed the name,
“« The Vale of Angels,” which continued to be used as an a/as for Bangor to its
dissolution, and even occurs as such in the patent under which its present owner
possesses it. .

The illustrious founder, St. Comgall, was born at Magheramourne, a district on
the coast of the county of Antrim, near Larne ; his father’s name was Sedna, and
his mother’s Briga. He was of a distinguished family of the Kingdom of Dal-
Araidhe (Dalaray), which then comprehended the northern half of the county of
Antrim, and which had received its name from its ancestor Fiacha Araidhe. It issaid
that his birth and future sanctity had been foretold both by St. Patrick and St.
MacNessa, the patron saint of Connor. He was bom, according to Tighernach,
in the year 517 ; but other accounts place his birth somewhat earlier. Jocelin,
and others after him, have translated his name into the words ‘‘ Beautiful pledge,”
but his first great disciple, St. Columbanus, considered Faustus, prosperous, as the
equivalent for his Celtic name. After having been instructed in the various
branches of learning he set out from his own country for the purpose of improving
himself in spiritual knowledge, and placed himself under St. Fintan, who then pre-
sided over the great religious establishment of Clonenagh, near Mountrath, in the
Queen's County. After he remained several years under St. Fintan, he was advised
by that saint to return to his own country, and to form there some religious estab-
lishment. On his return to Dalaradia, Comgall, it is said, went to Clonmac-
noise, where he was ordained priest by a Bishop Lugidius. Dr. Lanigan suspects
that Clonmacnoise is written by mistake for Connor, where there resided a per-
sonal friend of our saint, a bishop named Lugadius. St. Comgall intended to
spend the remainder of his days in Britain, but he was induced by Lugadius, and
other eminent men, to remain in his own country. _ He then, about the year 559,
founded the monastery of Bangor. The number of his followers soon became so
great, that it was necessary to establish various monasteries and cells, in which,
taken altogether, it was computed there were 3,000 monks under his rule. Among
them was Cormack, King of South Munster, who, in his old age, retired to Ban-
gor, and there spent the remainder of his days.

St. Bernard, in his life of St. Malachy, speaking of Bangor, says :—‘‘ There
had existed in this place, under the founder Comgellus, a most noble institution,
inhabited by many thousands of monks, the head of many monasteries, a place
truly sanctified, and so fruitful in saints, which brought forth fruit so abundantly
to God, that one of the sons of that holy congregation, Luanus by name, had
himself alone founded one hundred monasteries, which I mention for this reason,
that the reader may, from this single instance, form a conception of the number to
which the remainder of the community amounted. In short, so. widely had its

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-255.png ---
County of Down. 223

613. The abbot Fintan M‘Intrew died about this time, and
the town was destroyed by: fire! St. Columb was abbot, and
probably about the beginning of the century ; his feast is
held on the 1st of October.

634. Died the abbot St. Forannan; the 12th of June is
appointed for his feast."

645. The abbot M‘Laisre died May the 16th, on which day
his feast is held.°

1MGeogh, ™ Fleming, sup. ” Calendar, ° Act. SS., p. 792.

branches extended through Ireland and Scotland. that these times appear to have
been expressly foreshadowed in the verses of David— Thou hast visited the earth,
and hast plentifully watered it,’ &c. Nor was it only into the countries I have
mentioned, but even into distant lands, that crowds of saints, like an inundation,
poured, one of whom, St. Columbanus, penetrating into these our regions of
Gaul, built the monastery of Luxieu, and there became a great multitude. So
great do they say it was, that the solemnization of the Divine offices was kept up
by companies, who relieved each other in succession, so that not one moment,
day or night, was there an intermission of their devotions.” Seven years after he
founded Bangor. St. Comgall visited Scotland, where he founded a church in the
island of Tiree, and assisted his friend St. Columba in the conversion of Budeus,
King of the Northern Picts. Having returned to his dear Bangor, he died on the
toth of May, A.D. 601, in the gist year of his age, after having received the
Holy Viaticum from St. Fiacre. abbot of Conwall, in the county of Donegal, and
afterwards of Clonard. Long after the death of the holy man, the same St.
Fiacre came to Bangor, and, having opened the original tomb, transferred to a
costly shrine the body of St. Comgall, and took for himself an arm, which he
carried home to Leinster as a priceless relic. The shrine, which the piety of the
community had adomed with gold and precious stones, attracted the cupiiity of
the Danes, and the Annals of the Four Masters record :—

A.D. 822. “ The plundering of Bangor by the foreigners ; the oratory was
broken, and the relics of Comgall were taken from the shrine in which they were,
as Comgall himself has foretold when he said :—

«It will be true, true, by the will of the Supreme King of kings,
My bones shall be brought, without defect, from the beloved Bangor to
Antrim.’”

The crozier of St. Comgall was preserved by the clergy of Armagh till it was
taken from them by the English. St. Comgall is said to have drawn up, for the
direction of his monks, a rule which was reckoned among the principal rules in
Ireland. It is a metrical composition in Irish, consisting of thirty-six quatrains.
Though some have doubted whether or not it be the composition of Comgall, the
style and composition establish its claims to antiquity. We have, however, an
undoubted portion of his writings preserved in the works of his disciple St.
Columbanus, which, short though it be, indicates the means and the principles by
which the founder of Bangor raised it to the first position among the monasteries
of the island. His words are—‘‘ Ifthe cultivator of the land and husbandman,
when preparing the soil to commit to it the seed, does not consider his work
all done when he has broken up the earth with a strong share, and by the action
of the plough has reduced the stubborn soil, but further endeavours to cleanse the
ground of unfruitful weeds. to clear it of injurious rubbish,to pluck up by the roots
the spreading shoots of thorns and brambles, fully persuaded that his land will
never produce a good crop, unless it be reclaimed from mischievous plants, apply-
ing to himself the words of the prophet ‘break up your fallow ground, and sow
not among thorns,’ how much more does it behove us, who believe the hope of our
fruits to be laid up, not on earth but in heaven, to cleanse from vicious passions
the field of our heart, and not suppose we have done enough, when we subdue
the ground of our bodies by the labour of fasting and of watching, unless we
primarily study to correct our vices and reform our morals.” Obedience and

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-256.png ---
224 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

659. Died the abbot Seagain M‘Icwid.P

660. The abbot Comgan M‘Cuthenna died of the plague.4

662. The abbot Baoithin died this year,’ as did likewise, on
the 1oth of September, Seinghin M‘Ui Cuinn, who was called
the arch-abbot.*

663. Died the abbot Berach ;‘ his feast is held on the 21st
of April."

PMGogh. Id. *Id.,and Keating. * Act. SS.,p. 17. Vard., p. 354. * Tr.
Th., p. 377. * Fleming, sup.
humility were the great principles of the Bangor rule. ‘‘It was a custom in the
Monastery of the Holy Father Comgall” (says his life), when anyone rebuked
another, the person who was rebuked, whether he were guilty or not, hunibly

B

knelt down.” To the worldling this may appear hard, but the versicles in the
old office-book of Bangor show that the monks of old thought otherwise :—

“ Excellent the rule of Bangor—
Correct and divine—
Exact, holy, constant,
Exalted, just, and admirable.

Blessed the family of Bangor,
Founded on unerring faith,

Graced with the hope of salvation,
Perfect in charity.

A ship that never is distressed,
Though beaten by the waves,
Fully prepared for nuptials,

A spouse for the Sovereign Lord.

A house full of dainties,
Founded on a rock,
Also the true vine
Brought out of Egypt.

Surely an enduring city,
Strong and fortified,
Glorious and deserving,
Built upon a hill.

The ark shaded by the cherubim,
Onall sides overlaid with gold,
Filled with sacred objects,

Borne by four men.

+A princess meet for Christ,
Clad in the sun’s light,
Innocent, yet wise,
On every side invulnerable.

A truly regal hall,

Adorned with various gems,
The fold also of Christ's flock,
Kept by the supreme Father.

A virgin very fruitful,
A mother also chaste,
Joyful and reverential
Submissive to the word of God.

For whom a happy life

Is laid up with the perfect.

Prepared by God the Father—
Excellent the rule of Bangor.”

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-257.png ---
County of Down. 225

664. The abbot St. Segineus died December the 1oth.”

665. Died the abbot Crittan; whose death was followed
by that of the abbot Mochua.* St. Florentius, or Flandus,
was abbot, and probably about this period.’

674. The abbey was destroyed by fire about this time.*

678. St Kennfaelus was abbot ; his feast is observed on the

8th of April.*

679. Died the abbot Colman.>

721. Died the abbot St. Malrubius ; his feast is on the 21st
of April.* Same year died the abbot Chronan whose feast is

on the 6th of November.?
729. Died Cochuler, the learned scribe of this abbey.*
743. Died the abbot Saran, whose feast is observed on the

Ist of August.!
We meet with a St. Daniel, who was either abbot or bishop
of Bangor, and whose feast is held on the 11th of September,

~ Tr. Th., Index. * M‘Geogh. % Fleming, sup. * Keating. * Fleming, sup.
© M'Geogh. °Calendar. *M‘Geogh, and Vard., p. 353. *Annal. Ulster. *M'Geogh.

The superior of Bangor was styled ‘‘ Abbot of Bangor” and ‘‘ Successor of
Comgall.” The 18th hymn of the office-book. or Antiphonary of Bangor, is en-
titled ‘‘ The Commemoration of our Abbots,” and contains a list of fifteen abbots.
Their names are recited in the old book, which is now nearly twelve hundred
years in a foreign country, precisely in the same order as they occur in the annals,
which have been preserved in this country, a circumstance which bears important
testimony to the fidelity of our domestic records. Dr. Reeves, in the Ulster
Journal of Archeology, gives the following translation of that valuable docu-
ment :—

“ The holy, valiant deeds
Of sacred fathers,
Based on the matchless
Church of Bangor;

“ The noble deeds of abbots,
Their number, times, and names,
Of never-ending lustre—
Hear, brothers, great their desert,
Whom the Lord hath gathered
To the mansions of his heavenly kingdom.

“Christ loved Comgall,
Well too did he, the Lord ;
He held Beogna dear ;
He graced the ruler Aedh;
He chose the holy Sillan,
A famous teacher of the world,
Whom the Lord hath gathered
To the mansions of his heavenly kingdom.

“ He made Finten accepted,
An heir generous, renowned ;
He rendered Maclaisre illustrious,
The chief of all the abbots ;
With a sacred torch (the enlightened) Segene,
A great physician of Scripture.
Whom the Lord, &c.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-258.png ---
226 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

but the time when he lived is not mentioned® We also meet
with a St. Regulus, whose feast is on the 11th of June, but
the time he lived in is uncertain; and it is not recorded
whether he was abbot or only a private monk?

755. Died the abbot Suarlech.

775. Died Augustin of Beanchor.*

791. Died the abbot Thomas.

801. Died the abbot Maccoigi.™

812. The Danes burnt the town and abbey this year,"

818. They again plundered it, breaking open the rich shrine
of St. Comgall, and putting the abbot and his monks to death.°

823. They renewed their depredations this year.P

© Fleming, Coll. “Jd. ‘Id. * Tr. Th., p.185. 1 M°Geogh. ™ Annal. Ulster.
2 Annal. Munster. ° Keating. Tr. Th., Index. ® Annal. Munster.

“ Beracanus was a distinguished man ;
Cumine also possessed of grace ;
Columba a congenial shepherd ;
Aidan without complaint ;
Baithene a worthy ruler ;

Crotan a chief president ;
Whom the Lord, &c.

“To these, so excellent, succeeded Caman,
A man to be beloved by all,
Singing praises to Christ,
He now sits on high. That Cronan
The fifteenth, may lay hold on life
The Lord preserve him.
‘Whom the Lord will gather
To the mansions of his heavenly kingdom.

“The truest merits
Of these holy abbots
Meet for Comgill,
Most exalted we invoke
That we may blot out
All our offences,
Through Jesus Christ,
Who reigns for ages everlasting.”

Thus, did the monks of old in Bangor, and its various dependent monasteries,
scattered everywhere through Europe, from Belfast Lough to the banks of the
Ticino, in Italy, keep up a pious remembrance of their abbots. The hymn itself
is rire teenie to assist the memory, for after the introductory verse the lines
run in alphabetical order, beginning :—

“* Amavit Christus Conigillum ;
Bene et ipse Dominium.”
‘Christ loved Comgill ;
Well, too, did he the Lord.”

In this way it devotes a line to each letter of the alphabet till it comes to—
“Zcen ut carpat Cronanus,”
“ That Cronan may lay hold on life.”

It is worthy of remark that zen isa Greek work. The Irish ecclesiastics of that
period displayed a wonderful taste for Greek. The writings of Johannes Scotus

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-259.png ---
County of Down. 227

gor. The abbot Indrect, the son of Dobalenus, died the

26th of April.
919. Died the abbot Mainach, the son of Shiell, esteemed

the most learned writer of the Irish."
Act, SS., p. 254. *1d., p. 107.

Erigena, and many others, show how much that classical language was studied in
our schools. ~ .

I will now place before the reader the various entries in the Annals of the Four
Masters relative to the abbots of Bangor. You will observe that the order of
succession, as recorded in them, precisely corresponds with that in the Antiphonary
of Bangor.

A.D. 600. “ St. Congall, of Bangor, abbot of Bangor, in Ulster, died on the
tenth day of May, after having been thirty years, three months, and ten days in the
abbacy of Bangor. His age was ninety years.”

A.D. 605. ‘St. Beoghna, abbot of Bangor (next) after Congall, died on the
12th of August.”

A.D. 606. “St. Sillan, son of Cuimin, abbot of Bangor, and successor of Con-
gall, died on the 28th of February.” We do not find the name of Aedh in the
annals, though he is set down in the hymns as intervening between Beogna and
Silanus. His name seems to be omitted in the annals on account of the short
period of his office. Colgan, in the Acta Sanctorum, at the 28th of February,
speaking of Sillan, says that he was surnamed “ The Master,” on account of his
learning, and that after he had presided over the schools of Bangor, he was pro-
moted to its abbacy. During the time he presided over the monastery, we read
that—

A.D. 611. “The Church of Bangor, in Ulster, was burned.”

A.D. 612. “ Fintan, of Antrim, abbot of Bangor, died.” We should observe
that from this period a very close connexion existed between the churches of
Antrim and Bangor.

A.D. 645. “ MacLaisre, abbot of Bangor, died on the 16th of May.”

A.D. 665. “Segan Mac-h-Ui-Cuinn, abbot of Bangor, died.” His festival
was afterwards kept in Bangor on the roth of September.

The hymn in the Antiphonary gives the succession after Segene as Berechanus,
Camine, Columba, Aidan, and then Baithene ; but in our own native annals there
seems to be some confusion. The Four Masters give, at A.D. 665, ‘‘ Baeithin,
abbot of Bangor, died ;” and, at A.D. 666, “a great plague raged in this year, of
which died four abbots at Bangor, of Ulster—namely, Bearach, Cummine, Collum,
and Aedhan, their names.” The obit of Baeithin is probably antedated. Berach’s
festival was celebrated on the 21st of April, and that of St. Cummine on the 17th

of September.
A.D. 668. ‘‘Critan, abbot of Bangor, died. Mochus, son of Uist, died.” The
Annals of Clonmacnoise make this entry :—‘Critan, abbot of Beanchor and

Mochwa, abbot of Reanchor, died.” It is probable there is an error in the Clon-
macnoise entry ; for Mochua does not occur in the hymn of the Antiphonary of
Bangor.

AD. 671. Maelrubha, abbot of Bangor, went to Alba (Scotland), and founded
the church of Aporcrosan (Applecross, in Ross-shire), Maelrubha does not occur
in the hymn, perhaps because he had resigned shortly after his appointment ; he
was living at the time the hymn was written. It is stated in the glossary to the
“Felire of Aengus” that he was of the Kinel-Owen, and that his mother was Sub-
taire, daughter of Setna, and the sister of Comgall, of Bangor. This is not very
probable ; for St. Comgall died at the age of 91, in the year 601, and Maelrubha,
who was eighty years of age in 721, must have been born in 641.

A.D. 678. “Colman, abbot of Bangor, died.” He is called Caman in the hymn.

A.D. 688. “ Cronan MacCaulne, abbot of Bangor, died on the 6th of November.”
Cronan was living when the hymn was written, from which it follows that its
date is some year between 678 and 688.

A.D. 704. “Ceanfaeladh, grandson of Aedh Breac, abbot of Bangor, died.”
He belonged to the same race as St. Congall. Aedh Breac was Prince of the

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-260.png ---
228 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

921. Died the abbot St. Tarannan; he was also abbot of
Drumcliffe ;* his feast is on the 12th of June.‘

928. Died the abbot Celsus."

956. The abbot Tanudius, the son of Uderius, was this
year slain by the Danes.”

"Tr. Th. p. 510. * Fleming, Coll. “ Annal. Ulster, ™* Act. SS., p. 107.

Dalaradians, He perished A.D. 557 in the disastrous battle of Moin-Doire-lothair
(supposed to be Moneymore, in the parish of Derryloran), and his people, the
Dalaradians, were for ever driven eastward over the Bann. In the year 478
Fiachra Lonn, king of Dalaradia, distinguished himself in the battle of Ocha,
and received the territories of Lee and Cairloegh (extending from near Derry to
Toome) “as a reward,” from the Hy-Niall princes, This battle of Ocha formed an
important era. It enabled the descendants of Niall the Great to confine the elder
branch of the same race, to which they themselves belonged. to the provincial
‘overnment of Connaught, and to hold uninterrupted possession of the monarchy
for five hundred and nineteen years. The race of Niall, in their gratitude, were
munificent to their allies ; but, as it always was and will be, princes have pro-
verbially short memories, and past services were so far forgotten, that in less than
eighty years the Hy-Nialls expelled the Dalaradians, slew their prince, Aedh
Breac, and bestowed the territory on the O’Kanes, a branch of themselves.

A.1), 721. “St. Malrubha, abbot of Bangor, having gone to Alba, died in his
own church at Aporcrosan (Applecross, Ross-shire), on the 21st of April. Eighty
years, three months, and nine days, was the length of his life.” (See A.D. 671.)

A.D. 722. ‘St. Flann, abbot of Bangor, died.”

A.D. 724. ‘ Cochall Odra, scribe of Bangor, died.”

A.D. 739. ‘‘ The sea cast ashore a whale in Boirche (Mourne), in the province
of Ulster. Every one in the neighbourhood went to see it for its wondrousness.
When it was slaughtered, three golden teeth were found in its head, each of which
teeth contained fifty ounces. Fiachna, son of Aedh Roin, king of Ulidia, and
Eochaidh, chief of Ui Eathach (Iveagh) sent a tooth of them to Bangor, where it
remained a long time on the altar, to be seen by all in general.” This story was
currently told at the time of the English invasion. Giraldus Cambrensis picked it
up and considerably improved it by tellinga similar one of a stag, that was caught
in his time in Great Britain,that had all its teeth of a colour like gold. Duald Mac-
Firbis, in his genealogical work, speaking of Aedh Roin, King of Ulidia, says :—
“It was he that got the whale with the three golden teeth, and he gave a tooth of
them to the mason, #.¢., the mason that built the bridge (the bridge of the pass and
the bridge of Moindaimh), and he gave the other two to ornament the reliquaries
of the province. It was he who made a pilgrimage to Bangor, because one cow
had been stolen in his province,”*

* A monster of the deep, still more strange, was once caught in the nets of the
fishermen of Bangor, if we but credit the Leabhar-na-h-Uidhre, which tells the fol-
lowing wild legend :—‘ Eochaidh, from whom Lough Neagh derives its name,
was drowned in its eruption, together with all his children, except Liban, Conaing,
and Curnan. Liban was preserved from the waters of Lough Neagh for a full year,
in her grianan (palace) under the lake. After this, at her own desire, she was
changed into a salmon. and continued to traverse the sea till the time of St. Comgall,
of Bangor. It happened that Comgall despatched Beoan, son of Innli, of Teach-
Dabeog, to Rome ona message to Gregory, to receive orders and rule. When the
crew of Beoan’s curach were at sea, they heard the celebration of angels beneath
the boat. Liban (mermaid) thereupon addressed them, and stated that she had
been three hundred years under the sea, adding that she would proceed westward
and meet Beoan that day twelvemonths, at Inbher Oilatboa, (Larne), whither the
saints of Dalaraidhe, with Comgall, were to resort. Beoan, on his return, related
what had occurred, and, at the stated time, the ncts were set, and she was caught
in the nets of Fergus, of Milluc, upon which she was brought to land, and crowds
came to witness the sight (within the recollection of many still living, crowds went

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-261.png ---
County of Down. 229

toro. Died the abbot Dermot O'’Moiletealcha.*

1106. This year a synod was held at Usneach in Meath, at
which presided Gillaspuic, or Gilbert, who had been abbot of
Bangor, and was now bishop of Limerick and apostolic
legate

1120. Malachy O’Morgair, in the 25th year of his age, was
placed over this abbey which he had rebuilt; four years

®M'Geogh. ¥ Walsh's Prospect, p. 246.

A.D. 742. ‘‘Saran, abbot of Bangor died.” His festival was kept on the Ist
of August. 5

A.D. 751. ‘‘ Bangor the great was burned on Patrick’s Day.”

A.D. 755. ‘‘Suarleach, abbot of Bangor, died.”

MacFirbis, in the work to which I have already referred, speaking of a prince
of Ulidia, who Jived about this time, says :—‘‘ It was that Aodh, son of Eochagan,
that gave his dues and services to Comgall—on breaking his shin at Tealach-na-
Lurgan (Hill of the Shin) while committing sacrilegious violence on Comgall’s
congregation. And none of them had previously gone over to Comgall. but always
abode with Patrick, from the time of Cairioll—(he died in 526)—son of Muireadhae,
till then.” The meaning of this seems to be that the family transferred from the
successor of Patrick to the successor of Comgall, the various dues arising from
baptisms, burials. &c., and made Bangor their burial place.

A.D. 762. ‘‘Fidhbhadhac, abbot of Bangor, died.”

A.D. 773. ‘‘ Snedhchest, son of Tuamchu, abbot of Bangor, died. Conall, son
of the artificer. a wise man, and abbot of Bangor, died.”

A.D. 775. ‘‘ Augustine of Bangor died.” His festival was observed in Bangor
on the 27th of October.

A.D. 786. “Sorna, abbot of Bangor, died.

A.D. 789. ‘ Thomas, abbot of Bangor, died.”

A D. 795. ‘‘ Aormeadhach, abbot of Bangor, died.

A.D. 797. “ Macoige, of Aporcrosin (applecross, Ross-shire,) abbot of Bangor,

A.D. 800. ‘‘ Robhartach, abbot of Bangor, died.”

A.D. 801. “ Loitheach, doctor of Bangor, died.”

A.D. 812. “ Maeltuile, abbot of Bangor, died.”

A.D. 818. Meeltuile, abbot of Bangor, died.”

This seems to be a favourite name at Bangor. A third abbot, Moeltuile, died

Ballyurgan, near Kilclief, in Lecale—In the townland of Ballyorgan stands the
west gable of a church called by the people “ Cappe’l na coole,” which they trans-
late “ The chapel at the back of the hill." The portion of the gable remaining is
from three to eight feet high, twenty-five feet wide, and three feet thick. In the
taxation of Pope Nicholas the chapel of Baliurgan was valued at two marks. An
inquisition, taken 3 Ed. VI., finds that the tithes of “ Ballyurcegan,” of the
annual value of 535. 4d., were appropriate to the abbey of Bangor, and another in-
quisition, taken at Downpatrick, in 1603, found that the impropriate rectory of
“ Ballelughan,” a/ias “ Balleurkegan,” extended to the townlands of “ Balleurcegan”
and “ Corbally.” It is not improbable that Ballyurgan, which remained even to

from Belfast to see a mermaid, which was reported to have been caught in Island
Magee.) The right to her being disputed by Comgall, in whose territory—and
Fergus, in whose net—and Beoan, in promise to whom she was taken, they prayed
for a heavenly decision ; and next day two wild oxen came down from Carn-
Airend, and on their being yoked to the chariot on which she was placed, they
bore her to Teach-Dubeoc, where she was baptised by Comgall, with the name
Muirgen, i.¢., ‘born of the sea,” or Muirgelt, #2, “traverser of the sea.” The
whole story arose from the fact that there was about that time a woman named
Muirgen under the spiritual direction of St. Comgall.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-262.png ---
230 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

afterwards he was made bishop of Connor, and in the year
1134, archbishop of Armagh ;? he appointed

1124. Malachy, brother to Christian, the abbot of Mellifont,
to succeed him in the government of this abbey.*

1131. The abbot Maurice O’Hindrectaigh died in pilgrimage
at Armagh, on 3rd of October.”

1163. Died the abbot Moyle Issa O’Concran, denominated
the head of Ulster.*

* War. Bos. p. 54. * Allemande. Tr. Th., p. 303. ° Ann. annon.

the “ Reformation” an impropriation of Bangor, was Tealach-na-lurgan, “The Hill
of the Shin.” The origin of this name is thus accounted for in Duald MacFirbis’
GEnealogical work, which says, speaking of Aodh, son of Eochagan, King of

lidia, who was slain at Kilmashoge, near Rathfarnham, in the county of Dublin,
in the year 917, while fighting against the Danes under Niall Glundubh—* it was
that Aodh, son of Eochagan, that gave his dues and services to Comgall (the
patron saint and founder of Bangor) on breaking his shin at Tealach-na-lurgan
while committing sacrilegious violence on Comgall’s congregation.” There is none
of the religious establishments connected with Bangor, which approaches so near
in name to Tealach-na-lurgan as Ballyurgan, and the change from Ballylurgan to
Ballyurgan is very slight. The Protestant bishop reports, in 1622, “ Capella de.
Ballyverdgan ruin,” and says, “ The great tithes are thought to belong to the Abbey
of Bangor.” Mr. James Magee, in whose field the ruin stands, has had it neatly
enclosed to protect it from further injury. Portions of a large cross, and some
stones marked with crosses, still attest the ancient faith of that remote offshoot of
ancient Bangor. .

A.D. 822, “The plundering of Bangor by the foreigners ; the oratory was
broken, and the relics of Comgall were taken from the shrine in which they were,
as Comgall himself had foretold, when he said :—

“* It will be true, true, by the will of the Supreme King of kings ;
My bones shall be brought, without defect, from the beloved Bangor to Antrim.’”

A.D, 838. “ Maelgaimhridh, a select scribe, anchorite, and abbot of Bangor,
died.”

A.D. 847. “ Arannan, abbot of Bangor, died.”

A.D. 869. “ Maenghal, the pilgrim, abbot of Bangor, died.”

A.D. 878. “ Fearchair. abbot of Bangor, died.”

A.D. 881. “ Raghallach, abbot of Bangor, died.” This may be the St. Raighuil
whose festival was kept at Bangor on the 11th of June. MacFirbis, in his annals,
has s preserved a poem written by Riaghuil, of Bangor, on the death of Alfrid, King
of Northumbria.

A.D. 884. Maeltuile, son of Dunghal, abbot of Bangor, died.”

A.D. got. “Innreachtach, son of Dobhailen, abbot of Bangor, died on the 26th
day of April, of whom was said :—

“* One and three hundred fair revolving years from the death of Comhgall, of

Bangor,
To the period of the happy death of the great, illustrious Innreachtach.’”

A.D. 919. “‘ Maenach, son of Siadhal, abbot of Bangor, and the¥best scribe of
all the Irish race, died.” The annalists likewise record the deaths of Cairbre, and
of Fearghal, abbot of Saighir. Of them was said :—

“It was not a year without events; premature died the abbot of lasting Bangor,
And the successor of Diarmaid, Cairbre, the gifted-above-all-good pillar,
The abbot of Saighir with multitudes, Fearghal, man of gentle exactions
Domhnall, a scion of all good ; a plague among the Gaeidhill
I have not enumerated. I shall not enumerate, because I am sorrowlul
What misfortune came upon Ireland in this year.”

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-263.png ---
County of Down. 231

1170. Gilda Domongart, the son of Corbmac, was abbot.‘

1179. The abbot Maurice was a subscribing witness to a
gharter granted by Sir John de Courcey to the abbey of Ned-
drum.°

About the close of this century, Christian, bishop of Man,
was interred here.*

1207, and 1216, E———— was abbot between these years.f

4 Act. SS., p.651. * Monast. Angi., vol. 2, p. 1023.' King, p.67. © Annal. Mann.

It was of the death of the same Maenach, son of Siadhal, and of Domhnall (a
Prince of the Southern Hy Niall) was said :—

“ The fifth year, disastrous, sweet,
From Filan, of Tara,a Company have died ;
Maenach of happy Congall’s city,
Domhnal was slain by Donnchadh donn,
Great grief is Maenach, oh, dear God !
The illustrious black-haired man of the charming face,
The paragon of Ireland between the seas,
The successor of the mild Comgall,
Head of council of the just province,
The golden crown to be sorrowfully regretted ;
Grievous to me that the wise man of Inis-Fail
Died from the assembly of the brave Gaeidhil.
A gem of the full precious stone,
As far as noble Rome it is a sign of sorrow,
That Maenach, of noble Munster, does not live,
‘Tis sufficient cause of grief, oh, great God.”

A.D. “926. Celedabhail, son of Scannal, went to Rome on his pilgrimage from
the abbacy of Bangor, and he composed these quatrains at his departure :—

“*Time for me to prepare to pass from the shelter of a habitation,
To journey, as a pilgrim, over the surface of the noble lively sea;
Time to depart from the snareg of the flesh, with all its guilt,
Time now to ruminate how I may find the great Son of Mary.
Time to seek virtue, to trample on the will with sorrow,
Time to reject vice, and to renounce the demon;
Time to reproach the body, for of its crime it is putrid,
Time to rest after we have reached the place wherein we may shed our tears ;
Time to talk of the last day, to separate from familiar faces,
Time to dread the terrors of the tumults of the Day of Judgment ;
Time to defy the clayey body, to reduce it to religiaus rule,
Time to barter the transitory things for the country of the King of heaven;
Time to defy the ease of the little earthly world of a hundred pleasures,
Time to work at prayer, in adoration of the high King of Angels ;
But only a part of one year is wanting of my three score,
To remain under holy rule in one place it is time ;
Those of my own age are not living, who were given to ardent devotions,
To desist from the course of great folly in one place it is time;
It was grievous that Cormack the Hospitable was wounded with long lances,®
Indreachtach the noble, Muireadhae, Maenach, the great Maelmthigh.’ ”

It would seem that this poet-abbot of Bangor, before he had arrived at that
dignity, was confessor and spiritual adviser of the monarch, Niall Glundubh (Niall

* It is stated in an interlined gloss that this was Cormac MacCuileanan who
perished in the battle of Ballaghmore, near the town of Carlow, A.D. 903. In-
+ dreachtach and Maenach were abbots of Bangor.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-264.png ---
232 Ancient Monasterics of Ireland.

1217. Nicholas, bishop of the Isles, was interred in this
abbey.t

1273. ———— Molys, the prior of this abbey, was elected to
govern the abbey of Saul, but the royal license not having
been obtained, he was set aside! .

1380. In a parliament held this year it was enacted, that no
mere Irishman should be suffered to make his profession here.*

» Harris's Collect., vol. 1. } Willis's Cathedrals, vol, 1, p. 364. * King, p. 93-

of the black knee). It was he who urged that patriotic prince to free his country
from the Danish invaders, but, unfortunately, he perished in the attempt, at the
battle of Dublin, 916. Of Celedabhaill’s part in the transaction, the annals record
—‘Celedabhaill, son of Scannal, successor of Comgall, and confessor of Niall
Glundubh, was he who had requested Niall to come to this battle; and it was he
who gave the Viaticum to Niall, after having refused to give him a horse to carry
him from the battle. He never returned from that pilgrimage.”

A.D. 927. “Celedabhaill, son of Scannal, successor of Cor ll of Bangor,
throughout Ireland, bishop, scribe, preacher, and learned doctor, died on his pil-
grimage at Rome on the 14th of September, and in the fifty-ninth year of his age.”
Of the year of his death was said :—

“Three times nine, nine hundred years, are reckoned by plain rules,
From the birth of Christ, deed of purity, to the holy death of Cele, the cleric.”

A.D. 935- “ Muireadh. abbot of Bangor, died.”

A.D. 938. ‘ Muircheartach of Camus. abbot of Bangor, died.”*

A.D. 951. “ Dubhinnsi, a sage and bishop of the family of Bangor, died.”

A.D. 956. “ Tanaidhe Mac Uihdir (now Maguire) successor of Comgall, was
killed by the foreigners.”}

A.D. 980. *‘Sinach, son of Muirthuilen, abbot of Bangor, died.”

In the same year, “ Maelcothaig, son of Lahtnan, successor of Comgal and
Mocholmog. died.”

A.D. 1015. “ Diarmiad Ua Maeltelcha, successor of Comgall, died.”

Dr. Reeves, in his history of Down and Connor, gives, but from what source I
cannot say, a different reading of this entry :—“ Diarmiad Ua Maeltecha, successor
of Comgall, learned scholar, scribe, and bishop, died.”

The earliest record of the residence of a bishop at Bangor is in the Annals of
Inisfallen, at the year 810, which answers to 824 of the common era, but the
manner, as Dr. Reeves remarks, in which it is expressed implies that the presence
of a bishop in the monastery was not an unusual occurrence. The entry in the
Annals of Inisfallen is :—* Bangor, wasted by the Danes, and the shrine of Comgall
broken open by them, and its learned men and bishops were smitten by the sw orl.”
Diarmiad Na Maeltecha was one of those superiors of Bangor who combined the
office of abbot and bishop. M°Firbis, speaking of him in his genealogical work,
says :—“‘ Cathal, son of Aodh Roin (King of bilidia, or Eastern Ulster, who was
slain 732), from whom the Clan Cathal, of whom was Diarmaid O’Maoiltealcha,
successor of St. Comgall, and the head of the wisdom of the Gaels.” From this
date, indeed before it, owing to its exposed position, which subjected it to continual
incursions of the Danes, Bangor was on the decline, and we find that the annalists
cease to be so regular in chronicling the obits of its abbots.

A.D. 1058. “ Colman Ua-h-Aireachtaigh, successor of Comgall, of Bangor, died.”

A.D. 1064. “‘Donnchadh Ua Mathghamna, King of Ulidia, was slain by the
Ulidians themselves in the Daimhliag (stone church) of Bangor. Brodar, the
enemy of Comgall (it was by him the king was killed at Bangor), was slain by the
lord of Dalaraidhe.” This reference to a stone church at Bangor thirty years before

* Now Camus MacCosquin, county Derry. This was one of Comgall’s
monasteries.

fn is the earliest notice of the family of Maguire occurring in the Irish
Anna


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-265.png ---
County of Down. 233

Inquisition 5th November, tst King James, finds that
William O’Dorman was the last abbot ; and that Ist February,
23nd King Henry VIII. he was seized of the townlands of

St. Malaehy was born, proves, beyond doubt, that the church erected by the saint
was considered by the people a novelty, not because it was built of stone, but
because it presented a magnificence to which they had not been accustomed. From
the frequency of entries of churches and monasteries having been consumed by
fire, there can be no doubt that the Irish, like all people occupying a wooded
country, did utilise their forests by constructing of wood most of their buildings ;
but it admits of as little doubt that many of those structures were made of stone.
At the same year in which the annals record the death of Ua Mathghamna, or
O'Mahony, they cite, in reference to the death of an ecclesiastic, the following
poem, incidentally descriptive of one of those wooden structures :—

“ Dubhthach (Duffy), a strict, austere man,
Who made the roomy, cheap abode,
The friend of souls, thou seest, has obtained heaven
In exchange for his fair, thin-boarded domicile.”

Weare told by St. Bernard, in the life of his friend, St. Malachy, that Bangor
had been destroyed by pirates, and 900 monks are reported to have been killed
by them in one day. Though there is not, in the native annals, any account of
this fearful slaughter, yet they record that Bangor was several times plundered ;
and at 956 we have seen that Tanaidh Maguire, the abbot, was slain. It is pro-
bable that on this occasion many of the monks were put to death, and, perhaps,
we may thence date the devastation spoken of by St. Bernard. The obits of the
abbots are not recorded with that regularity which characterised the previous
period, from which we may infer that the abbatical records either were not kept,
or became the prey of the invaders. In the days of St. Malachy the monastery was
waste, yet the lands belonging to it were then in the possession of its erenachs, or
church-farmers. These were the heads of the respective clans, in which the
abbey lands had been originally vested under the Brehon laws. Generally
speaking, the erenach clans were the descendants of the persons who gave the
original site. They were bound to pay certain rents to the abbey. and to perform
other specified duties. They looked up to the erenach as their chief, and he
received his appointment from the abbot; but, by the provisions of the Brehon
code, the abbot was restricted in his selection to the clan. In one word, the suc-
cession to the erenachy seems to have been determined by the general law, which
regulated the succession to the chieftainship of any of the various toparchies. The
erenach who was in possession of the land in the time of St. Malachy,
was a maternal uncle of that saint. He consented to surrender the lands
and the site of the monastery to St. Malachy; but the Saint was satis-
fied with the site, and the lands passed to another erenach, for the old man
resigned the office and became a monk in Bangor. St. Malachy, taking
with him about ten monks, set about erecting a handsome oratory, constructed of
wood, and re-established the ancient discipline. Our saint then proposed to build
a stone church, beautiful in design and ornament, but the son of the new erenach,
probably fearing that a large portion of the expenses must devolve on his father, in
accordance with the provisions of the recognised code that then regulated the re-
ciprocal duties of erenach and ecclesiastic. excited the people against the under-
taking, and, proceeding at their head to the building, thus addressed the saint :—
*€O good man! what hath induced you to introduce such a novelty into our
country? Weare not Galls, but Scots. Whence this levity? What need have
we of a building so useless and splendid?” Shortly after this, various misfortunes
befel the family of the erenach.* His son died, and he himself becoming

* He was brother to Christian, who afterwards became abbot of Melifont. The
erenachs of Bangor, at that time, seem to have belonged to the family now calling
themselves Gilmore.—Another branch of the same people, calling themselves
M‘Gillmurray and Murray, are stil! numerous in Killinchey.


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-266.png ---
Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

‘n, Ballefredon, Ballememan, Ballow, Balle-

234 -ach, Ballema-connell, Ballecrohan, Balle-
Carriostanclac-canduffe, Callos-

reigh, Ballemowne, Carogh,
Ballencarndeogh, Ballen-
, Ballecrotte, Bal-
lemajor, with all

Bangor, Balleport
vullecraghe, Ballecor:
hum, Ballenoghne, Ballo:
nescron, Carronnser, Carrow
Raiogele, Ballefebane, Ballenba

celloe, Ballenmulle, Ballesallogt of God: and embraced
leschalle, Ballemegh, Ballemachcit never attained its

to his heavenly

im. P. 303) one

at Armagh on .

afflicted with epilepsy, acknowledged the ch:
the monastic state under St. Malachy.

r revived, to some degree, under St. } the title of
Primitive splendour. Its great benefactor, St. M: belonged
reward, A.D. 1148. During his lifetime we find %

Maurice O’Henectaigh, styled successor of St. ComgaNe son of
the 13th of October, 1131. He may have been a persortion to
Cowarb, held, in those days of confusion, the lands which 11, The

@ the monastery.

A.D. 1149. We are told by the Four Masters that an ar.¥
Niall O’Loughlin into Ulidia to settle some disputes regardin, *
the throne of that Principality, plundered Bangor and many other",
same annals, in the last entry which they make regarding Bangor,
the death of Maelisa O’Corerain, successor of Cot I.

It appears that the community of Bangor advanced pretensions to the
electing the bishops of Down, and of having their abbey considered the ca.
but the primate decided against them, and Pope Innocent, about the year
issued a bull, the text of which has been lately published by Theiner, declarin,
church of Down the Cathedral, and the prior and chapter of the Order of
Benedict belonging to that church the electors.

About the year 1291, Pope Nicholas IV., having imposed on the clergy of In
land a tax of one-tenth of their movables and annual income for the relief of th
Holy Land, the church of Bangor was valued at 28 marks (a mark 135. 4d), and the
temporalities of the abbot at 58 shillings and 1 penny. The poverty of the great
abbey and the church seems strange ; but we are to bear in mind that most people,
if they can prevent it, do not wish to have their Property valued at its full value,
when the valuation is for the purposes of taxation, and in estimating the poverty of
Bangor in its fallen State, we must take into account the value ot money at that
date. In one of the Pipe rolls preserved in the Irish Exchequer Record Office, of
the date of 1261, we find the fol lowing entry, which shows the value of money at
the time :— John Byset (he would now be called M'Keown) 7 cows, the price of
each cow being forty pence, for making a distress.” In ‘A Brief Description of
Ireland, made in this year, 1589, by Robert Payne,” we find that at that compara-
tively modern period “ A barrell of wheate, or a barrell of bay salt, containing
three bushels and a half of Winchester measure, is sold there for 4s. malt, peason,
beanes, for 2s. 87. ; barley for 2s. 4d.; oates for 20d.; a fresh sammon, worth in
London tos., for 6d. ; 24 herrings, or 6 makerels, 6 sea breames, a fat hen, 30 eggs,
a fat pigge, one pound of butter, or 2 gallons of new milk, fora penny; a reede
deare, without the skinne, for 25. 6d.; a fat beefe for 138. 4d.; a fat mutton for
18d, One hundred pounds will buy 60 milche kine, 300 yeawes, 20 swine, and a
good teame; the ground to keepe these cattle and use this teame on will be 400
acres, at £10 rent.” Hitherto I have recorded the glories of Bangor; it now be-
comes my sad duty to chronicle its decay. An enactment of the Anglo-Irish Par-
liament, held in Kilkenny, A.D. 1367, declared that no mere Irishman should be
allowed to make his profession in a religious house situated amongst the English.
This enactment extended to the abbey of Bangor, and after that the race to which
Comgall, Collumbanus, and Gall belonged, was to be excluded from the cloisters
they had sanctified, and the rich endowments which the piety of the Irish had
consecrated to religion were given to foreigners. Religious discontent among the
People was thus added to the other evils of the land, and the effect was such as
might be expected. The successor of St. Comgall now presents himself in a new


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-267.png ---
County of Down. , 235

the tithes of the said lands, which lie in the Ards and the
Upper Clandeboy, in or adjoining the country of Con M‘Neil
M‘Brian Furtough ; also the Grange of Earbeg in the county
of Antrim ; also the two Copland islands in the bay of Car-
rickfergus, in county of Antrim ; also the following rectories,
Clenongh and Anghellye in Kilultagh: Toenfada in Kil-
muchoret, in county of Antrim ; Clanduffe in Evagh; Balle-
laghrum and Ballemaghan in Lecale, in this county ; and the
advowson of all the vicarages of the above recited lands ; also
the tithes of the island of Raghlin ; annual value of the said
abbey, &c., besides reprises, £3."**
&& Chief Rememb.

character, unlike his predecessors, being neither Dalaradic in blood nor traditions.
Thomas Kennedy, abbot of Bangor, with the abbots of Saul, Inch, and Greyabbey,
the city of Down, the towns of Ardglass and Kilclief, the bishop of Down. and
George Baron Russhel, and many others, about 1405, petitioned Edward IV. in
behalf of themselves and ‘‘all the faithful and true liege peaple of Therldome of
Ulster, whiche some tyme was named the third moost rialle (royal) erldome in
Christiante ;” but was then daily attacked “ by see and lande, by see with Bretones,
and with Scottes of the Oute Isles, which both with Irishmen, enemyes of the land,
confedered—that is to say, with O'Neyll Bwy, O'Kane, M‘Gwylyn, Henry
O’Neyll, Con O’Neyll, M‘Gyunusses, M ‘Cartan, and the Offlynnes (O’Flynn, now
Lynn), which, within short tyme, fynally and utterly will destroy youre said earl-
dome and peaple, without that it be by your mooste graceous highnesse provided
to send unto them a certain of peaple to inhabite and to defende your said ground,
&c.” .
The original of this petition is in the Chapter-house, Westminster, but a copy
of it, with notes by Dr. Reeves, was printed in the transactions of the Royal Irish
Academy. To this document were appended the seals of the petitioners, but some
of them have been broken off. That of Thomas Kennedy, abbot of Bangor, is in
ood preservation, and gives some idea of the abbey front. The Hollywood and
Bangor Railway Company have copied it, and use it as their corporate seal. The
exclusion of the native Irish soon began to produce its natural effects on the abbey.

*An inquisition taken at Killyleagh, January 14th, 1664, regarding the lands held
by the late James Viscount Claneboy, enables us to identify the townlands in the
Inq. 1. Jac. I., which are here given in their modern names in the same order :—

Bangor, Portavde, Ballyfotherlly, Ballyminetragh, Balloo-juxta mare, Grooms-
ate allymacormack, Ballymaconnell, Ballycroghan, Ballyholme, Ballymagee,

allyree.

Carriostanclac-canduffe, Collosnescron, Carrownser, Carrownerreigh, Ballmowne,
and Carogh, are included in the modern townlands of Conlig, Corporation, Cotton,
Gransha, and Bangor Bog].

Rathgill, Lisbane, Ballyvarnet, Carnalea, Ballykillaire, Ballymullan, Ballysallough
Major, and Ballysallough Minor, Ballygilbert, Ballygrot, Ballyleidy. being the entire
parish of Bangor, and the townlands of Ballymaghan, Strandtown, and Ballymisert,
which constituted the ancient Rectory of Ballymaghan, or Bally O’Meachan, now
incorporated into the parish of Holywood.

Earbeg, intended for Inverbeg, at Larne, near which St. Comgall was born.
Clenongh Pe Glenavy.

Aughellye ” Aghalee

Toenfada ” Tremfade, an alias for Kilmakavet, in the parish of Killead.
Clanduffe, in Evagh, intended for Clonduff, in Iveagh,

Ballelaghrum oD Ballyorgan.

Ballyegan and Corbally were not in Bryanfertagh’s country. They are the
townlands, Ballyedock and Corbally, in Lecale.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-268.png ---
236 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

The abbot also enjoyed a townland in the Isle of Man,
called Clenanoy, on condition that he should attend on the
king of that island at certain times!

A carucate of land in Ballyegan, and another carucate in
Corbally, parcel of the possessions of this abbey, and situate
in the country of Bryan Fertagh, were granted to Gerald Earl
of Kildare; see Lismullen, in county of Meath."

Franciscans ; the abbey of Bangor was so gone to ruin in
the year 1469, through the neglect of the abbot, that Pope
Paul II. commanded that the friars of the third Order of St.

1 King, p. 238." Aud. Gen.

It had gone so far to ruin in the year 1469, that Pope Paul II. commanded that
the Franciscans of the third order of St. Francis should immediately take posses-
sion of it, which was accordingly done, says Wadding, by Father Nicholas of that
order. How much Hangor was resuscitated under the disciples of St. Francis,
does not appear ; but at the dissolution we find it possessed by the Augustinians,
though it was then in a very impoverished and dilapidated state. According to an
inquisition held in the reign of James I., William O’Dornan, the abbot, held, in
the 32nd year of Henry VIII, 34 townlands, together with the tithes of the
rectory of Ballymahan, extending over three townlands.—The site of this church
is at present occupied by two gardens attached to Moat House—the tithes of
Glenavy. extending over 13 townlands; the tithes of Aghalee, extending over 7
townlands; the tithes of Clonduff, extending over 21 townlands; and those of the
Island of Rathlin, together with the Church of Ballyorgan, in Lecale, the Chapel of
Cromac, situated on the Falls-road near Belfast ; St. Mary's Church, outside Carrick-
fergus. All these vast possessions nominally lapsed into the hands of the Crown, in
the reign of Henry VIII., but were retained by the neighbouring chiefs till the ascen-
dancy of the English power. in the reign of James I., enabled that monarch to
bestow them on his relative, James Hamilton, whom he ennobled under the title of
Viscount Claneboy. Vicars nominated by the abbot ministered in the Churches,
whose rectories were impropriated to the abbey, and enjoyed the altar fees, and
one third of the tithes, while the other two-thirds passed into the common fund of
the great monastery.

After abbot O’Dornan, others bore the title, though the succession was not
uninterrupted. In the beginning of this century, in company with the late
Dr. M‘Donnell, of Belfast, there visited the Protestant Church of Bangor an aged
ecclesiastic. whose whitened locks and venerable mien. threw around his person
an air of interest. and betokened to the most unobservant, that no casual visitant
was he. As he approached the communion table, near where once had been the
altar, a gleam of the sunshine of youth seemed to light up the features of the old
man, and his prayers, which at first were in silence, suddenly, through ecstatic
forgetfulness, were raised toa degree of audibility, that embarrassed his companion,
while it still more astonished the sexton. That old man was the Lord Abbot
M‘Cormack, the last abbot of Bangor. What a splendid subject for poet or painter !
That old abbot, bowed down with years—a stranger, and unknown —the connect-
ing link between the present age and the remotest past, standing on the same spot
whence his predecessors, more than twelve centuries ago—ere nations that have
long since disappeared. had yet come into existence—sent vut those bands of mis-
sionaries who converted the Franks and the Longobards, and for ever linked the
name of Bangor with the history of the Church !

The Lord Abbot M:Cormack was a native of the county of Antrim, and like all
the priests of the last century. he sought on the Continent that learning which the
laws denied him at home. The French Revolution having deprived him of the
asylum which the houses of his order afforded. he closed his days in Maynooth
College. and his ashes commingle with the sacred dust of a long line of abbots, the
successors of St. Senan, in I.araghbrine, close to the College wall.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-269.png ---
County of Dowe. 237

Francis should immediately take possession of it, which was ac-
cordingly done,says Wadding, by Father Nicholasofthat Order.™

A small part of the ruins of this abbey still remain; the
windows were of the ancient narrow Gothic kind, &c., and the
traces of the foundation show that the building was of a great
extent."

Black Abbey ,* has its situation two miles north of Bally-
halbert, in the Great Ardes, and was founded for Benedictin
monks by the celebrated Sir John de Courcey, who made it a
cell to the abbey of St. Mary at Lonley in Normandy, and in
the foundation charter he calls it the abbey of St. Andrew de
Stokes.?

A.D. 1210. Died Sir John, the founder? It is said by
some writers, that this priory was united to the archiepiscopal
see of Armagh, and that the archbishop, Richard Fitz-Ralph,
gave two hundred pounds sterling to the abbot of Lonley
for the confirmation thereof, in the reign of King Edward III.
But it is certain, that this house was seized into the King’s

™Allemande, ® Hist., County of Down, p. 64. Pococke's Journal. ° Mon. Angl.,
vol. 2, p. 1019. ¥ Lodge, vol. 4, p. 31-

4 Black Abbey.—Black Abbey was anciently styled ‘‘the Priory of St. Andrew,
in the Ardes.”—Mon. Angl. vol. ii., p. 1019. It gives name to the townland of
Black Abbey, in the parish of Grey Abbey, where it was situated, but not a vestige
of it now remains, and the only surviving relique of the establishment is an
ancient cuneiform sculptured tombstone which has been removed to Grey Abbey.

“The priory of St. Andrew, or, as it is sometimes styled, the Black Priory, in
the Ards, was founded by John de Courcy, about the year 1180, at which date he
granted ten carucates of land called Maccolloqua in the Ards, with certain tithes,
to the priory of St. Andrew de Stokes, or Stoke Courcy, which he had founded in
Somersetshire. By some arrangement, which is not recorded, this grant was trans-

- ferred to the priory of St. Mary of Lonley, in Normandy, and the priory of St.
Andrew's in the Ards, about 1218, was constituted by Hugh de Lacy a cell of that
house.”—(Harris’ ‘* Ware’s Works,” vol. ii., p. 273.) In 1342, during the war
between France and England, the temporalities of this house were seized, as
belonging to an alien pricry, into the King’s hands; but were, in the following
October, delivered to William de Hodierne, a monk of Lonley.—(King’s ‘‘ Col-
lection.”)

Not long afterwards. Richard FitzRalph, Archbishop of Armagh, entered into
an agreement with the prior and convent of Lonley for the purchase of the lands,
tithes, and privileges of the priory of St Andrew's, This took place in the year
1356, and the deed of assignment, which has been preserved, is printed in the
Monasticon Anglicanum.—(Vol. ii., p. 1019). At the same time the primate
bound himself to the abbot and convent of Lonley in the sum of £200, to be paid
to them or their attorney on or before the feast of St. John the Baptist, in the year
1360: provided that this transfer of the cell of St. Andrew in the Ard, in the
county of Ultonia, should be confirmed by the Pope, the King. and other the lords
and founders of said house, to him, his successors, and the church of Armagh.
That if such license should not be obtained, the premises were to be delivered
back in due form. Dated 20th [March], 1356. A copy of this bond is entered in
the register of Archbishop Sweteman, who succeeded FitzRalph in the primacy,
and is, perhaps, the oldest record on paper now existing in Ireland Fol. 16 b.)
An inspeximus of the same document is preserved among the Rolls of Chancery of
Ireland (Calend., p. 140, No. 123.) Richard FitzRalph died on the 16th Novem-
ber, 1360, and after his death the priory of St. Andrew was seized into the king's

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-270.png ---
238 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

hands, as an alien priory in 1395, and the custody of the same
was granted to the archbishop on the rgth of July in that year
at the rent of ten marcs, who annexed it to his see.4

By an inquisition taken 5th of November, ist King James,
it was found that the last abbot, Ist August, 35th King
Henry VIII, was seized of the abbey, with three townlands
adjacent, viz., Black Abbey, Ballenemanogh and Ballcarrocke,
with the tithes thereof; annual value, 23s. 4d. Also of the
lands and tenements in the Ardes, cammonly called le Turnt-
nes lands, with the tithes of Enischargie, parcel of the said
lands, and belonging to the rectory or vicarage of Enischargie ;
also of Talbotstown, Donnoghe-Dee and Whitechurch ; annual
value, besides reprises, 3/.94

9 War. Mon. and Bps., p. 84. “Chief Rememb.

hands. In 1382 it was under the government of a prior; and in 1389 the office
was held by one Thomas. —(Cal. Canc., p. 140 b.)

In 1390 Primate Colton presented a petition to the King, setting forth that
license had been granted by Edward III. to Richard, Archbishop of Armagh, and
his successors, to purchase such alien priories and cells of the French, in Ireland,
as did not exceed 100 marks a year, and that said Richard had made the above
purchase from the abbey of Lonley, but that after his death it had been seized to
the Crown, and praying for its restoration. Upon this, Richard White, prior of
the hospital of St. John of Jerusalem, Richard Russell, and William Merser were
appointed to examine into the merits of the claim.—(Cal. Canc., p. 142.)

in 1395 the custody of the priory was granted by the King to the same primate,
subject to 10 marks per annum. Still, however, it seems to have been regarded
as having a foreign relation, for in 1411 the King ranted to John Chenele the
alien priory of Eynes in Arde, within the lordship of Ulster, which had been seized
into the King's hands by reason of the war between him and France.—(See above,
p- 22.) During the wars of the O’Neills these lands were taken possession of by
them, and by their rebellion were supposed to be vested in the Crown. Hence it
was that James Hamilton, Viscount Clandeboy, succeeded in obtaining a grant of
them, and the appendant rectories and advowsons. The lands he assigned to Sir
Hugh Montgomery of the Ards. The See of Armagh, did not, however, abandon
its claim to them or their appurtenances. for in 1622, Primate Hampton made the
following return :—‘‘ Withheld by Sir Hugh Montgomery, Kn*, and Sir James
Hamylton, Kn*., y* Black Priory of St. Andrew's in the Ardes. Sometyme the
lands of Prior Aliens, and bonght by one of my predecessors, for the mayntenance
of his successor's table, from the Abbot and Convent of Clonley in Normandy, by
license of King Edward the third, with allowance of the poope ; for the sum of 200
ster., paid by my predecessor, in Paule’s Church in London: which priory doth
consist of three towne lands and five impropriations.”—( Ulster Visitation.)

According to Harris. the priory was awarded to the See of Armagh in 1639.
Until the middle of the last century, the representatives of the Lord Viscount Clan-
boy claimed the right of patronage to the united vicarages of Talbotstown, White
Church, and Inishargy, under the name of the parish of St. Andrews ; but a suit
which was instituted by Primate Stone against Viscount Mount Alexander, con-
cerning the advowson to the vicarage of Donaghadee, having resulted in favour of
the plaintiff, re-established the See of Armagh in the enjoyment of this portion of
its ancient rights. The five impropriations, spoken of above, were the rectories of
Donaghadee, Whitechurch or Ballywalter, Talbotstown or Ballyhalbert, Inish-
argy, and Derryaghy.—(Reeves’ “eel. Antiq.,” page 383).

Enischargie, now Inishargy, in the barony of Ardes.

Talbotstown, now Ballyhalbert.

White Church, now Ballywalter.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-271.png ---
County of Down. 239

At the suppression of religious houses, this priory and its
possessions were seized upon by the O’Neils, on whose rebel-
lion the abbey, &c., became vested in the crown, and King
James I., granted the same to James Viscount Clandeboys,
who assigned them to the Lord Ardes; but in 1639 they were
awarded to the see of Armagh."

Breatain ;> St. Loarne,who had been a disciple of St. Patrick,
and died about the year 540, was bishop or abbot of Inreathan
in Lethcathuil, or the barony of Lecale ; it is now called Brea-
tain, and is only a castle and seat of a nobleman near the
town of Down ; it was so at least about the year 1630.*

* Harris Tabl. * Tr. Th., p. 19 and 20.

5 Breatain is now called Bright—The site of the ancient church of Bright is
occupied by the Protestant church. We are told in the ‘‘ Tripartite Life of St.
Patrick” that the saint, after his unsuccessful mission to his old master, Milcho, at
Slemish, returned to Saul, whence he set out southwards, to convert a prince
named Ros, who was the brother of Dichu, his first convest at Saul. The account
of this mission, as given in the ‘‘ Irish Tripartite,” lately published by Miss Cusack,
is as follows:—‘ Patrick went subsequently from Sabhall southwards, that he
might preach to Ros, son of Trichim. He it was that resided in Derlus, to the
south of Dun-leth-glaise (Downpatrick). There is a small city (Cathair,
i.¢., civitas, but also meaning a bishop’s see) there this day, #.e., Brettain, where is
Bishop Loam, who dared to chide Patrick for holding the hand of the boy who
was playing near his church. As Patrick was then on his way he saw a tender

outh herding pigs—Mochae his name. Patrick preached to him and baptised
im, and cut his hair (tonsured him), and gave him a copy of the Gospels and a
reliquary. And he gave him also another time a bachall (a crozier) which had
been given them from God, —viz., its head into Patrick’s bosom, and this is the
Detech—Mochae of Noendruim (Mahee Island, in Strangford Lough), and
Mocha promised Patrick a shorn pig every year, and this, indeed, is still given.” |
The fort, “ Derlus,” which in some of the lives is also named Inreathan, was an
earthen rath which stood probably where now is the Castle of Bright, for the
Anglo-Normans in Lecale generally selected raths as sites for their castles. The
word ‘‘ Durlas” is translated by O’Donovan ‘‘a strong fort.” He says that it
is Anglicised into Thurles. Ros, son of Trichim, the prince of Bright, was a very
important personage. He was a doctor of the Berla Feini, or the most ancient
form of the Irish 1 age, and he was one of the nine commissioners appointed
to draw up the Senchus Mor, one of the ancient laws which was so much revered
that the Irish judges, called Brehons, were not authorized to abrogate anything
contained in it. The original has been lately published by the Brehon Law
Commissioners. The festival of Ross was held on the 7th of April. There
is not any ancient well close to the church of Bright, such as is generall
to be found in the vicinity of ancient churches, but the townland in whicl
it is situated is named lintubber—the town of the well—from a_re-
markable well about a quarter of a mile to the north of the church, which
probably is the ancient holy well where was baptised Ros-Mac-Trichim.
it. Loarn, who was Bishop of Bright, was honoured in the ancient Irish Church
with a festival on the 11th of September. I do not know anything more than is
related in the ‘Irish Tripartite Life” regarding St. Loar chiding St. Patrick,
nor have we any account of St. Loam’s successors in the See of Bright, but it
would seem that at whatever time it merged into the See of Down the lands
attached to it passed into the possession of the Bishops of Down. John Don-
gan, who became Bishop of Down in 1395, with the assent of his chapter and
. Clergy, assigned eight messu: and four carucates of land in Bright and
Rasteglas (Rossglass), to Janico D’Artois, a Gascon gentleman, who had attended
Richard II. in his Irish wars, The assignment appears by an inquisition held

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-272.png ---
240 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Castle Buy ;* or Johnstown, in the Ardes, three miles north
of Portaferry, near the Lough of Strangford. Hugh de Lacie,
in the 12th century, founded here the commandery of St. John
the Baptist.*

A.D. 1327. The prior of Kilmainham, granted to friar
Thomas de Vallet, during life, his diet at the brethren’s table
in his house, with clothes of the value of twenty shillings

* War, Mon.

in 1496, to inquire what lands Sir Janico had died seized of. It would seem that
these lands passed into the possession of the Kildare family through Allison
Eustace, the grand-daughter of Sir ‘Janico, who married Gerald, the 8th Earl of
Kildare. In 1622 the Protestant bishop reports among the possessions of the
see :—‘‘In Roseglass the temporalities of a town and a-half. In Bright three
plowlands, and the Earl of Kildare oweth for rent out of the said three towns
4§ 10s. 8d. per annum.” In the margin he places the name of John Russell, of
Killough, as tenant in occupation of Rossglass, and that of Christopher Russell
as tenant in occupation of Bright. In 1639 a lawsuit was instituted by
the Protestant bishop for the recovery of these lands, but the civil wars
interrupted it, and the Fitzgerald family held these lands until 1808, when the
Right Hon. Charles James Fitzgerald, Baron Lecale, sold them to his step-
father, William Ogilvie, Esq., whose great grandson now possesses them. About
the year 1178, John De Courcey granted the church of Bright to Malachy,
Bishop of Down. This was, however, a mere confirmation on the part of the
conqueror of what had from the earliest times belonged to the See. Shortly after-
wards Malachy annexed it, under the name of “ Brichten,” to the Abbey of St.
Patrick, of which the bishop was ex-officio abbot. In the account rendered on
the 4th of March, 1305, into the Irish Exchequer, by Walter de la Hay, Escheator of
Ulster, in which he accounts for the rents received by him during the vacancy of
the See, he returns £3 16s. 6d. out of Rossglasse, but he received nothing out of the
lands of Bright, or of “ Bycospille,” which may be supposed to be Tullinespick—
the bishop’s hill—a small townland, still held under the Protestant bishop, in
which the remains of a cemetery, cogtaining graves lined with stones, Nav
been discovered in what seemed to have been arath. In the taxation of Pope
Nicholas the church of “Brich” is valued at eight marks ; but in 1316 it was des-
troyed by the Scots, under Edward Bruce. Grace, in his “ Annals,” under that
year, records :—“ The church of Bright, in Ulster, full of persons of both sexes, is
burned.” At the dissolution, the church of “Britt,” at the annual value of £6 13s.
4d. was appropriate to the Abbey of St. Patrick. The Protestant bishop returns
it in 1622 as being in ruins. These ruins were removed when the Protestant church
was erected in 1745.

© Castlebuy.— The lands of Castleboy, otherwise Johnstown, which formerly
belonged to the Hospitallers, consist of nine townlands, containing 1,335 acres.
In the townland of Castleboy there remains a small portion of the castle standing ;
and, a few perches to the N.W., the ruins of the chapel, measuring sixty-three by
twenty-one feet. The last window was a triplet of lancet compartments. On the
north and south sides were lancet windows, about six feet removed from the west
angles. There were entrances to the north and south sides, about twenty-six feet
from the west end. A small lancet window was in the west wall, about six feet
from the floor. A cemetery surrounded the building; but the ground is now culti-
vated up to the very walls.”—(Reeves’ “ Eccl. Antiq..” pi 164.)

The prior of St. John of Jerusalem was possessed of the following appropriations
in the Diocese of Down ;—The chapel of St. John’s Point, Rectory of Rathmullan,
Ballyhay, ‘‘ Ballyhayes lyeing in the parish of Donaghdee, in spiritualities and
temporalities parcel of the late dissolved priorye of St. John’s of Jerusalem.” Inquis.
13 October, 1623. “ Ecclesia Sti. Johanis de Moyvelusk,” now the Grange of Mo-
lusk, Ballytrustan. A.D. 1320, two carucates of land in “ Ardmacaisse” which had
been forfeited by John FitzNicholas, of Slane, on account of his having joined
Edward Bruce, were granted by the King to the prior of St. John’s, of Jerusalem.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-273.png ---
County of Down. 241

sterling, and half a mark yearly for shoes, and also entertain-
ment for his horse and servant, in the same manner as the pre-
ceptor’s horses and servants were treated."

1333- The same prior granted to Robert, the son of Thomas,
the reve or bailiff, his entertainment in this house, and clothes
yearly, with the other free servants, or ten shillings in lieu
thereof, he to undertake the office of farmer to the commandery.”

1335. The same prior granted to friar William, the son of
Thomas, the like grant that he made to friar Thomas de
Vallet ; and that, if he should happen to be confined to his
chamber, his allowance should be daily two white loaves, and
two of the coarser kind, two flagons of ale, and two dishes of
meat from the kitchen ; that he should have free liberty to
bring into the house, or to remove from it, all his goods and
chattels, and at his death to dispose of them at his pleasure,
reserving the sum of thirteen shillings and four-pence to the
prior of Kilmainham as his mortuary ; and, moreover, that he
should have a proper place within the house whereon to build
a chamber for himself, but at his own cost and charges.*

1337. Friar Nicholas de Compton was preceptor.’

1339. He was preceptor this year also.”

1349. The prior of Kilmainham granted to Henry, the son
of R——,, during life, the employment of butler in this house,
with a mark sterling annually for clothes and other neces-
saries, to be paid by the preceptor; to have his diet at the
esquires’ table, but to have the same in his chamber if confined
thereto, and to have the power of disposing of his goods and
chattels at his death, excepting to the prior a marc for his
mortuary. The same year he granted to Robert de Hagard
the employment of farmer, with his diet, &c., with ten shillings
annually for his salary, and to have his diet in his chamber if
confined thereto, and a power to dispose of his goods and
chattels at his death, reserving to the prior a marc as his
mortuary. The same year he granted to brother friar Ste-
phen Kermardyn, chaplain, his corrody in this house, and that
at his death he might dispose of his goods, &c., reserving to
the prior forty shillings sterling as his mortuary; he
granted to him also a piece of ground, within the commandery,
whereon to erect a chamber for himself, but at his own cost
and charges.¢

1397. Thomas Mercameston was preceptor.*

This building is now a great heap of ruins, and the family
of Echlin possess several townlands in freehold, and also a
manor court which did belong to this commandery.®

" King, p. 61. “id. *Jd. p.62. %1d,~.7. */d., p. 83. *Id., p. 62.
Td. *Id. dd. ~.6t. * Hist., County Down, pp. 67 and 269.
R

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-274.png ---
242 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Cluaindaimh ;” in Huechia. There was an abbey here in
the early ages, of which St. Mochoemoc, or Mochommoc, was
abbots

8 Cumber »» or Comerer ; a poor village on a branch of the
Lough of Strangford, and three miles south west of that town,
in the barony of Castle Reagh. St. Patrick founded an abbey
here, of which we have no further account ;! but Brien Catha
Dun, from whom the O’Niels of Clandeboys descended, built
one to the honour of the Virgin Mary, and supplied it with
monks, of the Cistertian order, from the abbey of Alba landa
in Carmarthenshire* The founder fell by the sword of Sir
John de Courcey, about the year 1201.' John O’Mullegan
was the last abbot, and he voluntarily resigned in the year

1543."

Inquisition 5th November, 1st King James, finds, that John
O’Mullegan, the last abbot, was, on Ist of August, 35th King
Henry VIII., seized of seven townlands, both in spirituals and
temporals, circumjacent to the abbey, viz., Ballemonostar,
Ballengona, Ballealletnegan, Ballestoger, Ballengam, Ballen-

t The baronies of Upper and Lower Iveagh. & Act. SS., p. 598. % Was called
anciently Domnach Commuir. | Tr. Th., pp. 95, 114, and 270. * Pembridge’s
Ann, War. Mon. ™ Hist. County of Down, p. 269.

7 Cluaindaimk, now Clonduff,a parish in the diocese of Dromore.—See Reeves’
Eccles. Antig., p. 115.

8 Cumber, now Comber,— Father Edmund MacCanna says in his ‘‘Itinerary”:—
“Previous to the outbreak of heresy, there were two monasteries here commonly
called the Black and the White, from the colour of the garments worn by the in-
mates of these houses. I saw a monk of the White Abbcy, that is, of the order
of St. Bernard, who commonly went by the name of the White Monk. When
weighed down with years, and an exile from his abode, he was murdered in Clan-
Cania, a territory of Tyrone, by the ruthless enemies, the Scots, in the year of our
salvation 1643. Of these monasteries not even the ruins remain, for a colony of
Scots who settled there employed the stones of them for building houses for them-
selves, so great is the passion of heretics for demolishing sacred objects.” The
old church of Comber, on the site of which the new one has been erected, was
considered to have been a part of the old monastery. In the Life of St. Patrick
(Colg. Trias Thaum., p. 147), he is said to have founded a church called Domh-
nach Combuir, and the Annals of Ulster, at 1031, relate that an army was led by
MacEochay as far as Iveagh, which burned Killcummar, with the oratory ; killed
four of the clergy, and carried away thirty captives. This may have been a com-
munity of Regular Canons, which continued to the ‘‘ Reformation,” and was
called the Black Abbey. Archdall is evidently mistaken regarding the founders of
the Cistercian monastery. It was not built by Brian-Catha-Duin O’Neill,
or any other of that family, who did not effect a settlement in the county
of Down for nearly a century after the date assigned for its foundation. Brian was
slain in the battle of Down A.D. 1260, fighting against the Lord Justice, Stephen de
Longespey. The foundation is attributed to the Whites by Allemande. The year
118 is the date assigned in an old Cistercian catalogue (Butler's Grace's An.,
Pp. 170). At the dissolution it was possessed of four peace townlands, with the
tithes of five others, and the rectories and advowsons of four parishes, viz.. Tawn-
aghneeve, or Saintfield, Templenelafin, in Island Magee, Killmood, and Ballyma-
geehan, which is now incorporated in the parish of Comber. All its possessions
were granted by the Crown to Sir James Hamilton.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-275.png ---
County of Down. 243

Altocher, and Balleongonye ; also the grange of the Temple-
ne-leffine, in the county of Antrim, and all the tithes of three
townlands appertaining to the said grange, which lands were,
on said 5th November, in the tenure of Moyses Hill, Esq.;
also the grange of Kilwoodmaninghe, in the country of Slutte
Henrikeis, in the county of Down; and all the tithes of five
townlands appertaining to the said grange, lying in the said
Slutte Henrikeis, viz., Dennihenrye, Ballnullye, Ballehull,
Ballchalnegye and Ballasneburn ; annual value of the said
abbey, &c., besides reprises, 425.—Chicf Rememb.

Domnachmaghin *° St. Patrick founded this church in Mug-
dorna,® and placed St. Victor over it.°

Downpatrick ,*? lies on the south west branch of the Lough
of Strangford, and is a market and borough-town sending
burgesses to parliament.

» The barony of Mourne. ° Act. SS., p. 424. » Was known anciently by the
several names of Avaskeltair, Rathkeltair, Leathlaidhi, Leatkglaysse, and Dunda-
leathglasse.

° Domnachmaghin ; now Donagh Moyne, in the county of Monaghan.—See
Shirley's Dominion of Farney, p. 151, &c.

10 Downpatrick.— Abbey of Canons Regular, and afterwards of Benedictines.
The Mound or Rath of Downpatrick, lying to the north of the Cathedral,
‘*comprehends,” says Harris, “at least three-quarters of an English mile within
the circuit of all the works. The circumference of it is 2,100 feet ; the conical
height 60 feet ; the diameter at the top bearing a proportion to the other parts.
Three great artificial ramparts surround it, the most considerable of which is thirty
feet broad.” This great rath appears to have been the royal residence and prin-
cipal fortress of the princes who governed the surrounding territory, and it was
probably on that account that the church in its vicinity was selected as the place of
St. Patrick's sepulture and as the cathedral of the diocese. On this mound was
the residence of Celtchar of tke battles, who flourished about the commencement of
the Christian era, and was one of the heroes of the Red Branch, and one of the
twelve chiefs of Ulster. From him the fortress was called Aras Cealtair, “the
habitation of Celtchar,” Rath Chealtair, ‘the fort of Celtchar,” and Dun Celt.
chair, ‘‘the fortress of Celtchar.” Downpatrick, in more modern times, was known
by the names of Dun-leth-glas, or Druim-leth-glas, and eventually the name assumed
the form of Dun-da-leth-glas, which Colgan translates ‘‘the fort of the two halves
of the chain ;” and this name is accounted for by a legend related by Jocelyn, that
King Laoghaire, being enraged against Dichu for becoming a Christian, had
ordered that the sons of Dichu, who were hostages with him, should be allowed
to perish of thirst ; but an angel freed them from their prison house, and, in the
words of Jocelin, “he left one of them in a place in Down, where is now erected the
Church of St. Patrick, and the other on a neighbouring hill (the Mound), sur-
rounded by a marsh of the sea; and he broke asunder the chains wherewith they
were bound ; and each place is, even to this day, from the broken chains, called
Dun-da-leath-glas.” It would seem, however, to have borne that name four
hundred years before the time of St. Patrick ; for, in an old story preserved in the
Book of Leinster, Celtchar is said to be ‘‘of Leth-glais.” In process of time the
name was abbreviated to Dun, from which the Latin name Dunum, and modern
one Down, or, with the addition of the name of the patron saint, Downpatrick,
have been formed.

We may presume that the conversion of the princes who ruled Ulidia induced St.
Patrick at an early period of his mission to erect a church in the vicinity of their
chief fortress, and we find that the ancient lives of the saint represent Rus, son of
Trichem, and brother of Dichu, as presiding over the church of Dundalethglas.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-276.png ---
244 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Abbey of Canons Regular ; St. Patrick founded this abbey,
and was interred therein, A.D. 493 ;3 although some writers give
that honour to the abbey ot Glastonbury, in Somersetshire.*

« War. Bps., p. 22. * Stevens, vol. 1, p. 420.

Rus, or Ros, resided at Derlus, which seems to have been an earthen fort, which
stood on the site now occupied by the ruined castle of Bright, where he was
visited and converted by St. Patrick. He was a poet and a doctor of the Berla
Feini, the most ancient form of the Irish language, and he was one of the nine
persons appointed to draw up the Senchus Mor, the great law which regulated the
whole civil polity of the Irish. His festival occurs on the 7th of April. The first
church built in Downpatrick was probably of the same perishable material as that
used in the construction of the dwelMngs which stood within the circumvallations
of the neighbouring fortress. We should, however, remember that all the primi-
tive Irish churches were not constructed of mud-wall or planed timber, several
of them were built of stone and lime ; and we even find in the ancient lives of
St. Patrick that he prescribed the dimensions of some of the most important of
them, and directed that they should be constructed sixty feet in length.

The great glory of the Church of Down was the possession of the relics of St.
Patrick, St. Brigid, and St. Columba. _Jocelin, who collected nearly all that the
previous biographers had written regarding the interment of St. Patrick, relates
that “the people of Ultonia, having entered Down, celebrated the solemnities of
the Mass, and in the place foreshown by the heavenly light buried the venerable
body with all due veneration; and this desirable treasure—this Precious jewel—
they deposited beneath a stone five cubits deep in the heart of the earth, lest,
haply by stealth, it might be conveyed thence.”

It is very probable that St. Donard ornamented the tomb and enlarged or rebuilt
the church, and that may have been the occasion when the circumstance related in
the ‘‘ Book of Armagh” occurred. ‘“ When the church was being built over the
body, the men who were digging the ground saw fire bursting forth out of the sepul-
chre, and, flying back, they were afraid of the torching flame of the fire.” ‘* The
Annals of Ulster” copy the following entry from a chronicle called the ‘‘ Book
of Cuana”:—A.C. §52. “The relics of Patrick were enshrined sixty years
after his death by Columcille. Three precious reliquaries were found in the tomb,
viz., the Cup, the Angel’s Gospel, and the Bell of the Will. The angel directed
Columcille to divide the three reliquaries thus: the Cup to Down, the Bell of the
Will to Armagh, the Gospel of the Angel to Columcille himself. And it is called
the Gospel of the Angel because Columcille received it at the Angel's hand.”
Dr. Reeves adduces an objection, taken from a passage in the notes on the ‘* Life
of St. Patrick,” by Tirechan, which are in the Book of Armagh, where one of the
similitudes introduced by that writer between St. Patrick and Moses is ‘‘ where
his bones are no one knows ;” but a note by Dr. Reeves, in which he proves that
Tirechan’s part of the ‘‘ Book of Armagh” could not have been written before
the close of theninth century, supplies an answer to the objection, for long
before that period the sacred relics had been concealed lest they might fall into
the hands of the Danes. There is no doubt that a portion of the relics were
removed to Armagh, which accounts for the shrine containing the relics of St.
Patrick, mentioned by the ‘‘ Annals of Ulster,” at the year 830, as carried by
Forinnan, abbot of Armagh, into Munster, and explains why St. Bernard
describes Armagh as the place “ in which, when living, he (St. Patrick) ruled, and
when dead he rests.”

The true reason for the selection of Down asa resting place for the relics of
Brigid and Columbkille, was the belief universally received by the Irish people
that St. Patrick’s relics were in that church, as was recorded in his biographies
and in his ¢estamentum, a document which Ussher describes as written in the most
ancient Irish verses, where he is made to prophesy—

“Down, where will be my resurrection on the hill of Celtar, son of Duach.”

_ Immunity from incursions of the Danes could not have suggested the removal to
it of sacred treasures so highly valued, for our annals record that the town or church

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-277.png ---
County of Down. 245

A.D. 583. Died the bishop St. Fergus; his feast is ob-
served on the 30th of March.*

785. Died the abbot Dungal, the son of Laogar.'

940. The Danes plundered and burnt this town," as they
likewise did in 942” and 988.*

"Calendar. + Act. SS., p. 257. % Tr. Th., p. 633. “Hist. County of Down,
p. 29. * Tr. Th., p. 633.

was several times plundered by them. The exposed position of Downpatrick, built
on a branch of Lough Strangford, rendered it at any time an easy prey to those
pirates. It was thenalone the possession of the relics of St. Patrick which ob-
tained for Down the honour of being the depository of the remains of St. Brigid
and St. Columba, which had been for several centuries deposited in the respective
churches where they died. The Life of St. Brigid, by Cogitosus, describes the
church of Kildare as containing the relics of St. Brigid, and of St. Conlaeth, first
Bishop of Kildare, who died in 519, four years before the decease of St. Brigid.
‘*In it the glorious bodies of both Bishop Conleath and of this holy virgin,
Brigid, repose on the right and left of the high (ornati) altar, placed in monu-
ments ornamented with interlaced work (vario cultu) in gold and silver, and
gems and precious stones, over which are suspended crowns of gold and silver.”
Adamnan, in his Life of St. Columba, describes the interment of that saint in
Jona, which occurred in the year §94. In 825, the Abbot of Iuna, “ Blathmac,
son of Flann, received the crown of martyrdom, for he was killed by the foreigners
(the Danes), at I-Colum-Cille,” because he would not inform them where he had
concealed the costly shrine which contained the relics of St. Columba. In the
year 830 the relics of St. Columba were brought to Ireland, but they seem to
have been carried back to Iona, for in the year 848 the Abbot of Iona brought
them to Ireland. Again they were returned to Iona, for in 878 they were
transferred to Ireland to save them from the Danes. It is probable that the relics
of St. Brigid and St. Colamba became finally located in Down about that period,
and that for greater security against the hostile incursions of the Pagan Northmen,
the relics of the three patrons were committed to the earth in one common tomb,
as expressed in the ancient verse, cited by Keating as the prophecy of St. Columba:

“ My prosperity in guiltless Hy
And my soul in Derry
And my body under the flag
Beneath which are Patrick and Brigid.”

From time to time various churches became possessed of portions of the relics
of these saints ; hence arose the seeming contradiction which we so frequently meet
in our ancient records, when we find it stated that these relics were in Saul, in
Down, in Armagh, in Kildare, in Iona, or in Dunkeld.

O'Donnell’s, ‘* Life of St. Columba” has preserved the following curious
legendary story of the removal of St. Columba’s remains to Downpatrick :—
“It is sufficient to relate the manner and the circumstances of the translation, which
the holy Berchan states to have occurred in this manner. Mander, a son of the
King of Denmark, and a commander of a piratical fleet of Northmen, devastating
with fire and sword the northern parts of Brittain, came of Iona. . . search-
ing for treasure. They dig up the sarcophagus, or chest, in which was the body
of the holy Columba, a true treasure, but not such as they coveted. They carry
to their ship the chest, which they afterwards opened as they were on their course
to Ireland, and finding nothing within it but human bones and dust, they shut
it up and cast it into the sea. After having been tossed on the billows of
the ocean, and driven through the waves, it is found floating on the waters in a
bay of the sea near to the city of Down. Being thus found and recognised by a
Divine revelation, the Abbot of the Monastery of Down, having opened it, placed
the holy treasure, which he took out of the chest, in the same shrine with the
sacred relics of the holy Patrick and Brigid.” This story is surpassed by a

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-278.png ---
246 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1015. Died the abbot Chernaich,’ and the same year the
Danes destroyed the town.”

1040. The Danes continued their cruel ravages, and re-
peated them in 1069.*

1101. Magnus, King of Norway and Man, was interred in
this abbey in this year, or in 1103.>

1111. The town was again destroyed by the Danes.°

¥ Annal. Ulst. * Tr. Th., p. 633. *Jd. > Annal. Mann. * Tr. Th.,p. 633-

traditional legend told by the people around Downpatrick, which relates that the
chest was of stone, and that it floated on until it was cast up on Horse Island by
a high tide, which covered it with sand. It happened that there were at that
time many cows grazing on the Horse Island, and it was remarked that one of
them, which belonged to a poor widow, continued for days licking the sand at a
certain spot, and was never seen eating grass, yet she gave more milk than any
other cow in the herd. This matter having attracted the attention of some curious
ersons, they removed a portion of the sand, and found St. Columkill’s coffin!
hese old legends are evidently of a bardic origin.

A.D. 775—‘* Macniadh, son of Ceallach, abbot of Dun-Leathglas, died.”

A.D. 785—‘' Dungal, son of Laoghaire, abbot of Dunleathglas, died.”

A.D. 795—‘“* Loingseagh, son of Fiachra, abbot of Dun-Leathglas, died.”

A.D. 823—“ Dun da-Leathghlas was plundered by the foreigners,” but swift
vengeance soon overtook the Pagan Danes, for, in the same year, “ A battle was
gained in Magh-inis (Lecale) by the Ulidians over the foreigners, in which many
were slain,” ‘‘ Suibhne, son of Fearghus, abbot of Dunleathglas, anchorite and
bishop, died.”

“AD. 879—“ Scannlan, abbot of Dun-Leathglas, died.” ‘‘The Annals of
Ulster” add that he was strangled by the Ulidians.

A.D. 939—‘* Oenacan, priest of Dun-Leathglas, died.”

A.D. 940—“ Dun-Leathglas was plundered by the son of Raghnall and his
foreigners. God and Patrick quickly took vengeance of him for this deed, for
foreigners came across the sea and attacked them upon their island, so that the
son of Raghnall, their chief, escaped to the mainland. He was killed by Madud-
han, King of Ulidia. in revenge of Patrick, before the end of a week after the
plundering.” The island in which the Danes were attacked by a hostile band of
their own countrymen was probably one of those artificial islands called crannogs,
which the Irish then used as fortified habitations, to which they retreated in
time of danger. The “ Terrier” informs us that the bishop possessed, near Down-
patrick, certain lands called the “ Bishop's island, and both the crannochs, one

lowland.”

P A.D. 951—“ Maelmartin, son of Maenach. priest of Dun-Leathglas, died.”

A.D. 954—“ Gaeithine, learned bishop of Dun-Leathglas, died.”

A.D. 952—“ Finghin, distinguished bishop of Dun-Leathglas, died.”’

A.D. 970—‘‘ Cathasac, son of Fergus, comharba of Dun, died.’ The term
“ Comharba” is used by the Irish writers in the sense of heir or successor to the
spiritual dignity as well as the temporal rights of the founder of a church.

A.D. 988—‘‘ Dun-Leathglas was plundered and burned by the foreigners,” and
“ Maelmoghna O'Carroll, Airchineach of Down, died.” The Irish ecclesiastical
title Airchineach, which is anglicised Herenach and Erinagh, the latter of which
forms gives name to the townland of Erinagh, in the parish of Bright. is explained
by Dr. Reeves as ‘hereditary warden of a church,” and by Dr. O’Donovan as
‘“lay superintendent of church lands.” Anciently the office was probably held
by an ecclesiastic, but in more recent times it would seem to have been exercised
by a layman. In some instances, on the death of an erenagh, the bishop appointed
to the office some member of the family in which the erenaghship was hereditary,
and he observed the same rules that regulated the selection of tanists for the clans.
At times the temporal princes were selected by alternate succession from two or
more families, and such would seem to be the case in the office of erenach of

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-279.png ---
County of Down. 247

1183. The secular canons were turned out of this abbey by
Sir John de Courcey, who placed therein monks of the order
of St. Benedict, from the abbey of St. Werburgh in Chester,
dedicating it at the same time to St. Patrick, it being before
under the invocation of the Holy Trinity ;4 and William de
Etleshall, a monk of Chester, was made the first prior.®

In several different charters Sir John makes them various
grants. In one, for the health of the souls of his father and

4 Usher. War, Mon. and Annal. © Id.

Down, which appears to have been hereditary in the families of O’Cathusaich
(which might be modernised into O'Casey, or perhaps O’Cusack) and O’Cairill
(which would now be O’Carrill, or perhaps Carvill). Some of the erenachs of
Down are not called by those sirnames, though it is probable that they belonged
to those privileged families. The genealogical work of Duald MacFirbis gives
the origin of the O’Cairills “ Aodh Roin (King of Ulidia, slain A.D. 732), had five
sons—viz., Fiacha, a guo Clann Fiachaidh at Dun-da-leathglas. - «+ This
Fiachna (King of Ulidia, died A.D. 785) had six sons—viz., Cairioll, son of Fiachna
(King of Ulidia, slain A.D. 815), from whom are the O’Cairill in Dun-da-lethglas.”
The same work, in another place, says that a descendant of Fiachna “ was killed
by the O'Creichim in Dundalethglas, by which the quarter of Dun was forfeited by
them for ever to the Clann Fiachaidh.”

A.D. 992—“ Macleighin, son of Dunghalan, erenach of Dun-Leathglas,” and
“Dunchadh, Lector of Dun,” died. Dunchadh seems to have been a professor in
the University or College of Down. Keating, speaking of the incursion of the
Danes at the year 837, says :—‘‘ There were, moreover, till this time four prin-
cipal schools in Treland—viz., a school at Armagh, a school at Cashel, a school
at Dundaleathglas, and a school at Lismore.”

A.D. 1005—* Madadhan, son of Domhnall. King of Ulidia, was killed by the
Tore, #.e., Dubhtuine, in the middle of Dun Leathglas, in violation of the Saints of
Treland. Dubhtuine, #.¢, the Torc, King of Ulidia, was slain, through miracles
of God and Patrick, by Muireadhac, son of Madadhan, in revenge for his father.”
«The Annals of Ulster” add that Madadhan was slain ‘in the Church of Brigid,
in the middle of Down.” The murderer is called the ‘‘Tore” (the boar)—from him
is named probably the townland of Dunturk, in the civil parish of Loughinisland.
We cannot doubt that he received this epithet from his cruelty and ferocity, which
his son seems to have inherited from him, as the following entry shows :—

A.D. 1009—‘‘Scannlan O’Dunghalain, abbot of Dun-Leathglas, was blinded.”
The “ Annals of Ulster” add that he was ‘‘ forced from his fortress and carried
away, and his eyes put out at Finavar by Niall, son of Dubhtuine.” The place
where the oxen were caught, which conveyed the body of St. Patrick to Down-
patrick, is called by Colgan ‘‘Finnauar,” but in the “Book of Armagh” it is
named ‘‘Findubrec.” It is obviously Finabrogue, in the neighbourhood of Down-
patrick. Niall suffered a just punishment for his crime ; he was deposed in the
year 1011, and killed in battle in the year 1015.
® A.D. 1015—“Cernach, son of Cathusagh, erenach of Dunleathglas, died.”
“* Dun-da-lethglas_was totally burned with its Damhliag and Cloictheach.” The
** Daimhliag,” which is the Irish word for a stone church, was the Cathedral, and
it was probably the same building at the erection of which flames are said to have
burst forth out of the foundations, as is told in the legend preserved in the “ Book
of Armagh.” The “ Cloichtheach” was the steeple or Round Tower, which stood
near the south-east angle of the cathedral, on a portion of what is now the
grayelled area. It is thus described in A Tour through Jreand in 1779 :—“ No
ancient monument remains in the old abbey, but here is a round tower which
stands about forty feet from the old cathedral, is sixty-six feet high, the thickness
of the walls three feet, and the diameter on the inside eight feet. On the west
side of it is an irregular gap, about ten feet from the top, near a third of the whole
circumference being broken off by the injury of time; the entrance into it is two


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-280.png ---
248 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

mother, all his predecessors and successors, Beatrice de Villers,
his own, Africa his wife, and of all that had died or should
die in his service, he granted the ferry of the Lough of Strang-
ford, towards the Duffren; the ferry of Carlingford ; the ferry
of Cragfergus and that of the Bann; and all the ferries in his
several conquests in Ireland, that between Lethcathel and
Arte alone excepted: Witnesses, M. bishop of Down; R.
bishop of Connor; E. abbot of Ynes; G. abbot of Holm; P.
abbot of Saul; G. prior of St. Thomas ; P. prior of Muckmor;

feet and a half wide, and placed on a level with the surface of the ground.” The
ground around the round tower must have been raised by the accumulation of
rubbish, for the doors of such towers are placed at a considerable height—that of
the tower of Kilmacduagh is placed at an elevation of twenty-six feet from the
ground. The destruction of this venerable monument of antiquity was determined
on in consequence of the rivalry between Lord Downshire and Lord de Clifford.
The latter, who was proprietor of the tower, opposed this piece of vandalism ; but
Lord Downshire, taking advantage of his rival's absence, caused it to be pulled
down, under pretence that its fall might endanger the cathedral. This occurred
in the Autumn of 1789. When the towerwas thrown down a wall was discovered
running directly across its site, which was supposed to have been the foundation of
an earlier church,

A.D. 1026—“ Maolpatrick O'Alecain, lector of Dunlethglas, died.”

A.D. 1043—‘‘ Flaithbhertach, bishop of Dunlethglas, died.”

A.D. 1048—“Gillacoluin O'Heighnigh, lord of Airghialla, died, and was in-
terred at Dun-da-Leathglas.”

A.D. 1043—‘‘ Ecmarcach, son of Cernach, erenach of Dunlethglas, went on a
pilgrimage.”

A.D. 1067—“ Scolaige, son of Indrechtach, erenach of Mucknoe (county
Monaghan), and the erenach of Dunlethglas, died.”

A.D, 1068—* Domhnall O’Cathusaich, erenach of Dun, died.”

A.D. 1069—‘* Dun-da-leathglas was burned.”

A.D. 1078—* Senoir. son of Mal-Molua, chief anchorite of Ireland, ended his
days in peace at Dundalethglas.”

A.D. 1083—‘‘ Muircertach O’Cairill, erenach of Dun, the most learned judge
and historian of Ireland, died.”

A.D, 1086—“ Maolkevin, venerable bishop of Ulidia (Down), died.”

A.D. 1089—O'Cernach, comarba of Dundalethglas. rested in Christ.”

A.D. 1099—‘“‘ Diarmaid O’Maolathgen, erenach of Dun, died on Easter night.”

A.D. 1102—“ Cooey O'Cairill, erenach of Dun, died.”

A.D. 1111—* Dun-da-leathglas was burned, both fort and trian, by lightning.” —
Trian signifies the third part. or a division of a town, but it seems frequently to
signify the part occupied by the inhabitants as distinguished from the military or
the clergy.

‘AD y— Maolmaire, bishop of Dunda-lethglas, died.”

A.D. 1136—‘ Maolmaedog (St. Malachy) O’Morgair retired from the cowar-
pate of Patrick (Primacy) to serve God.” It was to Down that St. Malachy re-
tired, where he established a house of Regular Canons which is supposed to have
been on the site now occupied by the old jail.

A.D. 1157—‘ Cuuladh O Duinsleibhe O Eochadra, King of Ulidia, died, after
penance, at J)un-da-leathghlas, and was interred at Dun itself.”

A.D. 1158—‘‘Gilla Odar O’Cathusaich, erenach of Dundaleathghlas,” was a
subscribing witness to the charter granted by Muircheartach MacLoughlin to the
Abbey of Newry, about the year 1158.

A.D. 1177—** Cardinal Vivian arrived in Ireland.” He was sent by Pope
Alexander III., as Apostolic Legate. After having remained during Christmas
with Gothred, King of the Isle of Man, he arrived at Downpatrick after Epiphany.
** An army was led by John de Courcy and the knights into Dalaradia and to

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-281.png ---
County of Down. 249

and W. prior of Cragfergus.—In another he granted the
tithe of all his hunting throughout his whole lands: Witness,
Will. prior of Cragfergus—In another, he granted the
power of holding a court, with certain privileges attending it,
and appointed D— to be then prior.—In another he confirmed
the donation which Amauric de Hanehhe had given of his
land of Ballcrou: Witness, Malachy, bishop of Down———
In another charter the prior is named Andrew ; and Sir John

Dun-da-leathghlas ; they slew Donnell, the grandson of Cathasuch, Lord of
Dalaradia. Dun-da-leathghlas was plundered and destroyed by John and the
knights who came in hisarmy. A castle was erected by him there, out of which
they defeated the Ulidians twice, and the Kinel-Owen and Oriels once, slew
Conor O’Carellan, chief of Clandermot, and Gilla-macliag O’Donnelly, chief of
Feardroma (in county Tyrone around Castlecaulfield), and Donnell O’Laverty,
chief of Clann-Hamill, in the county of Derry, was so wounded by arrows on this
occasion, that he died of his wounds in the Church of St. Paul, at Armagh, after
having received the Body and the Blood of Christ, and after extreme unction and
penance. Many other chieftains were also slain by them besides these.” John
de Courcy, a warlike but cruel man, set out from Dublin, with less than four
hundred men, in the month of January, A.D. 1177, and in four days arrived at
Downpatrick, without meeting an enemy to oppose him. The town, which was
taken by surprise, was given up to plunder, and the streets were wet with the
blood of the citizens. The Pope’s legate, having in vain endeavoured to prevail on
De Courcy to withdraw his soldiers, on condition that Rory MacDunlevey, King
of Ulidia, should pay tribute to the King of England, urged the native Prince to
defend his territories against the aggressors. In the meantime, according to the
Dublin copy of the Annals of Innisfallen, De Courcy erected a strong fort of
stones and clay at Down, and drew a ditch or wall from sea to sea, or, in other
words, he cut-a deep trench in front of the site of the present market house,
which completely insulated that portion of the town, which was afterwards called
“the English Quarter,” and which, probably, at that period constituted the entire
town. In order to defend the drawbridge which connected the insulated town
with the mainland, he erected a castle which stood at the junction of English-street
and Church-street. In the beginning of February, MacDunlevey collected in a
week, according to Giraldus, ten thousand warriors to attack the English, who
marched out of the town to meet them. Giraldus says the Ulidians, who, like
the northern inhabitants of every country, were the bravest of its people, fought
manfully with spears and battle-axes, but were defeated by the foreigners, who
mustered less than four hundred, a circumstance which, though it does not enhance
their bravery or their discipline, tende to lessen the credibility of Giraldus, who,
however, ascribes the victory of his countrymen to the direct interference of God.
The princes of the Kinel-Owen and Oriel, finding.that the common enemy was
approaching too near to their own confines, so far forgot their old enmity tothe

lidians as to muster all their available forces against the Normans. The united
forces, amounting to fifteen thousand men, sustained, on the 24th of June, 1177,
the crushing defeat mentioned in the extract already given from the ‘‘ Annals of
the Four Masters.” They seem to have been a multitude, without arms or discip-
line, opposed to the mail-clad Norman warriors ; or, as MacNamee, the poet of
Kinel-Owen, speaking of another battle, fought at Down, says :—

“ Unequal they engaged in battle,
The foreigners and the Gael of Tara ;
Fine linen shirts on the Race of Con,
And the foreigners in one mass of iron.”

In this battle, according to the Annals of Inisfallen, ‘‘the Archbishop of Armagh,
the Bishop of Down, and all the clergy were taken prisoners, and the English got
possession of the croziers of St. Comgal] (founder of Bangor), and St. Dachiarog

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-282.png ---
250 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

grants them every tenth cow and tenth animal on all his farms,
excepting in the Ardes, for the health of the souls of all who
had contributed to advise or assist him in the conquest of
Ulster: Witness, Jordan de Courcey, his brother.

The bishop Malachy granted to the abbey Lochmonne,
Messesarech, Ferrochen, Ballinscanlan, Arthgothin, Balin-
rothan, Telagnocrossi, Balienbrethnaghe, Belgach, Delen,

(the founder of Errigalkeeroge, in the County of Tyrone), and the Canoin Phatruic
(the Book of Armagh), besides a bell called the Ceolan an Tighearna, They
afterwards, however, set the bishops at liberty, and restored the Canoin Phatruic
(the Book of Armagh) and the bell, but they killed all the inferior clergy, and
kept the other noble relics, which are still in the hands of the English.” De
Courcy was extremely superstitious, and thought that he was designated in a
prophecy, said to have been delivered by Ambrosius Merlin, of Caermarthen, who
ived in the 5th century, which declared that ‘‘a white knight, sitting on a white
horse, and bearing birds on his shield, would be the first that, with force of arms,
would enter and invade Ulster.” He likewise held, it is said, the prophecies
attributed to St. Columbkille in such veneration that he slept with the book con-
cealed under his pillow, because there was one of those prophecies which foretold
that a certain pauper and beggar, and fugitive from another country, would come
to Down with a small army and obtain possession of the town, and that such would
be the slaughter of the citizens that the enemy would wade up to their knees in
their blood.

John de Courcy founded the Cathedral, which was then called the Church of the
Most Blessed Trinity, possessed by a prior and convent of secular canons, who
were the chapter of the diocese. “He caused the church to be called the Church of
St. Patrick, and he determined to substitute Benedictines instead of the secular
canons. For this purpose he obtained from the Benedictine Abbey of St. Werburg,
at Chester, a prior and a body of monks. for which he made to that abbey a grant
of lands, the record of which, in the Registry of St. Werburg’s, ran thuss—“John
de Courcy has given to the Church of St. Werburga, at Chester, Hurmach along
with ten carucates of land beneath 7hewet of Chenelfernan in perpetual alms . . .
in order that the Abbot of Chester may select from his house a prior and community,
to erect an abbacy of his Order in the Church of St. Patrick of Down; so that the
aforesaid Church of Down remain free from every subjection to the Church of
Chester, in consideration of the same forementioned ten carucates. Witness,
Malachy, Bishop of Down, &c.” In consequence of this, as we are informed by an
annalist of Chester, whose entry has been preserved by Ussher—‘‘ In the year 1183
a certain monk, named William de Etleshale, went from Chester into Hulvester
(Ulster) to Down, and he received the priory of the Church of St. Patrick from
Malachy, Bishop of Down, and Lord John de Courci.” Shortly after this, De
Courcy induced or compelled the bishop to make the following grant, which is
preserved in a Patent Roll, 42 Edward 11I.:—‘ Know all men present and to -
come, that I, Malachy, Bishop of Down, have granted, for the honour of God and
of holy religion, the Church of St. Patrick of Down, with all its rights, for the use
of the prior and the Black Monks, of whom I, the Bishop, shall be the guardian
and Abbot, as is the case in the Church of Wynton or Coventry. Wherefore, I
have granted and confirmed to them and to their successors the towns belonging to
the Church, viz., &c.” Then follow the names of forty-seven townlands and three
rectories, most, or perhaps the whole of these vast possessions, was the property of
the Prior and Convent at the period of the suppression. After enumerating the
townlands and rectories, the document concludes:—‘* Moreover, for the honour and
reverence of my episcopal dignity, I have retained in my hands the one-half of the
oblations on these five festivals of the year, and no others, namely, on the
Nativity of the Lord. on the Purification of the Holy Mary, on the festival of St.
Patrick, at Easter and Penticost. Of this grant these are the witnesses. L, Arch-
bishop of Dublin, T. Armagh, and many others.” There is preserved among the
papers formerly belonging to Sir James Ware, a copy ofan ancient roll of the four-

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-283.png ---
County of Down. 251

Tipermeni, Balmiechethe, Dunnovere, Balienlirnoni, Telagh-
methan, Balinbothan, Molrath, Kno, Chengar, Monenmor,
Nochenduf, Chemard, Tirgore, Tirestruther, Balioconevi,
Cremse, Crochbalindethdume, Balima, Celendre, Balmangatha,
Balinculter, Balmiackelli, Keloker, Balienscruthi, Balinzimur-
gam, Kelliohan, Baliowosan, Lesconan, Kortef, Cronoch,

teenth or fifteenth century, which was lent to him from the muniments of the See
of Down, which purports to be an extract from ancient documents read by the
Bishop of Down in the year 1210, before King John, and confirmed by that king.
It states “that the Bishop of Down is Abbot of the Convent of the Monks of the
Church of Down, and has the same pre-eminence over the Prior and the Convent
of St. Patrick as any other abbot has over hisown convent. And in the Church of
Down the same bishop has the half of all the oblations of that church and chapels
on the festivals of Easter, the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and the
Nativity of the same, and on the festival of St. Patrick and of the Nativity of our
Lord. Item. He has in the same church on the north side a hall and kitchen,
with chambers above and beneath, and before the gate of the cloister a little passage
which leads to the lower chambers, and behind the said hall chambers on the north
side, towards the parish church of said city.” It would seem from this document
that the cloisters and cells were to the north of the Cathedral, which corresponds
with what Harris says—‘ Large pieces of stained glass and window lead have been
lately turned out of the ruins of the building; the glass but rudely painted and
scarce transparent, probably done in the infancy of the invention; but the lead was
like pewter, and far beyond any used in the present times. Several cells have been
discovered behind the abbey, one whereof was floored with small painted tiles, some-
thing like mosaic work, but the figures small and ill done.” On account of the
peculiar relations that existed between the Bishop and the Prior and Convent, the
election to the see on each vacancy rested with the Prior and Convent, subject to
the approbation of the king and the Pope; however, we shall find an attempt on
the part of the abbey of Bangor to set up a claim to that privilege. The Terrier
says:—‘‘ The Prior of the said Abby and Convent is Dean, and the monks of the
said Abby or Cathedral Church are Cannons Cathedrall, and, as it were, a Chapter.”
It is on this account that we do not meet in ancient documents reference to any
of the officers, usually connected with other dioceses, except the archdeacon.

In the year 1185 the relics of St. Patrick, St. Brigid, and St. Columbkille were
discovered in the Cathedral, in a spot where they had been concealed, lest they
might fall into the hands of the Danes. The following account is given of this
discovery :—It being well known that the three bodies were in Down, the bishop,
Malachy III., used to pray fervently to God that he would vouchsafe to point out
to him the particular place in which they were concealed. Ona certain night,
when praying in the Cathedral Church, he saw a light like a sunbeam traversing
the church, which stopped at acertain spot. Immediately procuring the necessary
implements, he dug in that spot, and found the three bodies, which he then put into
three boxes, and placed them again under ground. Having cgmmunicated this
discovery to John de Courcy, then Lord of Down, they sent messengers to Pope
Urban III., for the purpose of procuring the solemn translation of these relics to a
more dignified ofthe church. The Pope, agreeing to their request, sent as his
legate on the following year Cardinal Vivian, who had been in Downpatrick nine
years before. On his arrival the relics were solemnly translated to a more respect-
able part of the church, on the 9th of June, the festival of St. Columba. ey
were deposited in one monument, according to the well known distich given in the
Office of the Translation—

“ Nunc tres in Duno tumulo tumulantur in uno
Brigida, Patricius, atque Columba pius.”
“In Down three saints one grave do fill,
Patrick, Brigid, and Columbkille.”
Besides the Cardinal Legate there were present at this translation fifteen bishops,
together with abbots, deans, archdeacons, priors, and an innumerable con-

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-284.png ---
252 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Lanne, Karenlatheri, Feod, Balimagereg,, Karenesche, Chal-
lenimien, Rathoop, and the churches of Killecleth, Brichter,
and Stethian, in Dalibinu, Latrath, Donenath, and Kellagki-
nere ; reserving to the bishop the moiety of the oblations made
on the several feasts of the Nativity, the Purification, St.
Patrick, Easterday, and Whitsunday. Witnesses, L. Arch-
bishop of Dublin; T. Armagh, and many others.!

* Mon. Angl., vol. 2, p. 1020.

course of the inferior clergy and laity. It may seem strange that the ‘‘ Annals of
the Four Masters” record, at the year 1293, ‘‘It was revealed to Nicholas Mac-
Maelisa, Coarb of Patrick (Primate), that the relics of Patrick, Columbkille, and
Bridgid, were at Saul. They were taken up by him, and great virtues and miracles
were afterwards wrought by means of them ; and after having been honourably
covered, they were deposited in a shrine.” We are inclined to believe that the Saul
referred to in this entry is the Church called Saul at Armagh. It obviously refers
to a portion of the relics which had been given to some church, and most likely
that portion which we know the Church of Armagh was long possessed of.

A Patent Roll (41 Ed. III.) preserved in the Tower of London, contains copies
of charters to St. Patrick's, of Down—one from Malachy, the Bishop, and six from
De Courcy. In one he granted to this abbey the ferry of the Lough of Strangford,
towards the Dufferin ; the ferry of Carlingford, that of Carrickfergus, that of the
Bann, and all the ferries in his several conquests, except that between Lecale and
Ards. This grant he made for the good of the souls of his father, mother, prede-
cessors, and his niece, Beatrice de Villiers; for that of his own, of Africa, his wife,
and of all who died in his service, or who should die in it. The witnesses to this
charter were M., Bishop of Down; R., Bishop of Connor; E., Abbot of Ynes
(Inch) ; G., Abbot of Holm ; P., Abbot of Saul; G., Prior of St. Thomas; P.,
Prior of Muckamor ; W., Prior of Carrickfergus. In another charter he granted.
the tithe of all cattle whatsoever he had on his lands, and of all his fisheries.
Witness, Will., Prior of Carrickfergus. In another he granted power to hold a
court and some other privileges, and appointed D—— to be prior. In another
charter he confirmed the donation made by Amuric de Hanehhe (probably now
modernised into Hanna), of the land of Ballcrou. Witness, Malachy, Bishop of
Down, Malachy, the third bishop of that name who presided over the See of
Down, after witnessing the ruin of his country and the spoliation of the native clergy
of his diocese to enrich English ecclesiastics who had come in the train of the con-
querors, died about the year 1201; and ‘The Annals of the Four Masters,” at the
year 1204, record, evidently with satisfaction, that ‘‘ John de Courcy, the plunderer
of churches and territories, was driven by the son of Hugh de Lacy into Tyrone to
scek the protection of the Kinel-Owen. He arrived at Carrickfergus, and the
English of Ulidia slew great numbers of his people.” It appears that De Courcy
had incurred the displeasure of King John by speaking too freely of the murder of
Prince Arthur, and Hugh de Lacy, the justiciary, was ordered to arrest him. The
Popular tradition of Downpatrick, and a romantic story told in the ‘‘ Book of
Howth,” now preserved in the Lambeth Library, relate that De Lacy proclaimed
De Courcy a rebel, and bribed his servants to betray him. These traitors informed
De Lacy that their master was a man of such gigantic strength, and always well
armed, that no one durst lay hands upon him ; however, that upon Good Friday of
each year he wore no arms, but remained alone doing penance in the graveyard of
Down, when he could be seized. This suggestion was followed, and De Courcy
was attacked unarmed. Seeing no other weapon at hand, he ran to a wooden cross
that stood in the churchyard, and tearing its shaft from the socket, he killed thirteen
of his assailants upon the spot. He was, however, finally overpowered, and deli-
vered into the hands of De Lacy, who conveyed him a prisoner to the Tower of
London. De Lacy inherited his possessions, with the title of Earl of Ulster, as a
mark of Royal approbation, but, instead of rewarding the betrayers, he caused
them to be hanged.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-285.png ---
County of Down. 253

A.D. 1185. The bodies of the Saints Patrick, Columb, and
Brigid, were discovered in this abbey, with the following
epitaph written over them :—

Hi tres in Duno tumulo tumulantur in uno,
Brigida, Patricius, atque Columba pius.®

1186. Bishop Malachy and Sir John de Courcey sent an
embassy to Pope Urban III. to obtain a bull for the translation
of those sacred reliques ; and on the 5th of June in same year,
a solemn translation was accordingly made by the Pope's
nuncio.

1201. Bishop Malachy, the great benefactor of this abbey,
died about this year.!

1210. Sir John de Courcey, the conqueror of Ulster and
founder of this abbey, yielded to fate.*

® War. Bps., p. 24. » War. Annal., Hist. County of Down, p. 27. | War.
Bps., p. 196. * Monast. Angl., vol, 2, p. 1019.

Downpatrick was visited by King John in the year 1210, who, on his way to
Carrickfergus, encam: on the 16th of July ‘‘at the meadows of Down,” at a
place ales Kingsfield, and again, on his return, he spent the 2nd and 3rd of August
at ‘* Dun.”

The English suffered repeated disasters in skirmishes with the Irish, and the
Bencdictine Abbey of Down shared in their fortunes, as the following letter, written
to Henry III., in the year 1220, sufficiently testifies :—

‘To their Venerable Lord, Henry, by the Grace of God King of England, Lord
of Ireland, Duke of Normandy, Count of Anjou and Aquitane.

“The Prior and Convent of the Church of St. Patrick of Down, health and
prayers in Christ.—We transmit to your Excellency our monk with the shrine of
the patrons of Ireland, Patrick, Columba, and Brigid, and their relics. Inasmuch
as for the reverence to them, and for the promise that our lord, your father, pro-
mised forsooth that he would be a benefactor of our church, and for yourself, who
are the lord of all the land, and the patron of the patrons of Ireland, that you would
give to us and to charity some small dwelling in England, in which, when need be,
we may lodge.

“ For the Monastery of St. Patrick has frequently been, during the war, des-
troyed and burned, along with the church, which has commenced to be entirely
rebuilt, hence we very much stand in need of your assistance.”

There is given in Theiner’s “ Vetera Monumenta” a bull of Pope Innocent IV.,
dated March 5th, 1254. in which the Pope confirms a decision made by the
Primate, that the Abbey Church of Bangor was not the Cathedral of Down, but
that the Church of Down, of the Order of St. Benedict, was the cathedral, and that
to it alone belonged the right of electing the bishop.

The vacillating and unsettled system of government pursued during the reign of
Henry III., and the constant domestic and foreign wars in which the king was
engaged, weakened the English power in Ireland, and induced the Northern Irish to
hope that a favourable opportunity had at length come to drive them out of Ulster.
Bryan O'Neill, King of the Kinel-Owen. assisted by the Irish of Connaught, attacked
the town of Down which was defended by the Lord Justice, Stephen de Longespey.
The battle was fought on Sunday within the Octave of the Ascension, in the year
1260, at a place called * Druim Derg (the red ridge), near Dunda-leathghlas,” but
according to others, “ in the streets of Down.” It is not unlikely that it was fought
on the hill between Scotch-street and Irish-street. In the angle formed by these
streets, about seven perches to the rere of the former and sixteen to the right of the
latter, human bones were found in such quantities as to indicate a cemetery. Bryan
O'Neill and three hundred and fifty-two of the Irish, among whom were fifteen

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-286.png ---
254 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1220. The Benedictin monks of Downpatrick humbly prayed
that the King, Henry III., would grant them some habitation
in England where they might sojourn or reside when business
called them thither, and that of his royal goodness he would
charitably assist in rebuilding their church, which had been
destroyed by fire in the late wars.'! We know not the issue
of the petition.

1224. W— was prior about this time.™

1237. R— was prior.”

1276. The prior Nicholas was made bishop of Down, and
died in 1304.°

\Rymer Fad., vol. 1, p. 250. ™ See Holy Trinity, Dubl. ™ See Lacie’s chart. to
Newry. ° War. Bps., p. 198.

chief men of the O’Kanes, perished on that disastrous field. O’Neill’s head was
cut off and sent to London as a trophy, which is lamented by M‘Namee, the clan
bard of the Kinel-Owen, in words which show how Down was regarded as a
favourite place of interment by the Irish of that period :—

“« Alas that his noble head was removed from Down,
From the place wherein is the grave of Patrick.
It is grievous to us that the king of Caiseal
Is not (interred) near the relics of Tailginn (St. Patrick).”

A similar testimony is borne by the bard O’Dugan in the year 1372 : —

“*From Dun-da-lethglas of the Cassocks
It is the royal cemetery of Erin,
Without any heed or gain there;
A town wherein the clay of Columb was covered,
In the same was buried
Brigid, the victory of females,
And as we leave them every victory,
Patrick of Macha (Ardmagh) is in the same grave.”

In the Pope Nicholas Valuation the Church of St. Patrick in Down was valued
at five marks, and the Temporalities of the Abbot were valued at £41 55. 4d.

The brilliant and decisive victory achieved by the Scots over the English at
Bannockburn, in 1314, having awakened among the Northern Irish hopes of similar
success, they offered the crown of Ireland to Edward Bruce, the brother of Kin;
Robert of Scotland. Edward accepted the offer, and the country was deluge
with blood during three years while the war lasted. Grace's Annals, at the year
1316, say—‘‘ The monasteries of St. Patrick of Down and of Saul, with many
others are plundered. . . The Church of Bright, in Ulster, full of persons of
both sexes, is burned.”

“*The Annals of the Four Masters” record, at the year 1375—‘‘ A great victory
was gained by Niall O’Neill over the English at Downpatrick, when Sir James
(Talbot), of Baile-atha-thid (Malahide), the King of England’s Deputy, Burke of
Camline, and many others not enumerated, were slain in the conflict.” This
defeat of the English is not noticed by any of the English historians, and conse-
quently it cannot have been so important as the Irish writers pretend ; neverthe-
less, the English are forced to draw a very gloomy picture of the state of their
colony in Ireland about this epoch. There is Pree in the Chapter House,
Westminster, a memorial forwarded to Henry IV., about the year 1410, from the
Clergy and nobles of Down, in which they depict the terrible state to which they
were reduced. To this document are annexed, amongst others. the signatures and
seals of the Bishop of Down, of the Prior of Down, and of the Archdeacon of
Down. The scal of the town of Down is bruken off.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-287.png ---
County of Down. 255

1297. The prior, taking upon him to hold pleas, and the
delivery of felons within his jurisdiction, &c., the sheriff was
commanded to summon the said prior, to show by what warrant
he presumed to exercise powers which belonged only to the
crown.”

1301. Roger was prior.P

1314. Thomas Bright the prior was made bishop of Down.4

1316. Edward Bruce, at the head of his army of Scots, de-
stroyed the abbey."

1327. Thomas Bright, bishop of Down, and late prior of this
abbey, died, and was interred here.®

1353. Richard Calf, the prior, was made bishop of Down,
and dying on 26th of October, 1365, was interred here.‘

1365. Nicholas was prior."

© King, p. 258. Pld. %1d., p. 198. * Pembridge. * War. Bps., p. 200. */d,
“King, p. 259.

Tiberius, Bishop of Down and Connor, repaired and ornamented the Cathedral,
or Abbey Church, and the following document, preserved in an archiepiscopal
registry of Armagh, tells the means which he adopted for that end :—

“ Tiberius by the Grace of God Bishop of Down and Connor, &c.—Know that
we, with the consent of the Prior of Down and of the convent of the same, have
made certain unions for the repairs of the Cathedral Church of Down, which is
gone to ruin in walls and roof, and for the augmentation of Divine worship in the
aforesaid church, as also on account of the venerable relics of the holy persons, St.
Patrick, St. Columba, and St. Brigid, lying in one tomb in that place. ¢ monas-
tery which formerly, from ancient times, was governed by nuns (which same monas-
tery is now destroyed), and the Monastery of John the Baptist, and the Monastery
of St Thomas, proto-martyr, and the Monastery of the Irish, and the Rectory of
the Parish Church of Ardglass, and the Prebend of Ros, and the Prebend of
Ballengallbee (Ballykilbeg), and the Chapel of St. Mary Magdalene, at the just
and laudable petition of Lord Gelasius Magennis, Commendatory of Down, we
have united, annexed, and incorporated all and each of the aforesaid on account of
the foresaid causes, that it is better to endow the Cathedral Church than that each
should goto ruin. Given at Carrickfergus the 20th day of February, A.D. 1512.”

The Gelasius Magennis (spoken of in the bishop's letter) is called in Irish docu-
ments Glasny ; he was Prior of St. John’s in Down, of Saul, of St. Patrick's in
Down, and Abbot of Newry. ‘‘ The Annals of the Four Masters” record his death
in the year 1526. ‘ Glasny, the son of Hugh Magennis, Abbot of Newry and Prior
of Down and Saul, was slain by the sons of Donnell Magennis—namely, by Donnell
Oge and his kinsmen.” The union of the endowments of the smaller houses to
the cathedral was confirmed by the Primate, October 12, 1541, and the instrument
was directed to ‘‘Conosius (Eugenius) Magennis, Commendatory of Down Sede
Vacante.”

A.D. 1538.—The abbey was burned, and the shrine containing the relics of St.
Patrick, St. Brigid, and St. Columbkille was destroyed by Lord Leonard de Grey,
which is said to have been one of the counts in the indictment on which he was
afterwards condemned and beheaded.

A.D. 1539.—The prior of this abbey resigned it to the King upon being allowed
a pension during his life. Father Edmund MacCanna, in his Itinerary, says :—
“<The impicty of an Englishman, whose name was Cromwell, deserves to be
mentioned in this place with abhorrence. This son of earth. and foul spot on
the human race, having been sent to Ireland by Queen Elizabeth in command,
came with an army to the city of Down, and set fire to the noble church and
monastery of St. Patrick, where even the reliques of Saints Patrick, Columba,
and Brigid were exposed to the fury of the flames. And there cannot be a doubt


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-288.png ---
256 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1380. About this time it was enacted by Parliament, that
no mere Irishman should be admitted to profess himself in
this abbey.” Same year, John Rosse was prior ; it is observ-
able that this man’s character was marked with almost every
vice ; and in this year he obtained the King’s pardon, on the
payment of the fine of six marcs, for all treasons, transgres-
sions, felonies, extortions, usurpations, and excesses whatso-
ever, whereof he had been indicted ;* he obtained the bishop-
rick of Down in 1387, and died in 1394.%

1413. John Cely, the prior, was made bishop of Down, but
twenty-eight years afterwards he was deprived of his see, being
found guilty of adultery and other atrocious crimes.*

1442. William Stawley was prior.*

1526. The Prior Glaisne, who was abbot of Newry and of
Saul, and son of Hugh M‘Gennis, was slain by Donell Oge and
his brothers, sons of Donell M‘Gennis.”

~ King, p. 93. *id. 7 War. Bps., p 201. "Id., p. 202. *Id., p. 223.
= Ann. Four Masters. .
that many other sacred monuments and very ancient writings, as I was
told by old men who were alive at that time, perished in that conflagration. And
not content with this wickedness, the impious infidel burned all the other churches
of Ultonia, especially in the regions of Down and Antrim, very few of which have
since been restored. I have been told by my grandfather that he was an eye-witness
of that sacrilegious incendiarism ; and, further, that all the churches previous ti-
that consumption were lightly roofed, and highly adorned with statues and images.
Our natives give him the name of Maol-na-teampull, from his impiety. I have
heard many old men say that they were born in that year ; for so notorious was the
sacrilege of that impious man, that numbers of old men reckoned their age from it
as froma national visitation.” What Father MacCana here says of Lord Cromwell
was previously laid to the charge of Lord Leonard Gray, Lord Deputy in 1538.
It is probable that as the Cromwell family were in this time possessed of the lands,
he supposed that the sacrilege had been committed bytheir ancestor. Lord Leonard
Gray seems to have obtained the name of Maol-na-teampull—the Maol, or bald
man of the churches—from a prophecy attributed to St. Columbkille, which foretells
many evils that were to be perpetrated by ‘‘ Maol, the son of Donn (the brown-
haired man), who shall prove injurious to Leith Cuinn (the North of Ireland), the
seat of literature.” Thus perished that great abbey, the priors of which were
peers of Ireland, and possessed of a third of the landsof Lecale. Its venera-
ble ruins were repaired, and formed .into the present Protestant Cathedral in the
year 1790. Harris thus describes its ruins in 1740 :— ‘‘ The roof was supported by
five handsome arches, and compose a central aisle of twenty-six feet broad, and two
lateral aisles of thirteen feet wide each, and the whole structure is one hundred
fect long. The heads of the pillars and arches, the tops of the windows, and many
niches in the walls were adorned with a variety of sculpture in stone, some parts of
which yet remain. Over the east window, which is very lofty and august, are
three handsome ancient niches, in which the pedestals still continue, whereon it is
supposed the statues of St. Patrick, St. Brigid, and St. Columba formerly stood.”
Harris gives a copy of an illegible inscription which was on a stone over the east
window on the inside. He also says that there was found in the ruins an “ Agnus
Dei, or figure of a lamb, cut in freestone, as big as life, in sculpture not very bad.”
There is built into the western gable on the inside a stone on which is carved the
figure of a bishop holding in his hand one of the short Irish croziers. A portable
altar stone of the thirteenth century was found in the graveyard. Occasionally
stone-lined graves are found, such as have heen found at Saul, St. John’s Poiut,
and other ancient churches throughout the diocese.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-293.png ---
County of Down. 257

1538. The Lord Deputy Gray burnt the church about this
time, defaced the monuments of the Saints Patrick, Columb,
and Brigid, and was guilty of many other sacrilegious acts.”

The prior of this house sat as a baron in Parliament.

This monastery, with the appurtenances, a garden within
the site, together with a carucate of land in Down, and the
water called Loughdowne ; divers lands in Narenagh, Carrick-
enebregie, Ballindonetie, Dromquillan, Reanyston alias Bally-
vean, Ballymariscall alias Marshallston, Kiltaghlins, Bally-
galgalme, Tobbertyne, Dellyen, Ballusrogh, Ardmyn, Bally-
froill, Ballynecrosse, Ballingreley alias Slivengreley, Logh-
money, Ballyalton, Balderenolde, Ballycroston, Ballycrotill,

> War. Annals.

At the dissolution the lands of this abbey were valued at £60 Ios. od., and its
appropriations at £65 13s. 4d. (Inquis. 3 Edward VI.) By an inquisition held in
Downpatrick, April 9th, 1662, to inquire into the property held by Thomas
Cromwell, Earl of Ardglass, it was found that that nobleman was possessed of the
following properties formerly belonging to that abbey :—The site and a garden
within the precincts of the abbey, ‘‘ Hay-Island, otherwise Inishane ;” “ Cony-
island, otherwise Hoggisland ;% the ‘ Roundmount, otherwise Donecoscue ;”
«*Court-ground ;” “half of the town of Crombane, half the town of Cromreagh, half
the town of Sleevemoyle,” “ Parkenearle,” one quarter of “Tolleshane,” ‘‘Collis,”
“<*Farrinfad,” “Crottmore,” Prior's Island, ‘‘Tacrecam, otherwise Acrecam ;”
“ Crannaghmore and Crannaghbeg ;” “ Knockrennan, otherwise Knocknegrenan ;”
Friersbogg, ‘‘ Tollynecroy ;’ a head-rent of 405. per annum from Walshestown,
and a head-rent of §s. per annum out of the two townlands of Ballydugan, Ring-
ban, “ Tollwoollenamore, Tollwoollenbeg, and Castledorras ;” “the water called
Loughdowne or Loughcoyne (Strangford Lough). in which ships or boats can sail
to the port of Strangford, where salmon and other fish are taken ;” *‘ Carrickne-
bregie, otherwise Carricknecregie ; Ballydonety, Drumquillians (Hollymount) ;
Veanstown, otherwise Ballyvenees ;” Marshallstown, ‘‘the two towns of Kintagh-
lins” (supposed to be Ballynoe), Ballygallam Tobermoney, Dillin, Ardmeen,
Struell, Ballynagross, Slievenagriddle, Loughmoney, Ballytrusten, Ballymurry, two
townlands of Ballybrarnagh, Ballysallagh, Ballee, Ballyhossett, Ballyclander,
«‘Ballymorett, otherwise Ballywannett ;” Annacloy, ‘‘ Ballydomanelly, otherwise
Ballydonelly ;” “ Carricknehawly,” “ Carrowcoolemuck, otherwise Quarter Col-
muck,” Crevis, Spittle Quarter, Bishop's Island ; ‘‘ Ballymoghtrimony, otherwise
Ballynecremony;” Coyle Castle, ‘‘ Rathcavan,” “‘Carrigmavanagh, otherwise Coyle-
town ;” Ballynacreg, ‘Carrowvanny, Ullequarter (Saulquarter), Ballybeg, Sheep-
landbeg, Grangewalls, Grangebane, together with two ferries.

The site and extensive landed possessions of this abbey and of the other religious
houses in Downpatrick were granted by the Crown to Gerald, Earl of Kildare, but
they, by his death without male issue, and upon the decease of his widow, Mabella,
were again escheated to the Crown, and in 1603 they were re-granted by James I,
to Charles Blount, Lord Mountjoy, in consideration for his service against Hugh
O'Neill, Earl of Tyrone. Mountjoy transferred his rights to Edward Cromwell,
Baron Okeham, a nobleman of Devonshire. These estates, with the exception of
some portions, remained in the Cromwell family up to 1704, when the male line
having become extinct, the only surviving heiress, Lady Elizabeth Cromwell, mar-
ried the Right Honourable Edward Southwell, Principal Secretary of State for
Ireland, who obtained an Act of Parliament vesting these estates in the hands of
trustees for the purpose of selling a portion to pay off certain incumbrances, The
remainder descended to his grandson, Edward Southwell, who, in 1776, was created.
Baron de Clifford. He was succeeded by his son Edward, who died in September,
4832, without issue, when the property gavelled between his three sisters, and is at

s


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-294.png ---
258 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Ballyvolmorey, Ballybrenough, Ballysallagh, Ballyveally
Ballyhosside. Possevickeston, Clinder alias Ballyclinder, and
Ballyvoret alias Barrettyston, all in this county; and the
Grange of Ballincogher, Milten alias Mallimolin, Tullaghnere,
Balliasdrine alias Lisseboy, and Balligalincheath ; each de-
nomination containing a carucate or ballyboe ; all which were
granted to Gerald Earl of Kildare. See Lismullen in county
of Meath.

The priory stands near the town, on the ascent of a hill,
and is yet venerable, though in ruins; the roof was supported
by five handsome arches, which composed a centre aisle of
twenty-six feet in breadth, two lateral ones of thirteen feet
each, and the whole structure is one hundred feet long. The

present the property of David Stewart Kerr, Esq., whose father purchased it for
£200,000 from the co-heirs of the late Lord de Clifford.
Dr. Reeves has collected from various sources the following list of

PRIORS OF ST. PATRICK’S, OF DOWN.

A.D. 1183—William de Etleshale. (He is a subscribing witness to J. de

Courcy’s charter to St. Andrew’s, and Jordan de Courcy’s to Neddrum.)
-D. 1200—Circ. (He is named in two of J. de Courcy’s grants to Down.)

. 1215—Circ. W . . . wasprior.
. 1237—1251— Robert.
. 1271—1276—Nicholas, who was also Treasurer of Ulster.
1276—John, who was also, or had been, Abbot of Deulacresse.
1301—Roger.
Ear of Bright, who became Bishop of Down in 1314.
1317—John.
E 1352—Richard Calf, who became Bishop of Down in 1368.

1381—1387—John Ross, who became Bishop of Down in 1387.
. 1412—John Cely, who became Bishop of Down in 1413.
.D. 1434—1448— William Stanley.

A.D. 1470—Thomas Barkley. .
. A.D. 1512—1526—Gelacius Magennis, Commendatory of Down, Prior of
Saul, &c.

A.D. 1526—John Swerdes.

A.D. 1541—Con Magennis.

ST. PATRICK'S GRAVE.

Near the centre of the ancient cemetery attached to the Cathedral, or, as it is
called by aged people, the abbey, is a grave called ‘‘St. Patrick’s grave,” which
is in no other way distinguished from the surrounding graves, except that a great
portion of the clay has been removed from it. by pious Catholics, who, when about
to emigrate. carry with them to the most distant parts of the earth, some portion of
‘the mould from St. Patrick’s grave.” There formerly stood over this grave an
ancient granite cross, which some wicked bigots, on the night of the 19th of
April, 1842, carried off, and, with the intention of breaking it, rolled it overa
precipice. ‘‘On the next day,” says a correspondent of the Vindicator, ‘hun-
dreds of persons were visiting this grave, as if some great affliction had befallen
them, while the Orangemen were furiously vociferating ‘No St. Patrick,’ and
other such cries.” The ancient cross was carried back, but having again been
carried off and broken, it was for many years locked up in a portion of the
Cathedral. The three largest fragments of it are now, however, placed with some
other monumental stones, among which is the tombstone of Dr, O'Doran, Bishop
of Down and Connor, at the east end of the Cathedral, The Catholics of Down-
patrick remark that some terrible misfortune befel each of the iconoclasts. This

>>
i]

P>D>>>>D dD
ypoboyseyyy

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-295.png ---
County of Down. 259

heads of the pillars and arches, the tops of the windows, and
many niches in the walls, were adorned with variety of sculp-
tures, some parts of which yet remain. At the east end is a
very lofty and magnificent window, and over it are three
handsome niches, in which niches the pedestals whereon stood
the Saints Patrick, Columb, and Brigid still remain. Adjoin-
ing the east end of the church are two square columns, in one
of which was a winding staircase leading to the roof. At the
west end is a very high pillar; several cells have beendiscovered
behind the abbey, one of which was floored with a mosaic
work, but in a coarse and inelegant manner.*

Priory of Regular Canons," This was called the priory of
the Irish, and was founded in honour of St. Thomas, in the
year 1138, by Malachy O’Morgair, bishop of Down,’ who died
A.D. 1148."

° Hist. County of Down, pp. 27,29. % War. Mon. * War. Bps., p. 55-

does not seem to be the grave in which St. Patrick was first interred, for there is
no record of a church ever having stood at that part of the cemetery ; and we
know, from the passage already given from the Book of Armagh, that a church
was afterwards erected over the grave of St. Patrick. The place in which the
relics of St. Patrick, St. Brigid, and St. Columba were concealed, until discovered
in the year 11&, seems, from the account already given, to have been inside the
Cathedral. A correspondent of the Udster Examiner, in a letter dated Down-
patrick, February 9, 1870, says :—‘‘ About thirty years ago I had a conversation
on the subject of St. Patrick’s grave with a very old man named John Millar,
then over ninety years of age, who well remembered the making of this grave.
It was on the occasion of the renovation of the Cathedral, then many years in ruins,
that, on excavating under the high altar, or communion table, as Mr. Millar
termed it, three stone coffins were discovered, which were firmly believed to
contain the sacred remains of our three patron saints. The matter created a sen-
sation in the town and the surrounding country. Mr. Millar remembered the
grave being made, and the three coffins, with their contents, reverently removed
and covered up there, and the ancient market cross brought to the place, and
placed at the head of the grave, to mark the spot where rested the sacred re-
mains.” In all the drawings, however, of the abbey, when in ruins, a cross is
represented as standing at that portion of the cemetery, which seems to contradict
John Millar's account in a very vital point.

A portion of another ancient cross is in the grounds of the new Catholic Church,
and the remainder of it is in the possession of James Cleland, Esq. That is the
cross which Harris described— Near the Court House in the street lie several
portions of an old stone cross, on the shaft of which is carved a crucifix, or the
image of Jesus. It is generally called the Market Cross. yet probably it stood in
one of the churchyards, and was erected for superstitious purposes. The pedestal
is one solid stone, in form of a tube, about three feet high, all of a stone called
Lapis Molaris, or grit.” Ina grant of certain lands in Downpatrick to the abbey,
made by John de Courcy, one of the boundaries mentioned is ‘‘the cross of St.
Moninna,”’ which may probably be the cross in question.

| Priory of Regular Canons.— Archdall has confounded two priories situated at
different portions of the town, the Priory of the Irish—AMonasterium Hibernorum
—and the Priory of St. Thomas the Martyr, of Regular Canons.

Priory of the Irish.— St. Malachy founded, in the year 1158, a Priory of Regular
Canons, which, in after times, was called the Monastery of the Irish, or Afonaster
Gallagh. The ‘‘ Terrier” says of it :—‘‘ Monasterium Hibernorum, hard by the
cathedral, is the church of the channons;” and then informs us that it paid to the
bishop—‘‘in proxies, two marks; in refections, two marks ; in synodal, 2s.—four


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-296.png ---
260 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

William was prior, and had for his successor Martin, who
was prior in 1260!

William Rede was prior, and resigned in the year 1276.5

The site and precincts of this priory, with the appurtenances,
and eight acres of land within the said site; a whole carucate
or Balliboe in Croknegrange, alias Grangshecum ; a carucate
in Ballinlugge; the quarter called Rinryazuffe, the quarter of
Ilianamaster, alias the Master’s Island ; a carucate in Bally-
bogan, and a balliboe in Ballisdogan were granted to Gerald
Earl of Kildare ; see Lismullen in county of Meath.

Crossbearers.% The priory of St. John the Baptist" in this
town, called the priory of the English, was founded by Sir John
de Courcey in the 12th century, for Crossbearers following the
rule of St. Augustin.!

' King, p.198. &ld. " This priory is given to St. John the Evangelist in King’s
Collections, p. 24. ‘War. Mon.

marks, 2s.” Human remains have been found on the site occupied by the old
jail, and the position of that place would correspond very well with the description
given in the ‘‘ Terrier.” A townland called Carrickmallett is mentioned as a portion
of the possessions of this monastery. It was also possessed of the chapels of
Quoniamstown, Killbride, St. Knoth, and several other chapels and churches. The
Chapel of St. Malachy, which was valued in the taxation of Pope Nicholas at 8s.,
seems to have been the Chapel of the Monastery of the Irish.

Priory of St. Thomas the Martyr—On entering the town by the ancient road,
which leads from the old race-course past the ruined Cromlech, called Samson’s
Stone, there is on the left hand an ancient well called St. Dillon’s Well. which
perhaps should be called St. Aingeal’s (holy angel’s) Well. It is close to the wall
which surrounds the hospital. On the opposite side of the road there is a triangular
field, bounded on one side by a bog, and on the other two sides by the road men-
tioned and by another road which leads to the townland of Killyvees. In this field
human bones have been found in great quantities by Mr. Ferguson, the present

roprietor. Here stood the Priory of St. Thomas the Martyr, otherwise called the
Priory of Toberglorie (the spring of glory), so named from the adjacent well at
which St. Patrick is said to have had a vision of angels. The priory was founded by
John de Courcey for the order of Regular Canons, and made a cell of St. Mary’s,
of Carlisle. The charter given by the founder is preserved in a Patent Roll (12
Ed. II.), and is printed in the Afonasticum Anglicanum. Init the site of the priory
is described as ‘‘ near the spring, which is called Toberglorie, and in a suburb of
Down, between the two roads, one of which leads to Crems and the other to the
Grange of Saul.” Crems is intended for Killyvees, and the ‘‘ Grange of Saul” is
Saul Quarter, near the old race-course. This priory having fallen into decay, its
endowments were, in the year 1512, along with those of the Monastery of the Irish
and the Priory of the English, and of several other religious houses, united to the
cathedral by Tiberius, Bishop of Down.

"9 Crossbearers.— The site of the Priory of St. John the Baptist, or as it was also
called, the Priory of the English, which belonged to the Crouched Friars or Cross-
bearers, is now occupied by the Ebenezer Chapel, and its grounds extended along
John-street, which derives its name from the priory. It is marked on a map of Down,
1729, by a mound in the shape of a horse-shoe, which is referred to by Harris in
his history of Down, who also says :—‘ About sixteen years ago (written in 1744)
Mr. Trotter, as he was making a new garden on Chappel Hill, found another
Agnus Dei, which, being also of freestone, an ignorant servant maid brayed it to
powder for domestic uses. He found vast quantities of human bones in the same
place, which he deposited in one large grave.” On the old mapa place is marked
a little on the south-east of the mound ‘St. John’s Close.” A Patent Roll

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-297.png ---
County of Down. 261

A.D. 1210. William was prior, for we find him a subscribing
witness to Sir John’s charter to the Black Abbey,* and the
Knight died some time before this year.

1293. The prior William Rufus being deposed, a license
was granted, dated April the 6th, to proceed to elect in his
room.

1380. John was prior before this year.™
* Mon, Angl., vol. 2, p. 1019. 'Pryn, vol. 3, p. 354. ™ King, p. 24.

(10 Ed. IIT.) preserved in the Tower of London, recites charters of this house from
John de Courcy, Richard de Burgo, Stephen de Petraponte, Nicholas of Trym,
William FitzAllen, and William de Mandeville.

John de Courcy’s charter runs thus :—‘‘ To God, to St. Mary and St. John, and
St. Nicholas and to St. Clement, and to the friars who dwell in the hospital out-
side the City of Down.” The custody of the hospital, or leper-house of St.
Nicholas, seems to have been committed to the friars of St. John’s. A Patent
Roll (10 Rich. II.) of the date of 1387 records a grant from the Crown of the
custody of the hospital to Brother Thomas Cuthbert. This “ Brother Thomas
Cuthbert, master of the house of St. John of the English of Down,” was appointed,
in 1390, deputy to Thomas de Clifford in all his offices, and became Chancellor and
Treasurer of the Liberties of Ulster. A Patent Roll (3 Henry IV.) recites a peti-
tion of “ Thomas, Prior of the house of St. John of the English, near the City of
Down, in Ulster,” in which he states that he and his predecessors, since the con-
quest of Ireland, had been seized in right of their monastery by the gift of Johnde

ourcy of a certain custom called ‘‘Jes sise bolles’—namely, of two measures
(lagenze) of ale from every brewing (pandoxicatio) of ale in the City of Down ; and
that by a gift of Walter de Burgo, late Earl of Ulster, they had been seized of a
church in a certain island called the island of St. John of Down, but
that the custom and the church had passed into the possession of the late Karl of
Ulster, while the prior, both on account of his own poverty and of the suddenness
of the death of the earl, had been unable to recover them. The prior succeeded in
establishing his claim to both the custom and the church. This insular cyurch
seems to have been the Chapel of St. Mary Magdalen, which stood in the town-
land of Ringreagh, where traces of a burial-ground have been observed at a spot
about one hundred yards distant from the new road between Downpatrick and
Ballydugan, ona hill which had formerly been an island. The Chapel of St.
Mary Magdalen was valued in the taxation of Pope Nicholas at 20s. ‘‘ The free
chapel of the Blessed Mary Magdalene,” vacant by the death of Stephen Trystry,
was conferred, A.D. 1449, upon Wm. M‘Connocha, It was conierred in 1487
upon Robert Ball, and in 1512 it was one of the churches annexed to the cathedral
by Tiberius, Bishop of Down and Connor. We learn from an Inquisition (3 Ed.
VI.) held A.D. 1550, that the Prior of St. Patrick's was seized of ‘a void piece of
land and the walls of an ancient Chapel of St. Mary Magdalen, of no value.” The
“* Terrier,” a document of the year 1615, says—“ Capella Sanctze Marie Magdalen
de Rinriath, it is the Archdeacon’s of Down, and he pays in proxies, 15.; in refec-
tions, 1s.; in synodals, 2s.” It seems strange that the townland of Ringreagh
(Rinn riach, the grey point), though situated in the heart of the parish of Down,
should be in the parish of Kilclief. This, however, can be accounted for by sup-
posing that its chapel, dedicated to St. Mary Magdalen, was attached to the hos-
pital or leper-house of St. Nicholas of Down, the custody of which, along with the

ospital or leper-house of St. Peter at Kilclief, was entrusted, A.D. 1415, to John
FitzRichard, chaplain, John Molyn, and W alter Sely, and the lands attached to it
would easily pass under the jurisdiction of the Protestant archdeacon when that
dignitary became possessed of the parish of Kilcleif. The insular position of Ring-
reagh renders it probable that it is the church in the Island of St. John of Down
w]hich was the subject of the petition of Prior Thomas, to which reference has
aready been made, and the same igsular position would have recommended its
suitability for a leper-house.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-298.png ---
262 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

This priory, with all its appurtenances, and one acre within
the site ; a caracute in Ballingarricke ; two carucates in Wood-
amston alias Balliwodan, and a carucate in Carricknalt, were
granted to Gerald, Earl of Kildare ; see Lismullen in county
of Meath.

Abbey of Cistertian Monks , this abbey was founded in the
12th century, by———— Bagnal," but we have not learned any
account of it.

Abbey of Cistertian Nuns ; such a nunnery is said to have
been in the town.™

2 Allemande. ™ Id.

The “Terrier” of 1615 sets down ‘‘the Priory of St. John’s, of Down,” as
bound to pay the bishop—“ in proxies, three marks ; in refections, three marks ; in
synodals, 2s.—six marks, 2s.” The Priory of St. Thomas is not mentioned in the
“Terrier,” which seems to show that it had been completely effaced long before
the date of that document. It would seem that its endowments were merged in
those of the Priory of St. John, for an Inquisition, held in Downpatrick in 1662,
found that the Earl of Ardglass had been seized of the site of the dissolved Priory
of St. John and St. Thomas, and of an acre of land and a close (Clausulum—pro-
bably “ St. John’s Close”) adjoining the priory. Grangecam, Ringreagh, Master’s
Island, otherwise called Horse Island, and a head-rent of §s. per annum from the
two townlands of Ballydugan, ‘‘ esteemed parcels of the possessions of the said
Monastery of Saints John andThomas,”

Father Edmund MacCana, writing some time after 1643, says that in his time
the Monastery of St. John was called by the inhabitants ‘Killin Seon,” that is,
the Church of St. John. This celebrated monastery enjoyed a large extent of
lands not second in fertility to those of any country. A confirmation Charter of
Edward III. is preserved in the tower on a patent roll. In it the house is desig-
nated as the ‘‘ Hospital of John the Baptist,” and ‘‘The Hospital of St. John of
the English outside the city of Down.” It recites a series of charters, followed by
a confirmation, viz., that of John de Courcy, granting certain customs ; that of
Richard de Burgo, granting six marks annually out of Ballydonnell, in Lecale,
and two carucates held by William de Mannde ; that of Stephen de Petraponte,
granting the town of Clochorton in the Ards, and four marks per annum ; that of
Nicholas de Trym to John Walle, rior, granting one mark from ‘‘ Villa Jordani,”
in the Ards. Another charter is from William Fitz Alan, granting four marks
from Cubynillis (Kircabbin) in Ynchemkargy (Inisargy), and the last charter
recited, that of William de Maundeville, granting an acre in the Garthe along
the highway from Villa Hay to Cumber, and the advowson of the Church of St.
Mary of Haytown (now Ballyhay, in the parish of Donaghadee). At the disso-
lution, the monastery of St. John was found to be seized of the site, church and
an acre of land within the precincts : of a ballyboe in Ballynagarrick, one in the
two towns of Ballywooden: one in “ Carrickyna,” together with the rectories of °
Ballywoodan, Kircubbin, Killard, and Ballyrickard (in the parish of Cumber).
Some of the inhabitants of Downpatrick suppose that Mary-street is so called from
some chapel which once stood there. This is not the fact. It is named from Mrs.
Mary Trotter, relict of Dr. Edward Trotter, who, during her widowhood, opened
that street, and built most of the houses in it.

13 Cistercian Nunnery.—The Nunnery of the Blessed Mary, belonging to the
Cistercian Order, seems to have stood to the north of what is at present the Pro-
testant parish church. In the map of 1729, the junction of Bridge-street and
Church-street is marked ‘‘Nun’s Gate.” The “Terrier” informs us that the
“*Domus Monialis of the Nuns of Downe” paid—“ in proxies, five marks; in
refections, five marks ; in synodals, 2s—ten marks, 2s.” ‘he possessions of the
house were very extensive ; they included Ballintogher, ‘“ Mill-towne, otherwise
called Ballymullin,” Tullyneere (now included in the townland of Ballintogher),
Ballysherrin, otherwise called Lisboy, and ‘‘ Ballygallneheagh, otherwise Bally-

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-299.png ---
County of Down. 2603

Franciscan Friary; this monastery, which was founded
about the year 1240, by Hugh de Lacie, Earl of Ulster,° is

° War. Mon.

gallsheagh.” About the year 1395, Janico d’Artois, a Gascon knight, obtained
“two messuages and one carucate in Nuntown, by the gift of the Priores’ and
Convent of the Blessed Mary of Down.” Nuntown is the present townland of
Ballynagallagh—the town of the nuns—in the parish of Bright, which still forms
a portion of the estate which, at the commencement of this century, belonged to
the Kildare family, the lineal representatives of Sir Janico. It is probable that the
Cistercian Convent occupied the site of the Church of St. Brigid, mentioned in
the following entry in the Annals of Ulster, at 1006 :—‘ Matadan, son of Donel,
King of Ulster, was killed by Turk in the Church of Brigid, in the middle of
Dundalethglas (Downpatrick).

The Franciscan Friary occupied the site of the Protestant parish church. Father
Edmund MacCanna, in his ‘‘ Irish Itinerary,” written shortly after 1643, says :—
‘«In the valley beneath, on the south-east (of the Mound), is a monastery of the
order of St. Francis, badly and inconveniently situated, for the ground is over-
grown with rushes and swampy,” From proximity to the friary, Bridge-street
was formerly called Fryar's-lane and Church-street, and the gardens adjoin-
ing it on the eastern side occupy what is marked Fryar’s Bog in the map of
1729. A MS. written by ‘‘ Fr. Franciscus Wardeus,” is preserved among the
documents lately removed to Dublin from the College of the Irish Franciscans
in Rome. It was written about the year 1630 in Louvain, and transferred
thence to Rome. That document says:—‘*The Convent of Down was
built in the episcopal and maritime city of Down, in Ulster, and was placed
in the custody (a portion of a Province) of Drogheda, by the General Chapter
of Narbonne, in the year 1260. From its first foundation it was always a
nursery of piety. It was here that John Duns Scotus, the subtle doctor, assumed.
the habit of the Franciscan Order, and he was called Duns from the name of his
native city, Down, which was thus abbreviated. The friars were first expelled from
this convent by John Brittan, an English Protestant, who, with a number of wicked
followers, invaded the place in the year 1569. The friars were apprised of his ap-
proach, and saved themselves by flight, but returned again ; and in the followin,
year, 1570, he made an attack on the convent, hanged all the friars he caught, an
almost totally destroyed the establishment, with the exception of the church, which
was kept as a court-house for the English judges of Assize. It remained desolate
from the time of its suppression till 1627, when Father John Matthew (Matheus,

thaps M‘Mahon), being provincial, a residence was erected in the vicinity.

‘ather Henry Melan, a theologian and excellent preacher, was appointed superior
of the new establishment ; he having discharged the offices of vicar, provincial,
diffinitor, and custos, continues to labour strenuously in the salvation of souls. The
foundation of this convent is attributed bysome to Africa, the daughter of the King
of Man (Godred), and widow of John de Courcy, Earl of Ulster; but I rather
think that the founder was Magennis, whose posterity now inherit the lordship of
Iveagh, and are branched out into several noble families. Magennis erected a family
sepulchre in this monastery.” A chapter was held here in the year 1313.
The name of the assailant of the poor friars was John Brereton (not Brittan). His
thirst for religious spoils impelled him to the convent, but the sacred vessels were
concealed, and three friars—John Loughran, Edmund Simmons, and Donat
O’Rorke—were his only prey. These the villains subjected to a variety of tortures,
and then strangled them from the branches of a large oak which grew near the
Spring of Glory, now called St. Dillan’s Well. This friary was founded, according
to Ware, about the year 1240, by Hugh de Lacy, Earl of Ulster. The great glory
of the Franciscan convent of Down was its real or supposed alumnus, fohn Duns
Scotus, the great philosopher and founder of the school of theologians, called from
him Scotists. The birthplace of Duns Scotus has been disputed against us by the
Scotch and English. Nearly all his biographers say that he was born in Lecale in
the year 1274. Fray Samiengo even defines the precise spot as being at “the ex-
tremity of a promontory,” which would seem to indicate Be John’s point. From

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-300.png ---
264 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

said, by other writers, to owe its foundation to Africa, daughter
of Godred, King of Man, and wife to Sir John de Courcey ;

his works we learn that St. Patrick and St. Francis were his patron saints, a choice
most natural for a Franciscan born in Lecale. An Inquisition, held in Downpatrick
on the 9th of April, 1662, found that the Cromwell family were possessed of the
site of the Franciscan friary, with its cemetery, gardens, and orchards, together
with the townland of Magheralagan, and ‘‘ Connegar his acre,” which ha

portions of the endowments of that friary. It was also possessed of the lands of
“ Ballylarge ” and ‘‘Ballentlewe.” The friary of Down eventually adhered to the
branch of the Franciscans called Observantines, St. Francis of Assisi conceived
the design of founding an order of men whose duty it would be to preach the doc-
trine of Christ by word and example, and exhibit in their own persons the poverty
and humility of the Gospel. His rule was confirmed by Pope Honorius III. in
1223. Like all human institutions, however, the order lost its first splendour, and
a spirit of secular aggrandisement obscured the humility of the poor Friars Minors.
The most zealous and numerous portion of the order selected convents which had
renounced their property, and where the strictness of their founder's rule was ad-
hered to. Such convents were called “ Strictioris Observantia,” and were said to
be reformed. The Irish Franciscans finally adopted this reformation. They were
commonly called in Ireland Grey Friars, from the colours of their habits. It would
be now impossible to find out the place where father Henry Melan re-established
his order in the vicinity of their ruined friary, but there were, in the middle of the
last century, traditions among the people of Downpatrick that a numerous order of
friars were re-established in that town about the year 1644. The Franciscans
eventually established their /ocus refugii in the townland of Drumnaquoile,*
and the order, though exiled from its ancient monastery, and stripped of its rich
possessions, still continued to appoint in its chapters titular guardians fur the

* In the townland of Drumnaquoil, in a field belonging to James Laverty, which
adjoins the road that there forms the boundary between the townlands of Drumna-
quoil and Dunturk, is the site of the friary of Drumnaquoil which was the ‘locus
refugii” of the Franciscans of Down. A legend told by the people accounts
for the selection of that secluded spot. They say that when the friars were
at prayer in Rome, a vision of a lady in white warned them to build a friary
where they would hear the sound of three bells ringing. The friars, wearied and
foot-sore, sat down one day before the gate of Savage's Castle, in Drumaroad, to
rest themselves, for they had searched all Ireland through for the promised sign,
when at last their hearts were gladdened by the long expected chimes surging
across the valley from the lonely hill-side of Drumnaquoil.

Some would say, perhaps, that it was less owing to the influence of the vision
than to probability of escaping the priest-hunters that the friars came to that
mountain solitude, but the eyes of the Government were upon them even there, as
the following document, preserved in the Birmingham Tower, shows :—

“*To the Right Honourable the Lords’ Committee appointed to inquire into the
present state of Popery in the Kingdom of Ireland.

‘* In obedience to your Lordships’ order, bearing date the 6th day of the instant
November, to me directed, as sheriff of the County of Down, requiring me to
return unto your lordships an account of what reputed nunneries or fryaries, and
what number of fryaries, are within the said county of Down, and what number of
fryars or nuns are reputed to be in the same respectively.

“T do therefore humbly certify unto your lordships that, after the strictest in-
quiries, I can find there is but one reputed fryary in the said county of Down, kept
at a place called Drumnacoyle, in the said county, within eight miles of Rathfri-
land, in which there is commonly reputed to be nine fryars. And that there is not
in the said county of Down any reputed nunnery, nor any nuns.

“ Dated at Kirkistowne, the nineteenth day of November, one thousand seven
hundred and thirty-one. “OW. SAVAGE.”

It is probably to the Friary of Drumnaquoile that Primate Oliver Plunket refers
in his report to the Propaganda, in 1670, on the state of the diocese of Down and

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-301.png ---
County of Down. 265

it passed to the friars of the strict observance, in the time of
Thomas M‘Cominde, warden, and Patrick Keavinyn, minister
Monastery of Down. The following list of guardians of Down, and the date of

the chapter at which they were appointed, as extracted from the chapter acts of
the order, may be interesting :—

. inted in a Chapter held
Guardians of the Convent of Down. Appointed in a Chapter h
V.A.P. Fr. Anthony Dungan* 5 . August 1 1629
” Patrick Neny . : . February » 1645
5 ‘ames Hirill o . . September 5, 1647
” ames Hirill . . . February 4. 164!
” Dyonysius * * * . . August 17, 1650
Pr Paul Bruin . . . October 9, 1658
D Dyonysius Magee. 5 . February 26, 1659
” Dyonysius Magee. . . September 8, 1661
” fames Herill . . . October 18, 1669
5 ‘aul O'Neill* 0 5 . November 21, 1672
” Daniel Cormack . o > August 23, 1675
” dames Conegan . D . January 23, 1676
oD yonysius Magee . . . August 24, 1678
” Dyonysius Magee . 5 . April 28, 1680
” Paul O'Neill, sen. . . . March 14, 1681
D Paul O'Neill, sen. . . . June 13, 1683
Anthony Magennis . January 23, 1684
” Anthony Magennis anuary 27, 1685

” mal - - : . “August 15, 1687

xD Dyonisius Magee . . . May 5, 1689
o Bernard M‘Laghlin 5 . August 24, 1690
o John Doran 5 5 + February 18, 1693
5 Dyonisius Magee . 5 . July 25, 1697
Bernard Gemon 5 » July 26, 1699
D John Doran 0 5 . October 19, 1700
OD John Doran o . - June 9, 1702
5 James Shiel 5 0 . November 19, 1703
” James Shiel 5 « June 9, 1705
” ‘ames Shiel 5 5 . November 13, 1706
ames Shiel o c . May , 1708
aD qohn Doran . 0 + October 12, 1709
oD aul Burne 5 5 + June 717
iD James Shielt ; 5 + October 13, 1714
a ames Kenedy . : + May 10, 1716
iD James Shiel, S.T., Lector . October 16, 1717
Connor, in which he says :—‘‘ There is also a convent of Franciscans, who are twelve

in number, and amongst them Paul O’Bryn (probably Burns), Paul O'Neill,
James O'Hiney are the most distinguished in point of preaching and producing
fruit.” The friars left Drumnaquoil about the year 1760, There were then only
three friars in the establishment. From the records of the Franciscans it appears
that Father Anthony O'Neill was appointed guardian of the convent of Down on
the 26th of August, 1751, and again onthe 26th of February, 1753. It also appears
by tradition that the friars were withdrawn from Drumnaquoil by the superiors of
their order. The unroofed walls of their chapel were taken down in the year 1800.
Old people remember its altar, which was built of stone and lime, and covered
with a large black slate stone. A schoolmaster of Drumaroad removed a portion
of the altar-stone to the graveyard of Drumaroad, and inscribed on it in Irish the
date of the consecration of that graveyard, and it now serves for his own head-
stone. A reliquary which hung above the altar of the old chapel of Drumaroad
belonged once to the friary. It is described as gilded, and closed with a double
door. It was removed at the rebuilding of the chapel, and seems to be lost.

* Probably the Paul O’Neill of the Primate's report.

+ James Shiel was consecrated Bishop of Down and Connor, November 24th,
1717, and died in 1725.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-302.png ---
266 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

provincialis ;? and a provincial chapter of the order was held
here in the year 1313.9
? War. Mon. % War, Mss., vol. 34-
FROM THE RECORDS PRESERVED IN THE BERMINGHAM TOWER.

V.A.P. Bernard Cassidy . . 5 . ~ 1717
ra Dionysius 5 c : + 1720
” Anthony Conmy . . . . - 1724
os Dionysius Fegan + . . . + 1727
” Dionysius Fegan . . . . + 1729
LIST OF GUARDIANS CONTINUED, FROM THE LOUVAIN MANUSCRIPT.
V.A.P. Dionysius Fegan o o : yy 24, 1739
” joseph Kelly a ao ay 25,1741
o eter Shiel 5 . August 16, 1742
D Peter Shiel . . « April 16, 1744
D Richard Breen . A . August 12, 1745
os Francis M‘Cann 5 . February 12, 1747
mn Peter Shiel . . August 22, 1748
John M‘Mullan, Ex Dift.* . February 16,1751
Ay Anthony O’Neill,S. T. Lect.t . August 26, 175£
5 Anthony O'Neill, S. T. S . February 26, 1753
» Arthur Clinton, . . August 26, 1754
Dy Francis M‘Cann, September 24, 1755

a Bernard Lappan, S. T. L, Ex Diff. August 29, 1757
— February 19, 1759
cD John Reilly, 8.7 T.L, gen. . August 60

17
m George Gernon . . October 19, 1761
” Francis M‘Kiernan 7 . August 22, 1763
x Philip Hulloghan 5 . April 17, 1765
Ay Bernard Lappan : . August 18, 1766
» Anthony Dogherty : . November 12, 1767
” Anthony Dogherty D . August 28, 1769
Eugene Reill 6 . + October 8, 1770
a Thomas Reilly : . August 21, 1772
i oD Francis M‘Kiernan 5 . November 11, 1773
” ohn Hanlon O 5 . july 4, 1776
” ohn Hanlon 5 : . April 30, 1778
oO eter Maglogblin S . july 19, 1779
aD Thomas Maguire a . May 29, 1781
a Michael Gallagher . . july 22, 1782
5 Michael Gallagher 5 . May 12, 1784
5 Francis Coyle. 5 . May 25,1785
0 Patrick Thally, Ex Cus. . . May 9, 1787
a Francis Coyle . . july 14, 1788
» FrancisCoyle . - . ay 18, 1790
” Francis Coyle 5 O . July 11, 1791
” Francis Coyle . . . july 23, 1793
oD Peter Cassidy uly 14, 1794

* On the 2nd of May, 1749, Dr. Stuart, Bishop of Down and Connor, applied to
the Holy See that Fr, John M‘Mullan, a Franciscan, might be appointed his
coadjutor, with right of succession, and stated that this Postulation was according
to his conscience and the wishes of the clergy and Beople of Down and Connor.
The postulation was not, however, successful. nme Fr. Michael M‘Mullan, a
relation of Dr. Stuart, and probably of fr. John M‘Mullan, obtained, on the 21st
of February, 1749. from the Provincial of the Franciscans, Fr. Francis French, a
dispensation to hold the parish of Culfeightrim, to which he was collated, and of
which he was a native.

+ Fr. Anthony O'Neill is still remembered by tradition in Drumnaquoile. He
and two other Friars, one of whom was named Burke, resided there till about the
year 1760, when the Franciscans abandoned that friary.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-303.png ---
County of Down. 267

This monastery and its appurtenances, with an acre within
the site, several carucates in Ballymagherlegan, Ballylarge,
and Ballenclewe, called Russel’s lands, with an acre called
Cronage, were granted to Gerald Earl of Kildare; see Lis-
mullen, in county of Meath.

Leper's Hospital ; this hospital was dedicated to St. Nicho-
las, and, with the hospital of St. Peter, at Kilclief, was, on
2oth April, 1413, granted in custodium to John Young, John
Molyn, and Walter Celey, with all their lands, tenements, and
appurtenances, being then in the King’s hands for certain
causes ; to hold the same as long as they should continue in
his Majesty’s possession.

Dromore ; a market town, episcopal seat, and a manor, in
the barony of Lower Iveach ; takes its name from its situation,
being built on the side of an hill, and owes its origin to St.
Colman.

Regular Canons ; an abbey was founded here by the same
Saint, called also Mocholmoc,* he was a disciple of M‘Nissy,
bishop of Connor, who died A.D. 513 ;* St. Colman’s festival
is observed on 7th of June. We meet with St. Cumineus, who
was abbot of Dromore.”

A.D. 841. Died the abbot Cellach, the son of Caitginus.”

903. Died the abbot Cormac.*

972. Died the abbot Maolbrigid, the son of Cathasagh the
bishop.”

Franciscan Friary ;” from Doctor Bourke we learn that a
monastery was founded here for friars of the Order of St.
Francis ; but no other account has transpired.

Drumboe ,* three miles south of Belvoir, in the barony of
Castle-Reagh. St. Patrick founded an abbey here,” oftwhich

* Hist. County of Down, p. 30. * Act. SS f 147. ' Zr. Th., p. 113.  ° Act.
SS., p. 59. “Id. p. 334. *1d., p. 360. "/d., p. 387. * Tr. Th., p. 100.

14 Dromore.—See Reeves’ Eccl. Hist., pp. 104-5.

18 Franciscan Friary.—The Franciscans of Merchant’s-quay have a list of guar-
dians of that house similar to that of Downpatrick.

16 Drumboe.—The Church of Drumboe, with the chapel, was valued at three
marks in the Taxation of Pope Nicholas. Formerly the Bishop of Down had 12
earucates of land in Drumboe, as appears from an ancient document relating to the
property of the See. These were taxed in the King’s Books in October, 1616, at
60s. ; but it would seem that his claim at that date was only traditional, for an
Inquis. 17 Jac. I., found that ‘‘ the twelve towns of Drumboe are not, neither have
been, in the possession of the Bishop of Down within the memory of man. Jurors
say that the twelve towns are spiritual lands.” The Protestant Bishop (Eclin), in
1622, says :—‘* The XII. towne landes of Drombo, and the foure towne landes of
Blarys, let in fee farme by the late Bp. Dondasse unto Sir Hugh Montgomery and
Sir Tames Hamylton, Knightes, whit® deed is confirmed by Deane and Chapter
under the yearly rent of £LXIIII". ster. But the counterparte of the lease
not coming to the now Bps. handes, the said knightes refuse to pay the foresaid
rents, Cc.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-304.png ---
268 Ancient Monasterics of Ireland.

St. Mochumma was abbot about the beginning of the 7th
century.*

A.D. 1130. This abbey was plundered by Connor, the son
of Artgal M‘Lochlin.>

In after ages it became a parish church in the diocese of
Down.*

The few remains show it was 45 feet in length and 20 in
breadth ; at the distance of 24 feet to the north west stands an
ancient round tower, about 35 feet in height, 47 in circum-
ference, and nine in diameter in the clear; the entrance is on
the east side, six feet from the ground. It is generally sup-
posed that there was a small fortified town here.!

Dundrum ; A mean village on the bay of that name, in the
barony of Lecale, where the ruins of a strong castle, boldly

*Act., SS., p. 587. »Annal. Annon. ° Visitation Book. % Hist. County of
Down, p. 73.

A Presbyterian Meeting-house occupies the site of the ancient church. The
doorway of the round tower is § feet 6 inches high ; 1 foot 10 inches wide at the
bottom, and gradually contracts to the top, where it is 1 foot 7 inches wide. A
drawing of it is given in Mr. Petrie’s Round Towers, p. 396.—See Reeves. It is
remarkable that wherever there is a round tower in the diocese of Down, the
church lands are known to have belonged at one time to the bishop.

In the Calendar of the O’Clery's the Abbey of Drumbo is noticed at two festivals—
July 24—“ Luighbe Droma-bo—Lughaidh of Drumbo.” Aug. 1o—“Cuimin
abb. O'Dhruimbo n-Ultaibh.” Cumin, abbot of Drumbo in Ulidia. But it
might be gravely questioned whether the Drumbo under consideration is the
Church to which St. Cumin belonged.

Mr. J. W. Hanna holds that Drumbo, mentioned in the Lives of St. Patrick, is
situated somewhere near the Quoile Bridge, on the arm of Lough Strangford, which
formerly washed Downpatrick, The Quoile Bridge is not far distant from Saul,
where St. Patrick died, and it would be on the direct road to Armagh. In the
townland of Lisbane, in the neighbourhood of Quoile Bridge, is a portion of low-
lying land called Salt Lough, over which the tide formerly flowed until restrained
by an artificial embankment, and in the same townland is a half-finished rath or
fort. Dr. Todd has adopted from Mr. Hanna the opinion that, somewhere in the
vicinity of Quoile Bridge is the site of Drumboe.

1 Dundrum.—The portion of Lecale which is cut off from the main body of the
barony is obviously that designated as Watertiry. The boundaries of Lecale are, with
the exception of that portion and the parish of Inch, so well defined by the sea, that in
ancient times it was named Magh-Inis (the insular plain), and it is still designated
by the people Isle-Lecale. Dundrum was included in Lecale from a very early
date. ‘‘The Annals of the Four Masters” relate that in the year 1147 the Cinel
Eoghain—that is, the people of the counties of Derry and Tyrone—pursued the
Ulidians ‘‘ till they reached the shore of Dun-droma, in Leath-Chathail (Lecale).
The Ulidians gave them battle there on the day of the Festival of Paul and Peter
(the 29th day of June) ; but they were defeated, and a great number of them slain,
together with Archu Ua Flathrai, Lord of Leath-Chathail. After this the forces
plundered and burned all Leath-Chathail, and carried off hostages from the
Ulidians,” This Dun-droma—the Fort of the Long Hill—is now Dundrum,
where the ruins of the castle occupy the site of the original dus or primitive fort.
The castle is usually supposed to have been erected for Knights Templars by Sir
John de Courcey, and that order is said to have held it till they were suppressed in
the year 1313. It was afterwards granted to the prior of Down, who held it till
the suppression of religious houses ; and the reversion of the castle and manor,
with the yearly rent of £6 135. 4d. reserved out of it, was granted to Gerald Earl

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-305.png ---
County of Down. 269

seated on a rock, still remain ; this castle is said to have been
built by Sir John de Courcey for Knights Templars, who pos-
sessed it till the year 1313, when that order was abolished ; it
was afterwards granted to the prior of Down, who held the
same, with a small manor adjoining, till the final suppression
of religious houses.®
The reversion of this house and manor, with the yearly rent
of £6 135. 4d. reserved out of the premises, was granted to
Gerald Earl of Kildare ; see Lismullen in county of Meath.
This castle was granted to the family of Magennis; on their
forfeiture, it became the property of the Earl of Ardglass, and
afterwards was in the possession of the Lord Viscount Blun-
dell.! The ruins are of an irregular multangular form, with a fine
round tower which is about 35 feet in diameter in the inside®
Enachelte ;® The church of this name was founded in the
territory of Hibhethach® by St. Molibba.! It is now unknown.
Erynagh; in the barony of Lecale, and a mile and a half
south of Downpatrick ; here we find a celebrated well, dedi-

° Hist. County of Down, p.14.and 267. ‘Id.,p.14. © Pococke’s Journal. © The
baronies of Lveagh. * Act., SS., pp. 368.

of Kildare. The old Castle of Dundrum took a part in most of the bloody scenes
of those troublesome times. In 1517 Gerald, the ninth Earl of Kildare, then Lord
Deputy, marched into Lecale and took by storm Dundrum, which was then in the
hands of the Irish, who had some time before seized it from the English. Itagain
fell into the hands of the Magenises, and was re-taken by the Lord Deputy Gray,
with seven other castles in Lecale, in the year 1538. It was fortified by the cele-
brated Shane O’Neill in 1566. At the end of that century it was in the hands of
Phelim M‘Ivir Magenis, who was obliged to yield it to Lord Mountjoy in the year
1601. Phelomy M‘Arton, in 1605, made over to Lord Cromwell “ the Castle of
Dondrome” with “ the third parte of all that his countrie called Killinarte (Kine-
larty), or in Watertirrye or elsewhere in Co. Doune.” From the Cromwell family
it passed by purchase to Viscount Blundell, from whom it descended to the Mar-

wis of Downshire, its present proprietor. The castle was finally dismantled about
the year 1652. The ruins consist of a great circular keep or tower, surrounded by
towers and outworks, Father Edmund MacCana, in his “Irish Itinerary,” says
that the castle is built upon the top of a very pleasant hill, “at the base of which
the sea forms a bay, where the tide on going out leaves a remarkable strand called
Traig-na-trenfhior—that is, ‘the shore of the champions,’ for here it was that the
outh of the ancient Ultonians used to exercise themselves in the race and wrest-
ing.” No traces of a chapel exist at Dundrum.

Enachelte,—In a list of Metropolitan Procurations imposed on the Diocese of
Dromore in the year 1422 the church of “ Enaceilte” is valued at 1 mark. It is now
called Anahilt, and gives name to a parish in the diocese of Dromore. The patron
saint is commemorated at the 18th of February in the Calendars of Aengus and of
the O’Clery’s—‘ Molibba of Eanach-eilte in Iveagh of Ulidia.” The burying-ground
about the church is of great antiquity, and the fort in which it stands is curious,
being the innermost of four enclosures which include at least nine acres, and slope
to the east in a regular glacis. It,had formerly a morass on three sides, and must,
previous to the invention of cannon, have been a place of great strength. To this
Post oa Phelim O’Neill retreated in 1641, when repulsed at Lisburn by Sir John

wdon,

9 Erynagh.—The Monastery of Erynagh was situate in the townland of that
name, in the parish of Bright. Here, in a field called ‘*The Church Park,”
about 200 yards to the right of the road from Corbally to Grangecarn, were

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-306.png ---
270 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

cated to St. Finian, adjoining which Magnell Makenlefe, King
of Ulster, on the 8th of September, A.D. 1126 or 1127,
founded an abbey for monks of the order of St. Benedict, and
called it the abbey of Carrig, from the rock on which it was
erected. St. Evodius was the first abbot ; and, on the day of
his decease, he gave directions that his corpse should be
interred in the Island of Inis, afterwards Iniscourcey, pro-
pheying that his own abbey would in aftertimes be destroyed,
but that one should be built on that island. This abbey
continued of the Benedictin order during the times of Odo,
Devincius, and John, the three succeeding abbots, but in the

the ruins of a church measuring forty by fifteen feet. Though these ruins are
remembered by old persons, and the west wall was Standing nine feet high within
the last fifty years, and interments even took place in the ancient cemetery in
1825, yet in about ten or twelve years after that date the walls were cleared away,
and the cemetery ploughed up. The history of the foundation of this church is
given in the ‘‘ Monasticon Anglicanum,” from the registry of Furness Abbey, in
Lancashire. It informsus that ‘‘a certain King of Ulster, named Magnellus
Makenlef, first founded it on the 8th of September, 1127, near the well of St.
Finian, in the land that is called Erynach, and named in the Abbey of Carrick.” It
afterwards informs us that ‘tits first abbot, the holy Evodius, on the day of his
death, commanded the brothers to bury his body in the Island of the Inch (Ynes),
and he assigned the reason, saying—‘ This house, brethren, shall be destroyed to
the foundation, and here in future will be the dwelling of wild beasts and robbers.
But in that place will be a college of just men, and the ascension of holy souls,
Here briars and thorns shall cover the barren soil.’ . . . . ” Weare then
told that after the death of its first abbot it was ruled successively by three abbots,
Odo, Devincius, and John, and that it was demolished by John de Courcey, in
consequence of its having been fortified against him, and that he afterwards built
the Abbey of Inch, and endowed it with the lands which had been bestowed on
the abbey of Carrick, by Magnellus. This ‘*Magnellus Makenlef’ is Niall
MacDonlevy (O'Eochaidh), a Prince of Ulidia, who was slain in the year 1127.
The monastery was named that of Carrick—‘‘the rock”—from a rock beside
which it had been built. At the base of this rock is the ancient well of St.
Finian, but a few months ago Thomas Patterson quarried away a portion of the
rock, and filled up the well, and has thereby destroyed one of the ancient historic
monuments of the country. Ona white portion of the rock, above the spot where
the well was, is still to be seen the print of the saint’s knees and feet. This
church was called by the people “Templenageerah” (Teampull-na-g-caerach),
“‘church of the sheep.” Though the monastery was destroyed by De Courcey,
the chapel remained. In the taxation of Pope Nicholas it is valued at six marks,
under the name of “the Chapel of the Greencestell,” called so because it was
attached to the Castle of Castlescreen, which was one of those castles which the
Anglo-Normans erected to guard their conquests in Lecale, and. like several of
the other castles in that barony, it was built within an Irish rath. Its name,
Greencastle, became in process of time cbanged into its present form, Castle-
screen. The ancient church stood in the townland of Erynagh, but near the
rivulet which divides it from the townland of Castlescreen. It is mentioned in
“ Primate Fleming’s Registry,” in a document relating to the year 1408, as “the
Chapel of St. Finian de Viridi Castro (Greencastle), and in a Chancery Roll of
1427 it is stated that lands in ‘‘ Greencastel in Comitatu de Lecale,” to distinguish
it from Greencastle in Mourne, had been held of Richard, Duke of York, by
Janico Dartas, from whom descended the Fitzgerald family, who still possess that
townland. At the dissolution it was appropriate to the Abbey of Saul, under
the name of ‘‘ Castlecryn,” as appears by an inquisition taken in the third year of
Edward VI., which retumed its valuation at 106s. 8d.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-307.png ---
County of Down. 271

government of the latter it was given to the Cistertian order,
and made a daughter of the abbey of Furnes. At the con-
quest of Ulster, Sir John de Courcey“totally destroyed this
house, it having been converted into a fortification against
him; but, in atonement for this act of sacrilege, he founded
an abbey in his island of Inis-Courcey, which see.*

£ynes * King Henry IV,, on the 1st of May, 1411, made a
grant to Thomas Chenele of the alien priory of Eynes, in the
Ardes ; and to hold the same so long as it should remain in
the king’s hands, it having been seized on account of the war
between England and France! This priory might probably
have stood at Abbacy, near the Lough of Strangford, in the
barony of Ardes, a bishop’s lease, and late the seat of Charles
Echlin, esq.™

Glangragh ,* or the Vale of Charity; in the year 1200 an
abbey was founded here, which was a daughter of the abbey
of Swiry, of the line of Clariveaux. We owe this information
to Allemande, who founds his authority on that of Jungelin ;
and he says further, that some place it in the territory of
Meath, and diocess of Killoom, or Clonmacnoise ; conse-
quently it is in the King’s county.

Gray Abbey ;* on the Lough of Strangford, in the barony
of Ardes. This monastery, under the invocation of the Virgin

® Hist. County of Down, p.24. 1 A Pat. Roll in Birmingham Tower, No. 6, inter.
ffarris’s Collect. vol. 4. ™ Hist. County of Down, p. 47.

20 Eynes.—Dr. Reeves writes—‘ Harris (Hist. Down, p. 47), and after him
archdall (Monast. Hib. p. 120), conjectured that this Abbacy was the site of the
alien priory of ‘ Eynes in the Ardes,’ of which mention is made in a Patent Roll,
12 Hen. IV. (see Cal. Canc. Hib. p. 197, Harris’ MSS., vol. iv., p. 178) ; but
erroneously, for the priory in question was none other than the Black Abbey,
which was a cell of St. Mary’s of Lonley, in Normandy, and was the only alien
pricey in the diocese. The name ‘ Eynes’ was probably borrowed from the neigh-

ouring church of Inishargy, of which Black Abbey was parson.”—Ecc. Antiq.,
p. 22. The ruins of the ancient Church of Inishargy stand on high ground, and
industry has converted into arable ground the morass which once surrounded it.

%\ Glangragh.—Not in the county of Down.

Grey Abbey.—The following note is from Reeves’ Eccl. Antiq., p. 92:—
‘A.D, 1193.—Conditur monasterium de Jugo Dei, Whit Abbey, Hibemice
Monesterlech” [ A/ainisterliath, ‘Grey Abbey '].—Grace’s Annals. ‘Johannes
quidem de Cursi habuit filiam Godredi [regis Manniae], nomine Affrecam, in
matrimonium, quae fundavit Abbatiam Sanctae Mariae de Jugo Dei, quae ibidem
sepulta est.’—Chronicon Manniae, A.D. 1204. This Abbey was sometimes called
simply Leigh, from Liat,‘ grey.’ It-was a cell of Holm Cultram in Cumberland,
and its connexion with that house is thus illustrated by the Chronicle of Maibros :
©1222, Dominus Adam Abbas de Holmcultram suo cessit officio ; cui successit
Dominus Radulfus Abbas de Yugo Dei in Hibernia: loco cujus substitus est in
Hibernia Dominus Johannes Cellerarius de Glenlus.’ ‘1237, Obiit Dominus
Gillebertus Abbas de Holmcultram apud Cantuariam, dum rediret de capitulo
generali. Cui successit Dominus Johannes Abbas de Yugo Dei. Et de Jugo Dei
pastoralem curam suscepit Nicholaus ejusdem domus Prior..—(Rer. Angl. Script.,
vol. i, and Bannatyne Club Papers). The ruins of the Abbey are the most
extensive ecclesiastical remains in the diocese, and have been secured against

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-308.png ---
272 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Mary of the yoke of God, was founded on 25th of August, in
the year 1192 or 1193," by Africa, daughter of Godred, King
of Man, and wife to Mr John de Courcey. She furnished it
with Cistertian monks from the abbey of Holmcultrain in
Cumberland, and chose to take up her last residence here.°

1237. J the abbot, was in this year a subscribing
witness to Hugh de Lacie’s grant to the abbey of Newry.P

Walter Barnewood, in 1380, held two carucates of land in
Holmgrange from the abbot of this monastery, for the term
of ten years, at the rent of five marcs.9

Inquisition 5th November, 1st K. James, finds that John
Cassels, the last abbot, was, 1st February, 32nd K. Henry
VIII, seized of the abbey, &c. ; also of seven townlands cir-
cumjacent to the said abbey, viz., Corballye, Ballibrenny,
Ballenbelye, Ballevaltra, Ballecaslane, Ballenallane, and Balle-
cullemanagh ; also three townlands in Lecale, viz., Balletun-
geange, Balleedon, and Corballen, with the tithes, &c., belong-
ing to the said lands, all in this county ; annual value of said
abbey, &c., 405.7

Three carucates of land in Ballymotes, alias Ballinemonogh ;
one carucate in Hilletstone, alias Ballyhillet ; one in Carnarie ;
one in Ballynclere; a quarter carucate in Killena, alias
Killeney ; one carucate in Cashenmogheune ; two carucates
in Ballinquinuter, alias Quiltestone ; one carucate in Bally-
lenagh ; one in Ballincloite in the Dufferans ; two in Bally-
kallet ; one in Sheffoundbogge ; and one in Holmgrange,
part of the possessions of this abbey, were granted to Gerald
Earl of Kildare. See Lismullen in county of Meath.™

This abbey was ruined in the rebellion raised by Tyrone,
towards the close of the reign of Queen Elizabeth.*

The statue of the foundress, in alto relievo, carved in free-
stone, though much defaced, is yet to be seen in an arch on
the gospel side of the high altar ; the building was large and
magnificent, the east window of the church is a noble Gothic
design of three compartments, each about six feet in width, and
upwards of twenty in height; on the north and south walls,
on each side of the altar, is a large window of freestone, neatly
carved, and of the same breadth with the east window, but

2 Annal. St. Mary, Dubl. Pembridge. ° War. Mon. ? King, p. 370. ld.
* Chief Rememb. ™ Aud. Gen. * Hist. County of Down, p. 268.

further injury, except that of time, by the laudable care of their distinguished
proprietor, A few years since, when the floor of the Abbey was cleared of the
rubbish which had collected upon it, a leaden seal was found bearing the following
legend :—‘RADULPHUS: DEI GRACIA KARLEOLENSIS EpiscuHop.’ This Bishop
of Carlisle was Radulphus de Ireton, who was appointed to that see in 1280.—
(Godwin de Praesul., p. 765). At the Dissolution, this Abbey was seized of sixteen
townlands in the neighbourhood, and of the rectories of two parishes.”

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-309.png ---
County of Down. 273

lower ; the cells, dormitory, &c., are all in ruins, and part of
the west end is fitted up for church service.‘

Hollywood ;* on the bay of Carrickfergus, three miles north-
east of Belfast. A monastery was founded here for friars of
the third order of St. Francis ;# we know not to whom it owed
its origin, although M. Allemande, without the least authority,
gives it to one of the Annesleys, which family was not settled
in the north of Ireland until long after the final suppression
of monasteries.

Inquisition, 5th November, Ist King James, finds that Con-
nogher O'Hamle, the last prior, voluntarily resigned on Ist of
January, 33d King Henry VIII., being then seized of the said
priory, &c.; also of the five townlands following, viz., Balle-
keyll, alias Ballecexell, Ballamanacke, Ballacaltricke, alias
Ballacktragath, Ballackderrye, and Ballaer-knocknegonye, the
whole of the annual value of 235. 4d.

Iniscourcey ;4 a peninsula, opposite to Downpatrick, and
running into the Lough of Strangford. Sir John de Courcey,

* Hist. County of Down, pp. 49 and 50. “ War. Mon.

% Hollywood recte Holywood.—Ballekeyll, now Ballykeel ; Ballamanacke, now
Ballymenoch; Ballacaltricke, now Cultra; Ballaoderrye, now Holywood;
Ballaer-Knochnegonye, now Knocknagoney.

Father MacCana in his * Itinerary,” after writing of the ancient church of Knock-
columbkill—says ‘‘ At no great distance from this, on the east, is a monastery of
the Third Order of Saint Francis, founded by the munificence of the same chief
(Niall O’Neill, chief of Trian Congall), and adequately endowed with lands.
This is called in Irish Aird-mic-nissi, in Latin Collis Sancti Mac Nissi. It is on
the bank of Loch Laodh (Belfast Lough), and stands opposite Karrickfergus on
the south.” This fully identifies the present Holywood as the Ardicnise, which
Archdall gives as a separate friary. The Calendar of Aengus, at the 25th
of October, when treating of the name Laisren mor-mac Nascai, (Laisren
the Great, son of Nasca), adds in the gloss, “ Laisren, the son of Nasca, of
Ard Mac Nasca, on the shore of Lough Laigh.” This Laisren. the patron saint
of Holywood, was a distinguished ecclesiastic in the middle of the seventh
century. He studied the science of the saints along with his two brothers, under
St. Carthagh. in the monastery of Raithin. He is the Laistranus, the presbyter,
who is mentioned in the superscription of the letter from the clergy of Rome to
the Irish Church, which is given in the Ven. Bede’s Ecclesiastical History.
Previous to the thirteenth century the place had acquired the name Sanctus
Boscus (Holywood), while it was called by the people Ballyderry, but its ancient name
continued to be used occasionally ; a pedigree of the O’Neills, cited by Stuart,
states that they granted the lands of Ard McCriosq (recte Ard McNiosq), or
Holywood tothe Gilmores. The walls of the old church still remain.

¥ Jniscourcey.—Nearly opposite to Downpatrick is the island of Inch, which
has been rendered almost a peninsula by means of an embankment which stops
the tide water of Lough Strangford. This island in ancient times was called
Iniscouscry (the island of Couscry)—J#is Cumhscraidh—so named seemingly from
Cumhscraidh, one of the sons of Conor Mac Nessa, King of Ulster, who suc-
ceeded his father on the throne of Ulster. and was slain after a three years’ reign
in the year of our Lord 33. Harris, and after him Archdall, supposed that the
Cistercian Abbey founded by De Courcy, was the earliest church erected on the
island, and that this island was named Iniscouscry from the Norman conqueror.
Dr. O’Donovan was, however, enabled by our ancient records to correct those
mistakes. In the Calendar of the Saints of Ireland, at the 22nd of July, is given

T


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-310.png ---
274 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

who, in his wars, had demolished the abbey of Erynagh, or
Carrig ; in order to make his peace with Heaven for that
profanation, built an abbey here for monks of the Cistertian
order, and dedicated it, on the 3rd of June, A.D. 1180, to the
Virgin Mary ;¥ he supplied this house with monks from the
abbey of Furness, in Lancashire, and gave to it all the pos-
sessions which had belonged to Erynagh.*

The abbot E——— was a subscribing witness to Sir John
de Courcey’s grant to the church of St. Patrick at Down.*
1237. G——— the abbot was a subscribing witness to

Hugh de Lacie’s charter to the abbey of Newry.>

¥ War. Canob. Cist., p.75. * Mon. Angl., vol. 2, pp. toand 718. */d., p. L020.
» King, p. 93-
the festival of ‘‘ Biteus, #.c. Mobin, abbot of Inis-Cumhscraigh. He was of the
race of Eochaidh, son of Muireadhac, who was of the seed of Heremon.”

The festival of St. Biteus, or Mobin, is given again at the 29th of August. It
seems surprising that there could have been any mistake regarding the ancient
name of Inch, for the O'Clerys, in the Table.or Index of the Martyrology, having
given David as another form of the name Mobin,say—‘‘ St. David of Iniscuscraidh,
and this island is situate beside Dun-da-lethglas” (Downpatrick). There are
several saints named Mobin, but Mobin of Inch seems to have been the Mobin,
who was a companion and disciple of St. Finian. The Annals written by
Tighernach, abbot of Clonmacnoise, who died in the year 1088, nearly 90 years
before De Courcy’s invasion, records at the year 1002, ‘‘ Sitric, King of the Danes,
arrived with a fleet in Uladh (Down), and plundered Kilclief and Iniscuscraidh.”
The Four Masters add that he ‘‘carried off many prisoners from both.” The
same annals record. at the year 1161, the death of ‘‘Ogan O’Cormacain, erenagh
of Iniscuscraidh,” and at 1149, they inform us that a party belonging to an army
led by Niall O'Loughlin, “ went upon the islands of Lough Cuan (Strangford
Lough), and they plundered Iniscumscraidh and several other churches.” The
Charter of Maurice MacLoughlin to the Abbey of Newry, about the year 1153, is
witnessed among others by ‘‘Aedha Maglanha, erenanus de Insecumscray.”
The name Maglanha is still common in the neighbourhood of Inch, under the form
Maglennon.

The more ancient church was situaved in the middle of the cemetery. The sim-
plicity of its form and architectural features indicated a very early antiquity ; over
the south door was a piece of ancient sculpture representing the Saviour on the cross,
and a person on his knees, with his hands elevated prayingto him. The old abbey
church seems to have been eclipsed, and to have become a chapel to the Anglo-
Norman abbey ; it is valued in the Taxation of Pope Nicholas, under the name of
“ The Chapel of Ines,” at 1 mark. This venerable edifice, which Dane and
Norman spared, has been barbarously swept away to make room for a tomb for
the Maxwell family, of Finnabrogue. In any other country such a monument
would have been under the immediate protection of its government.

We have already given the history of the foundation of the Cistercian Abbey of
Inch (see Erynagh), and we need here only repeat that Sir John de Courcy
founded this abbey as an amends for demolishing the Benedictine Abbey of
Erenagh, which is said to have been converted by the native princes into a strong
military post. The registry of Furness Abbey, from which its monks were brought,
assigns the 30th of May, in the year 1180, as the date of its foundation.

** Anno mileno centeno bis quadrageno
Curcy fundavit Ynes, hostes hinc superavit.”

Grace and Pembridge state that it was built in the year 1187. The new abbey,
as might be expected, was thoroughly anti-Irish, so much so, that it was one of
the two monasteries complained of in the Quzrimonia, which Donald O'Neill
and the other Irish chiefs addressed to the Pope in the year 1318. His words are—

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-311.png ---
County of Down. 275

1380. It was enacted by parliament, that no mere Irishman
should be permitted to profess himself here.*

This abbey, with half a carucate, called the Island of Inch,
also a certain water, called the Narrow Water; a carucate or
ballyboe in Ballirenald, and a ballyboe in Faghebrogye; a
ballyboe in Ballymugnegall, and half a ballyboe in Jermyn ;
a quarter of a carucate in Erery; a carucate in Ballyeany; a
ballyboe in St. John’s ; two acres in Ballavig and Ballygilbert,
and two carucates in the two Granges there, were granted to
Gerald Earl of Kildare. See Lismullen in county of Meath.

The church of the abbey was built in the form of a cross ;
part of it yet remains ; at the east end are three large windows
with Gothic arches, upwards of twenty feet high ; in the north
and south walls are two windows, each of two arches, and
little inferior to those at the east end.4 On the south side of
the altar of this noble building, are still to be .scen the tops of
the seats for the administering priest and his assistants, cut in
the wall and beautified with Gothic sculpture; on the south
side was the steeple, supported by an elegant arch, some of
the beads or strings of which are yet visible.*

Kulcholpa ;* near Downpatrick; an abbey was founded

° King, p. 93. 4 Hist. County of Deaon, p.37- ° Bp. Pococke.

“For they heretically maintain, not their laymen. and seculars merely, but even
some of their ecclesiastics, that it is no greater sin to kill an Irishman than a dog,
or any other brute beast. And to carry out this monstrous assertion, some of
their monks coolly declare, that if it should be their lot, as it does often happen, to
kill an Irishman, they would not on this account refrain from the celebration of
Mass, even for a single day. And thus the monks of Granard, in the diocese of
Ardagh, as also the monks of Inch, belonging to the same order, in the diocese
of Down, unhesitatingly put into shameless practice what they profess in words ;
for in the open day they attack the Irish in armed bodies, and massacre them,
and notwithstanding celebrate their Masses.” —(Fordun Scotichron, lib. xii..cap. 30.)
Jocelin, the biographer of St. Patrick, was a monk of Furness, and it is pro-
bable that he was one of the monks brought over to Inch, where he could have
easily obtained the information necessary for his undertaking, which he completed
about the year 1183.
In the taxation of Pope Nicholas, the temporalities of the abbot of Inch were
valued at £10 19s. 4d.
Ballirenald, is now Ballyrenan,

Faghebrogie, is now mera Townlands in the parish of Inch.

Ballymugnagall, is now Ballygally,

Jermyn, is intended for Turmenan,

Erery, is intended for Erenagh, in the parish of Bright.

Ballyeany is intended for Ballycam, in the parish of I’right.

St. Joh intended for St. John’s Point, in the parish of Rathmullan.
Baliavig, is intended for Ballyviggis, in the parish of Bright.
Ballygilbert, is now Ballygilbert, in the parish of Bright.

The Two Granges, now Woodgrange, in the parish of Down.

8 Kilcholpa, now Raholp, near Saul.—In a sub-denomination of the townland
of Raholp called Banaghan or Banagh, -are the ruins of the ancient church of
of Ratholp, locally called Church-Moyley. The church was 33 feet 4 inches in
length and 21 feet 4 inches in width. Dr. Reeves says :—‘‘ The south wall is
overturned ; the east and west walls are about 12 feet high; the east window is 4


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-312.png ---
276 Ancient Monasterics of Ireland.

here by St. Patrick for St. Thassac,! whose festival is observed
on the 14th of April Kilcholpa is now unknown.
* Tr. Th. p. 270. © O'Flaherty Ms.

feet 6 inches high, and 10 inches wide, splayed inside to the width of 3 feet 2
inches, and ends not in an arch but in a large flag. In building the walls yellow
clay has been used instead of mortar. The plot of ground which the ruins and
cemetery occupy is about half a rood in extent, and seems from its elevation above
the surrounding field to have been a rath.” Inthe field to the north-east of the
ruin there was formerly a well, which was probably the holy well. This was the
ancient church of Rath-Colpa, over which presided St. Tassach, the bishop who
administered Communion to St. Patrick when that saint was dying at the neighbour-
ing church of Saul. The ancient hymn written by St. Fiech, Bishop of Sletty,
a disciple of St. Patrick, says :—
“Tassach remained after him

When he administered the Communion to him:

He said that he would give Communion to Patrick,

Nor was the prophecy of Tassach false.”

The great hagiologist, St. Aengus, treating of the 14th of April, the festival of
St. Tassach, thus commemorates this honour :—
“The Royal Bishop Tassach
Who gave, on his arrival,
The body of Christ. the King truly powerful,
As Communion to Patrick.”

Upon which an interlinear gloss observes his church was at Raholp, saying—
“*g.e, at Rathcolp in Lecale of Ulidia: é«., an artificer and bishop to Patrick was
Tassach, and this is the festival of his death.” St. Tassach is enumerated ina very
ancient poem as one of “the three artificers of great endowment,” who were attached
to ‘* the family of Patrick of the prayers.” The glorious privilege of having given
the Viaticum to our national apostle forms the distinguishing trait in the notice of
St. Tassach in the ‘‘ Martyrology of Donegal.” That * Martyrology,” on the 14th
of April, says :—“ Tassach, Bishop of Raholp, in Ulidia, é, Lecale. This is the
Tassach who gave the body of Christ to St. Patrick before his death in the Monas-
tery of Saul.” St. Tassach seems to have been the only Bishop of the Church of
Raholp, at least our early annals do not record any succession, but the lands of the
ancient church merged into the see lands of the divcese, and in the time of John
de Courcy Bishop Malachy gave, among other properties, ‘‘ Rathoop” (Raholp)
to the Church of St, Patrick in Down. Shortly afterwards Hugh de Lacy con-
firmed those possessions, including “ Rathcolp,” to the bishop as Abbot of St.
Patrick’s, An ancient document which pretends to have been drawn up in 1210,
and which professes to give an account of the possessions of the See of Down,
says, ‘Item in Rathcalpa—three carucates in temporalities and a chapel in spiritu-
alities, which were given by the same Flathri.” In the taxation of Pope Nicholas
the church of Rathcolpe was valued at 4 marks. The account of the receipts of
the see lands during the interval between March qth, 1305, and July tst of the same
year, returned into the Exchequer by Walter de la Hay, says—‘‘ And of 4 pounds
and 20 pence of the property of lordships of the prises, services, perquisites of the
court of Rathcolppe. for the said term during the same period.” Of the profits of
the mills and of the labour of the tenants in that place he makes no return. ‘‘ be-
cause all the labour is done in autumn, and the rent of the mill for the first term
is paid at the Purification of the Blessed Virgin, and for the second term at the
festival of St. Peter ad Vincula.” The water-mill of Raholp occupies the site. no
doubt of the bishop’s mill ; and the ‘‘Terrier” returns, in 1615, ‘‘ The mensal of
Rathalpe—the curate pays proxies 1s., refections 1s., synodals 2s." The same
document returned—“ In Ratalp 2 plowlands, spiritualities, and temporalities ” as
the property of the bishop, and to this day two townlands of Raholp are held
under the see. In 1622 ‘Capella de Ruchalpe” is returned by the Protestant
bishop as “ruynous.” ‘The great tithes possessed by Tho. Barnwell, and the
small. esteemed to be worth the third part thereof, some 20s. per ann. Noe curate
nor able to maynteyne any, fit to be united to the next, which is Soule.” The
glories of Raholp had passed away !

ee

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-313.png ---
County of Down. 277

Kilclief ; at the entrance of the Lough of Strangford, and
six miles south-east of Downpatrick.

%8 Kilclief.—Kilclief (Cill-Cleithe, ‘‘the hurdle church”) seems to have
been so named from the materials of which it was constructed, or it may have
received its name from some peculiarity in its chancel-screen, which, according
to “ Cormack’s Glossary,” was named ‘‘ Cliath”—‘‘ Crand-Caingel” (the beam of
the chancel, or the rood-loft). Says the “Glossary,” ‘a beam hurdlet here, é.¢.,
a hurdle in the beam between laymen and clerics, after the likeness of the veil
of the Temple. for Cliath is its name.” Kilclief is one of the churches the erection
of which is attributed to St. Patrick and two of his disciples. Eugenius and
Niellus, who were brothers, were placed over it. If the original structure was
built of wattles and boards, it seems to have given place, at an early date. to a
stone church. The “ Four Masters” record that in the year 935 “ Cill-Cleithe
was plundered by the son of Barith, and the stone church (Doimhliacc) was burned,
and a great prey was carried out of it.” This Doimhliacc, which was burned by
the Danes, was evidently a building of stone, or, as the word signifies, ‘a house
of stones.” Kilclief, situated so near the sea, must have been much exposed to
predatory visits from the Danes. The ‘‘ Annals of the Four Masters” record that
in toot, “ Sitric, son of Amhlaeibh, set out on a predatory excursion into Ulidia,
in his ships ; and he plundered Kilcleithe and Inis-Cumsraigh (Inch), and carried
off many prisoners from both.” The lands of Kilclief, like those of the other
ancient churches, which once had their own bishops, but were afterwards absorbed
in the see of Down, became the property of the see, and about the year 1178, John
de Courcy confirmed the possession of Kircleth to the bishop, and conferred on
him the power of erecting it into a borough. There is preserved in the Chapter-
house, Westminster, a memorial forwarded to Henry IV., about 1410, from the
clergy and nobles of Down, in which they pray the king “ to considre the said
thraldome and tribute with the important werres upon your said liege people daily
continued both by see and land ; by see with Bretones and with Scottes of the oute
lles, which beth wt Irishmen enemyes of the land confedered—that is to say, wt
Oneyllebwye, O'Kane, Mcgwylyn, henry Oneylle, Con Oneylle, Mcgynnusse,
Mccartan, and the Offlynnes, whiche will in shorte time fynally and utterly woll
destroye youre said Earldome and peaple without that it be by youre moost
gracious Hieghnesse provided to send unto theym a certain of people to inhabite
and to defende youre saide grounde.” . . . Such was the state of the English
colony in the north of Ireland nearly three centuries after its establishment! To
this document are annexed the signatures and seals of the Bishop of Down, of the
Prior of Down, of the Archdeacon of Down, and of the Abbots of Bangor, Saul, Inch,
Greyabbey, and of the town of * Kilcleth.” The seals of the Master of the Hospital
of St. John the Baptist, of George “ Russhel,” Baron, and of the towns of Down
and of Ardglass have broken off. The seal of the town of Kilclief (Ville de Kil-
cleth) exhibits an ancient galley in full sail.

Walter de la Hay returns the rents of the see lands in Kilclief which had been
received by him during four months in the year 1305 as amounting to £15 Ios.,
though he makes no return of the reaping which would be performed in Autumn
by the tenants, and which was valued at 3:. 4¢. per annum. The church of Kil-
clief was valued in the Pope Nicholas taxation at the large sum of twelve marks,
which was equal to the valuation of five or six of the ordinary churches of the diocese.
This church was dedicated to St. Caylan who probably was the Caylan who founded
Neddrum. The “ Terrier,” a document written in 1615, in enumerating the see lands
says :— In Kilclief 5 plowlands, and the Archdeacons of Downes part of the Ist 5

lowlands, this is the gift of the Bishop. The Earl of Kildare hath part of the said
land (as he alledgeth) thro’ gift of the Bishop and the other part he detains (viz. )
the towne of Lisbane, between Kilcliefe and Strangford. Certain other farmers
here have parte of this lande aforesaid for annual Rent of which Nicholas Fitz-
simons is one.” The tenants’ names given in the margin are Nicholas Fitzsimons,
James Dowdall, and Roger McNigh, his tenant. In 1622 the church is returned
as a ruin, though in 1592, in order to determine a Chancery suit pending between
the Archdeacon of Down and one Fitzsimons, respecting the glebe lands of Kil-
clief, an arbitration arranged that the Archdeacon should hold the lands, not as

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-314.png ---
278 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Abbey of Regular Canons , in the lives of the Irish Saints we
are told, that St. Eugene and St. Niell, disciples of St. Patrick,
were abbots of Kil-chleithe, near Down.

Tr. Th., pp. 182 and 265.

a parcel of his archdeaconry, but as procurator of the church of Kilclief, and that
the profits should be applied to the repairs of the church. The Protestant church
occupies the site of the ancient church, but there are uo ancient remains except
portions of four or five cuneiform gravestones, a very perfect one of which is pre-
served in the vestry-room. On it is inscribed an ornamental cross, along the stem
of which are sculptured on one side the knight's sword, and on the other his banner.

Near the church is a fine ‘old castle in an excellent state of preservation, and
well roofed. It is of considerable size and height, and is in form nearly a square,
with the addition of two towers in front, in one of which is a spiral stair, and in
the other a stack of closets. It is a building of the fourteenth century, and was
the ancient see-house and manor of the bishops of Down. The report made by
the Protestant bishop, in 1622, says:—‘‘Item, the bishop findeth in his old
recordes that the castle and lands of Kilcleefe belongeth to the Bishop of Downe ;
but the possessor, Nicholas Fitzsimonds, denieth that the bishop hath any pro-
priety but only tos. Irish asa chiefe rent yearley, wch he hath tendered, but the
bishop refuseth to receive it. It appeareth clearly, out of the archbishop’s book
of Armagh, that this was an ancient dwelling-house and manor of the Bishop of
Downe, for the archbishop sent process for the Bishop of Downe for some offence
he had done in his castle and dwelling of Kilcleefe ; and to. this day there is a
chamber in that castle called the haulkes chamber, and the reason given by the
old natives and neighbours because the bishop's faulconer and hawkes were kept
there.” Harris has enlarged the story of the hawks’ chamber by telling that
there is “the figure of a fowl resembling a hawk carved on a stone chimney-
piece in a room on the second floor.” Now, the truth is, there is no stone chim-
ney piece in the second floor, and the whole story arose from a mistake made by
“ the old natives and neighbours,” who thought they perceived the outlines of a bird
in the cross patee on a cuneiform gravestone which has been built into the wall of
the old castle. It is in general ornamentation precisely similar to the gravestone
preserved in the vestry-room of the Protestant church ; and the fact of the grave-
stone having continued beyond the remembrance of him to whose memory it had
been erected, before it was used as building material in the fourteenth century,
testifies to the great age of the cuneiform gravestones which occur in our cemeteries.

As the parish of Kilclief belonged in ancient times to the Arch-
deacons of Down, it may not be uninteresting to give a list of those
dignitaries. About 1183 Bernardus was archdeacon; A.D. 1257. Reginald
was archdeacon; he became Bishop of Down in 1256. About 1300
the name of Galfridus, Archdeacon of Down, is attached as a witness to a charter.
A.D. 1340. Robertus de Pyncebek was Archdeacon of Ultonia (Down). A.D.
1365. William, who had been archdeacon, became Bishop of Down. He seems
to have been succeeded in the archdeaconry by John Logan, who is mentioned as
being archdeacon in 1367 and in 1369. John Dungan, who became Bishop of
Sodor and Man in 1374, had been previously Archdeacon of Down. In the
primatial registries the name of Henry Logan appears as archdeacon in the years
1425 and 1434; in the latter year he had a commission from the primate to visit
the diocese. Simon Somerset was archdeacon in 1438; he resigned his office on
account of age and infirmity A.D. 1455. He was succeeded by Philip de Erdeslye.
The next archdeacon seems to have been Henry Fox. Eugene Kragennis was
archdeacon ; he became afterwards Bishop of Down and Connor in 1541. It
would seem that, at whatever time Kilclief became the parish of the Archdeacons
of Down, the bishop conferred on him a portion of the mensal lands, because a
considerable portion of the visitorial duties of the bishop devolved on him, and to
the present day the Protestant archdeacon possesses a tract of 400 acres. The
“ Terrier” distinctly states ‘‘ this is the gift of the bishop.” The Ordnance Survey
includes all the lands of the archdeacon in one townland which it calls the Giede,
though they consist of three denominations— Drumroe. Carriff or Carrafeagh, and
Carrowvannish—which were called, in a document connected with the Chancery
suit of 1592, Spittle Quarter, Carrowreagh, and Fermeannes.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-315.png ---
County of Down. 279

The castle and lands of Kilclief were an ancient see
house and manor, belonging to the bishops of Down!

It is now a parish church in that diocess.«

Hospital ,*7 an hospital for the reception of Lepers was
founded here, under the patronage of St. Peter; see the Le-
per’s hospital in Downpatrick.

Kilméian ;* this abbey was founded by St. Fergus, bishop
of Down, who died the 3oth of March, A.D. 583.1 We meet
also with a St. Neman of this place, whose festival is held on
the 1st of September." It is now unknown.

Kitlrois ;® was an ancient abbey in Mugdorna."°

Kiltonga ;* on the north side of Newtown, inthe barony
of Ardes; here was a cell, of which some re mains were to be
seen in the beginning of this century.P

| Hist. County of Down, p. 23. “Visitation Book. * Act. SS., pp. 139, 794, and
Index. ™ Vard., p. 160. ™ Now the barony of Mourne. ° Tr. Th., pp. 77 and 379.
P Hist. County of Down, p. 268.

37 Hospital—In Drumroe, a townland in the parish of Kilclief, there is a field
called the Spidal or Spittle in the farm belonging to Mr. James Blaney, where
some years ago there were the remains of an ancient building, which have now
been removed ; but large quantities of human bones are still frequently tured
up. That was the site of St. Peter's Hospital for Lepers. From the Chancery
Rolls of Ireland it appears that, A.D. 1387, Robert de Vere, Marquis of Dublin,
committed to Nicholas Lepyng, clerk, the custody of the Leper's House near
Kylcleth in Ultonia, to hold during pleasure rent free. In 1415, the King
committed to John FitzRichard, chaplain, John Molyn, and Walter Sely the
custody of the hospitals or leper houses of St. Nicholas of Down and St. Peter’s
of Kilcleth, with their lands and appurtenances, to be held while in the King's
hands, rent free. Since therefore the patronage of those hospitals was vested in
the representatives of the Earls of Ulster, it is probable that those establishments
for the treatment of a disease then so common owed their origin to the princely
liberality of the De Laceys or De Burgos.

28 4'i/mbian.—The Annals of the Four Masters record, under the year 583—
“St. Fearghus, Bishop of Druim-Leathglaise (Down), died on the 30th of March,
and this was the Feargus who founded Cill-m-Bian. This bishop would appear
to have been a distinguished person, for his death, and the fact of his having

‘founded Cill-m-Bian, are mentioned in the Annals of Tighernach at 584, in those
of Ulster at 583 and $89, and in the Annals of Boyle at 557. It might be ex-
pected that the Church of Kilmbian would be found closely connected with the
see of Down. In the “Terrier” of the Churches and Ecclesiastical property of
Down and Connor, drawn up about the year 1615, there is the following entry :—
“*Kilmore Merone, the Bishop's mensal,” to which is appended this note—
‘* Kilmore Marone, § quarter lands, having 7 chappels belonging to it.” In the
modern parish of Kilmore there is an ancient grave-yard still used, but in which
there are no traces ofa church. It is called Killyman,which is no doubt the ancient
Kilmbian. It is situated in the townland of Barnymaghery. Mr. Hanna dis-
covered this long lost church.

% Kilrois—to be sought for in the county of Monaghan.

® Kiltonga.—In the townland of Killarnin, in the parish of Newtownards,
there was an ancient chapel called in the “ Terrier,” ‘' Killarneid,” speaking of
which the author of the Montgomery Manuscript says—t near Newtown is a piece
of ground called Killtonga. in which hath been y* cell of some devout person, but
few remains thereof are now to be seen ; yet at y® old ruins of it were found (a
few years ago), some medalls and crucifixes.”

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-316.png ---
280 Ancient Monasteries of Iveland.

Maghera ;* alias Rathmurbuilg.

%! The parish of Maghera. The name of this parish was originally Rath-murb-
huilg (pronounced nearly Ra-murlough), which signifies ‘the rath at the sea
inlet,” There are two townlands named Murlough—one of which is in this parish
and the other in the parish of Kilmegan. The * Calendar of the Four Masters”
places the death of St. Donard at the year 506, but it considerably antedates the
event. Domangort (pronounced Donard), son of Eachach, Bishop of Rathmurbulg,
in Dalriada and Dalaradia, A.V. 506.” The church of St. Donard was in
Dalaradia, not in Dalriada, which is the north of the county of Antrim. The
error which occurs in nearly all the Irish martyrologies seems to have crept into
them from an early transcriber having confounded Murlough on the coast of
county Antrim with Murlough on Dundrum Bay. That it is the Murlough in the
county of Down that is intended, Dr. Reeves shows by the following quotation
from an ancient MS. :—‘‘Donard, from Kath-Murbulg, in Dalriada (recte Dala-
radia), from Sliabh-Slanga.” Sliabh-Slanga (mountain of Slange) was the
ancient name of Slieve Donard (mountain of Donard), which received that name
from one of the earliest colonists of Ireland, whose death is recorded by the Four
Masters under the year of the world 2533. ‘‘Slainge, son of Partholan, died in
this year, and was interred in the carn of Sliabh-Slanga.” The cairn of Slainge
still forms a very conspicuous object on the summit of Slieve Donard, but the
hero Slainge is forgotten in the traditions of the neigtbovrhood, while the memory
of St. Donard is enshrined in the veneration of the people. Giraldus Cambrensis
names Slainge ‘‘ Sa/anus,” and Donard “ Dominicus.” He says—‘‘ That exceed-
ing high mountain which overhangs the sea that flows between Ireland and
Britain is called Salanga. And because at the foot of it. after the lapse of many
ages, St. Dominicus had erected a distinguished monastery, it more commonly
bears the name of Dominicus’ mountain.” The monastery to which Giraldus
alludes is that of Maghera. Colgan, speaking of St. Donard, says—‘‘ Two
churches were consecrated to him—one at the base of a very high monntain
overhanging the sea in the eastern parts, which was called Rath-murlbulg (Rath-
murlow), now Machaire-Ratha (Maghera) ; the other is situated on the top of
the same very high mountain, far away from every human dwelling ; which,
nevertheless, even during the severe and terrible persecution of the heretics. used
to be frequented with a great concourse of people, and frequent pilgrimages in
honour of that miracle-working servant of God, who shone there in many
miracles.” Harris, writing in 1744, thus describes the scene of this pilgrimage :—
“ On the summit of this mountain are two rude edifices (if they mays so termed),
one being a heap of stones piled up in a pyramidical figure, m which are several
cavities, wherein the devotees shelter themselves in bad weather while they hear
Mass ; and in the centre of this heap there is a cave formed by broad, flat stones,
so disposed as to support each other without the help of cement. The other
edifice is composed of rude walls, and partitions called chappels, and perhaps
was the oratory and cell erected by St. Domangard, before hinted. Sir William
Petty mentions in his maps a chappel on the N.E. side of Slieve Donard, which
he calls Leniord’s Chappel ; but probably for want of due information he has
corrupted the name, and the true name of it is Donard's Chappel.” Dr. O’Doran,
writing on the 23rd of September, in the year (probably) 1752, to his agent in
Rome, says :—‘‘ I have it to add that I would be glad if I could get those indul-
gences of Crumdugh extended to Struel, for on that Fryday the Christians visited
Struel as well as Mount Donert, which is ten miles distant from sd. Struel.” This
holy retreat of St. Donard, perched on the high mountain which still perpetuates
his name, and towers over the range of lofty mountains which stretch away from
its sides, involuntarily forces on the imagination a feeling of total severance from
mankind, and recals to our minds how the saints valued heaven. and what price
they were prepared to pay for it. Father MacCana. in his * Irish Itinerary, *says :-—
“ But I cannot forbear to observe how our sa‘nts, scoring the earth about which
the miserable race of man so vehemently contends, sought a loftier range ; for itis a
fact for which I can vouch, that on the summit of that lofty pile, and in a different
region of the world, as it were, they sought an abode of holy retirement, of
which heavenly seclusion the traces still remain ; for in that, elevated region of

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-317.png ---
County of Down, 281

the sky there exists a hermitage sacred to St. Domanghart. From the foot of
the mountain on the east there stretches an agreeable plain, where there is a
fortress of the Magenis family called New Castle, which was bumed by the hostile
Scots in 1643. In this plain, not far from the aforesaid castle, is situate the
parish church of Maghare-rath (Maghera); the name of the saint to whom it is
sacred, my memory does not at this moment supply. One thing I can state, that
it, as well as many other sacred places, was endowed with no inconsiderable
estates by the chiefs of the MacCartan family, who formerly enjoyed an extensive
rule in these parts, and I may add that I know not of any other nobles who
were more generous to the Church of God than the lords of that most ancient
family, for it is an acknowledged fact that they both built all the churches in the
territories of Ivechia (Iveagh) and Kinnalfagartay (Kinalarty), and endowed them
with the choicest lands.” Father MacCana ascribes too much to the MacCartans,
for many of those churches were endowed by the Magenises and other co-re-
latives of the MacCartans. The ruins of the ancient church of Maghera, of which
the western gable and the south wall remain, measure forty-five feet nine inches
in length and twenty-one feet six inches in breadth. The beautiful Norman arch
at the western entrance is in good preservation ; the windows in the south wall
are narrow and of elegant design. _A little to the N. W. is the stump of a round
tower. Only about twenty feet of it now remains, Its doorway is towards the
East, and about seven feet above the ground. Harris, speaking of the grave-
yard, says :—‘‘ Near it formerly stood an high round tower, which, about thirty
years ago, was overturned by a violent storm, and lay at length and entire on the
ground, like a huge gun, without breaking to pieces, so wonderfully hard and
binding was the cement in this work.” The round tower was, therefore, thrown
down about the year 1710 or 1712. The founder and patron saint of Maghera
was St. Donard, whose festival occurs on the 24th of March. Colgan, writing
in 1645 on St. Donard, states that in the Church of Maghera ‘‘ there are preserved.
in great veneration a bell called Zhe Glunan, which formerly belonged to this
saint, and one of his shoes enshrined in a precious covering of silver and gold.”
These sacred articles are now entirely unknown in the locality, nor is there the
slightest tradition respecting them. In the Irish * Tripartite Life of St. Patrick,”
which is now preserved in the Bodleian Collection, a translation of which has
appeared in Sister M. F. Cusack’s ‘‘ History of St. Patrick,” there occurs the
following curious legend :—‘‘ There are moreover keepers of Patrick’s people in
Erinn living still. . . . . There is another man from him in Sliabh-Slainge
—that is, Domangart, son of Eochaidh. It is he that will raise Patrick's relics a
little before the judgment. His cell is in Rath-murbhuilg, at the side of Sliabh-
Slainge. And there is always a leg (of mutton), with its accessaries, and a vessel
of ale before him every Easter, which is given to Mass people on Easter Monday
always.” The story of the leg of mutton and its accessaries may have had its
origin in the belief that plenty would attend during the year the person who
heard Mass on Easter Monday in Maghera Church, while the legend that St.
Donard is preserved alive to raise the relics of St. Patrick before the general
judgment, seems to indicate that he was at the translation of that saint’s relics
referred to in the ‘* Book of Armagh”—‘* When the church was being built over
the body, the men who were digging the ground saw fire bursting forth out of the
sepulchre, and flying back, they were afraid of the torching fire of flame.” A
statement in Harris’s ‘‘ History of the County Down,” is confirmatory of this
opinion.” He says :—“ A tradition in this neighbourhood highly celebrates the
virtues, devotion, and miracles of St. Donard, now called Donogh, or Donat,
and that by his application much money was collected for building the Cathedral
of Down.”

We have seen that St. Dounard was a bishop, and it may have been because
Maghera was a see that it enjoyed the privilege of having a round tower. There is
not preserved the name of any of St. Donard’s successors in the see, and it would
seem that at an early date it, like many other minor sees, became incorporated in the
diocese of Down, and the bishop enjoyed the ancient see lands of Maghera. Among
the possessions of the see of Down at the end of the twelfth century, which are te-
cited in a patent roll of the tower of London, as quoted by Dr. Reeves, are
**Rathmurvul along with Rathscillan,” The former is Maghera, but there is a

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-318.png ---
282 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Magherclin,® on the river Lagan, four miles and a half
north west of Dromore, in the barony of Lower Iveagh.

St. Colman, or Mocholmoc, who died 30th of March, A.D.
699, founded the monastery of Lann, or Linn, or Linn huac-
huille, in the east of Ulster.

Maralin is now a parish church in the diocess of Dromore?

4 Act. SS.,~. 792. * Visitation Book.

difficulty in identifying Rathscillan, as there is no place in that neighbourhood
known by the name; and yet, as is evident by the grouping of the names, it must
have been in the neighbourhood of Maghera, and, like Maghera, it must have been
in early times the scene ofthe piety and labours of some eminent ecclesiastic. Rath-
scillan signifies ‘‘tHe Rath of Cillan.” St. Donard had a brothe named Cillan,
whose church was somewhere in the neighbourhood. /£ngus the Culdee, in his
tract on the ‘‘ Mothers of the Saints of Ireland.” refers to Cillen (Killen) in a pas-
sage which we translate from Colgan’s Latin translation of the original Irish :—
“* Derinilla, called Cethuir-Chicheach .(#.e., of the four provinces), was the mother
of SS. Domangart (Donard), son of Eachach and Aillean, and Aidan, and Muran
of Fathen (now Fahan in Inishowen), and Mochumma of Drumbo, and Cillen of
Achadhcail, in the territory of Lecale, at the bank of the estuary of Dundrum.” In
a field in Wateresk belonging to Mr. Savage, and immediately adjoining his house,
are the remains of an ancient cemetery which once was enclosed in a rath. The
bodies were interred in graves lined with flag-stones, and a large granite stone stood
in the cemetery, but it has been rolled into a stream which bounds the field; on this
stone is inscribed a simple cross formed by the intersection of two pair of parallel
lines. Mr. Savage, whois not accountable for the barbarous removal of the incised
stone, has promised to have it rolled back to its original position. This site exactly
corresponds with that of the Church of St. Cillen, as described by Aingus the
Culdee. It is in the territory of Lecale, and it is close to the estuary of Dundrum,
while it adjoins the lands attached to the Church of Maghera, which would account
for the expression in the “ Patent Roll,” “ Rathmurvul (Maghera) along with
Rathscillan.” By the privileges recited in this ‘+ Patent Roll” the bishop was em-
Powered to create boroughs where he might think it would be advantageous, as at
irleth (Kilclief), Rathmurvul (Maghera), to be ruled by such laws and customs as
he might select. In the ‘‘ Terrier of such lands as appertaine and belonge to the
Bishoprick of Down and Connor,” a document of the date of 1615, is an entry—
“at Rathra, a/ias Matherath, four townelands, spiritualities, and temporalities.” At
the margin of this entry the name of ‘‘Jn. O'Laithlan” is entered as tenant.
This name is intended probably for O’Loughlin, and one of the townlands of
Maghera is named Ballyloughlin. In 1622 the Magenises had laid claim to the
ancient see lands of Maghera ; and the Protestant bishop complains—‘* Item the
foure ‘Townes or Magherera being ancyently known by the Bps. landes were
lately found by an Inquisition to Sr. Arthur Mognely (Magenis), and to some of his
freeholders of the which Inquisition a great part of the jurors were of the name of
Magyness.” It is not unlikely that the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Maghera_ ex-
tended over the parish of Maghera and the parishes of Kilkeel, Kilcoo, and Kil-
megan, which in later timer were under the jurisdiction of the ‘‘ Plebanus” of
Kilkeel, though the parish of Maghera was never under the spiritual care of that
dignitary, being immediately under the bishop. In the report of the Protestant
- bishop in 1622 it isdescribed “Magherah, a chappel ruynous consisting of four or five
townes very small. The Bps. Mensall, the two partes of all the Tithes belong to
ye Bp.” This was obviously the old Catholic arrangement. In the Pope Nicholas
taxation the parish of Maghera was valued at twenty shillings. ut in the
“Terrier” of 1615 the entry is “ Matherira, it is a mensal, and hath four town-
lands; it pays in proxies, 4s.; in refections 4s.; in synodals, 2s.”

39 Magheralin—See Reeves’ Eccl. Antiq., pp. 110 and 307; but observe Cassan
Linne is the river Lagan which rises in county Monaghan, and flowing through
part of I.outh, empties itself into the sea at Annaghassan, é.c., Ath-na-Gassan. How
could a Scandinavian fleet sail on the Lagan at Magheralin?


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-319.png ---
County of Down. 283

Moville ;* In the barony of the Ardes.

St. Finian, the son of Ultach, King of Ulster, was a regular
canon of St. Augustin, and abbot of Maghbille; in the year
559 he went, a youth, to Rome, and was made bishop of
Lucca, where he was buried in 595; this saint did also belong
to the abbey of Moville, in Inis-eogain,* which occasions some
doubts to which of them belong the following saints and
bishops.‘

St. Finian’s festival is celebrated on the 11th of February
and 10th of September.”

St. Beogan’s festival is held on the 27th of July.”

The festival of St. Carbreus is observed on the 3rd of
May.*

And that of St. Moelathgin on the 9th of September.”

602. Died St. Sineall, or Senell, bishop of Maghbill.#

618. Sillan, called the Master, son of Garvius, and. abbot of
Maghbill, died the 21st of October, and his festival is held on
the 25th of August.*

649. The abbot St. Cronan died on the 7th of August, this
year.

691. Died Ogrin of Maghbill, he seems to be the Same with
Odrin of Druimdresna, of the race of Hua Buachulla, formerly
a noble family of Ulster.*

Same year died Hudrenius of Maghbill.4

731. Died the abbot St. Colman, the son of Marchon.*®

738. Died the abbot St. Affiat!

742. Died, on the 3rd of April, the abbot Cuanann.®

744. Died the abbot St. Liberius.*

823. Died the abbot Flann Abhra.!

*Inisoen, * Act. SS, pp. 639, 641, and 650. %Vard., p. 158. “Jd. "1d.
¥]d. *M‘Geogh. Act. SS., p. 650. * Vard., pp. 158 and 354. p Act. SS. 17.
Vard., p. 353. °Act. SS., p. 415. 4/d., p.650. *Jd. ‘Id. 8id. *dd. ‘Td.

Moville—See Reeves’ Eccl. Antiq., p. 151.

Some portion of the ruins of the church yet remain, surrounded by the ceme-
tery, in which was an ancient gravestone, now removed for protection to a gentle-
man’s garden, on which is inscribed a cross and the words: ‘‘ Or do Dertrand”—
A prayer for Dertrand. ,

Drumkerry and Ballyhuggan, now represented by Ballyobekin and Balliggan, in
the parish of Inishargy, belonged to the Church of Rone, which was appropriate
to Movilla.

Derry ; a townland in the parish of Ballyphilip, in which stand the ruins of two
roofless chapels, the space between them being but 224 feet. The rectory, embracing
the townlands of Derry and Ballycam, was appropriate to Movilla.

Luggan Droma ; now Drumbeg parish, which is intersected by the Lagan.

Anathdalor is the paish of Killaney, called in the inquisition Killenny, alias
Anaghlone, alias Anaghdoloun. It was appropriate to Movilla.

Agallamath ; the parish of Aghagallon.

Maggeringath—In Derrymore townland, the parish of Aghagallon ; there is an
ancient cemetery and the ruins of a church called Maghernagath.

Kilturga—See Kiltonga.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-320.png ---
284 Aucient Monasteries of Ireland.

Same year the Danes destroyed the town, and all its sacred
edifices, by fire.*

853. Died A&ngus M‘Longsich, archidnach of this abbey.!

986. Died the abbot Tuathal M‘Moylcowa.™

1098. Died, in pilgrimage, the abbot Flathbertach, the son
of Tigernach."

1136. Died the abbot Gilda Christus, or Christian
O’Hechain?

1149. The town and abbey were plundered in this year.?

1170. Amlave, who had been expelled the abbey of Drogh-
eda for his many misdemeanors, was made abbot of Magh-
bill; and soon after, in conjunction with Eochadha, King of
Ulidia, and some of his people, he drove the abbot and
monks of Saul out of the abbey, which had been built by
themselves, and plundered them of their books, vestments,
and other holy furniture, with their herds, their flocks, and
all their goods whatsoever ; but this wicked action did not
pass unpunished, for on that same Thursday, in the ensuing
year, Eochadha and his followers, fell by the sword of a much
inferior enemy, and their king being desperately wounded,
was, on the Thursday after, murdered by the hands of his
own brother at Down, the place where this wicked deed was
conceived and concluded upon ;1 but these ecclesiastical his-
torians, tender of the character of the church, do not tell us
what was the fate of Amlave.

1274. Died the abbot Gille Christ Colman; in his place
the abbey elected Christianus, one of their canons without
obtaining the Royal licence; but the King, on account
of their exility, pardoned their transgression, restored their
temporalities, and granted a licence to proceed to the election
of a proper person, provided that this should not hereafter be
made use of as a precedent,’ and Christianus was successful
in his sccond election.’ James M‘Guilmore was abbot at the
time this abbey fell in the general suppression ; on the Ist
of February, 1542, he was found to be seized of seven town-
lands, both in spirituals and temporals, and all of them ad-
jacent to the said abbey, viz.:—

Ballemaville, Ballenhanlea, Ballabaga, Bellenrya, Balleharry,
Ballegromnerk ; and the two townlands of Dromkerry and
‘Ballyhuggan, in Upper Clandeboy, only in spirituals ; and a
townland and an half in the Little Ardes, called the Derry,
but in spirituals also; four townlands of Luggan Droma, in
spirituals; Anathdalor, and seven townlands in the country
of South M‘O’Neill, in this country, in spirituals only ; Agal-

* Act. SS p. 650 ‘Id. M‘Geogh. ™ M'Geogh. » Id. and Act. SS., p- 4X5.

eld. Tr Th., p. 633. Act. SS., p. 650. * Harris's Coll., vol. 1, and King,
2-345. * King, Lbid.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-321.png ---
County of Down. 285

lamath and Maggeringath, two townlands, in spirituals only ;
Kelturga, or Chapel Newton, in the Ardes, in spirituals ; and
all the tithes of the whole lands of the priory of Newton.‘

Part of the ruins of the church still remain, and the ves-
tiges of some large foundations appear in the cemetery.

Neddrum ;* Sir John de Courcey, in the year 1179, granted
to the monks of St. Bega of Coupland” the church founded
in this island, to serve God therein, together with a large
portion (two thirds) of the issues and profits and lands of
the island; he granted to them also several other lands;
and in 1194, Roger de Duneseforthe made them a large
grant, as did Brien de Eschallers, on the gth of June, A.D.
1202, in the lifetime of the founder. John, the cardinal legate,
confirmed these several grants to the prior Walrann, as also
those of many other persons.*

This abbey did not long exist, the cause of which does not
appear’ We cannot find an island of the name of Neddrum ;
but probably it may be the largest of the Copland islands.

Noendrum ,> St. Coelan was abbot of this monastery
about the year 520.2 It is now unknown.

Newry ; a long straggling town of an extensive trade,
sending two burgesses to parliament.

A Cistercian abbey was founded here to the honour of the
Virgin Mary and St. Patrick, by Maurice M‘Lochlain,
monarch of all Ireland, with the unanimous consent of the
Kings and Peers of Ulster and Ergal; from the several
bishops who were witnesses to this charter, it appears to have
been granted between the years 1148 and 1173.>

The abbot Finn, the son of Gorman, was made bishop of
Kildare, and died A.D. 1160.°

1162. The abbey library, all its effects, and the yew-tree
planted by the hands of St. Patrick, were destroyed by fire.*

1237. L was abbot, when Hugh de Lacie, Earl of
Ulster, confirmed and made additions to the grant formerly
made by M‘Lochlain?

This town was burnt to ashes by Teig O’Conor Roe and
Teig M‘Tuathal*

King. p. 345." Hist. County of Down, p. 60. “In Cumberland.  * Mon.
Angl. vol. 2, p. 1023. 7 War. Mon. * Usher. p. 494. * Newry was called by the
several names of Monasterinm Nevoracense, Fubhar-chinn, Traigh, and in the
barbarous Latin of the age, Monasterum de viridi Ligno, and in Irish it was called
NaJuar, » Harris’ Coll., p. 241. © Ann. Four Masters. ©1d. 4% War. Mss.,
vol. 34. Ann. Annon.

ae eH now Mahee island—See Dr. Reeves’ Eccl. Antiq., pp. 187, 188,

189, &e
Noendrum—See last.
% Newry—See Reeves’ Eccl. Antiq., pp. 116, 17, 118, and 119.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-322.png ---
286 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1329. Radulph was abbot before this year, when the abbot
of Mellifont paid into the Exchequer the sum of £41, being
the amount of fines for the abbots of Granard and Cashel,
and Radulph, late abbot of Newry, in which sum they were
amerced by the Sheriff of Uriel!

1335. Roger, the abbot, wasindicted by Adam Pyesson and
William Rede, for unlawfully taking and detaining an horse,
the property of the said William; on the non-appearance of
the said Roger, the Sheriff was ordered to attach him®

1373. This convent being found to be mere Irish, conversing
only with such, and spending their rents and profits in abetting
the said Irish, King Edward ITI. seized their lands, a carucate
and an half, in the county of Louth; and 2oth of February,
in this year, he granted the same, at the rent of forty shillings,
to James Bellew for life, if they should so long continue in
the King’s hands.®

1526. The abbot Glaisne, son of Hugh Magennis, was slain ;
see Downpatrick.

1543. John Prowle, the late abbot, was appointed warden,
when this house was converted into a collegiate church, at the
suit of Sir Arthur Magennis.!

College; this college consisted of a warden and vicars
choral. 28th June, 30th King Henry VIII., a confirmation of
all their possessions was granted to them, reserving only to
the crown the yearly rent of four marcs.* But in a few
years it was totally destroyed.

The abbot exercised episcopal jurisdiction over the lord-
ships of Newry and Mourne; which is still enjoyed by a
Mr. Needham, descended from Sir Nicholas Bagnal, to whom
King Edward VI. granted this abbey; the seal of his court
is a mitred abbot in his albe, sitting in a chair supported by
two yew-trees; with this inscription:—Sigillum exempte
jurisdictionis de Viridi ligno, alias Newry et Mourne.!

Inquisition, 1oth August, 3rd King Edward VI, finds that
the said warden, John Prowle, and his vicars choral, 21st May
last, had voluntarily surrendered the said college, church,
steeple, and cemetery, chapter-house, dormitory and hall, two
orchards and one garden, containing one acre, within the pre-
cincts of the college, of no value besides repairs; and of
seventy-two messuages and cottages, a carucate of land, other
wise called a ballyboe, in the townland of Newry, annual
value, besides reprises, 40s.; two salmon weirs on the river of
Glanrye, with a water mill and the customs of the market of
the town of Newry, annual value 13s. 4d. besides reprises ;

! King, p. 135. "/d., p.136. %Jd., p. 135. | War. Canob., p. 63, and Hist.
County of Down, p.9o. * Aud. Gen. ' Hist. County of Down, p. 90.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-323.png ---
County of Down. 287

three carucates in Moycarne, annual value 4os. besides reprises ;
a curucate, &c., in Cormyne, alias Enaghaynathreta, annual
value 13s. 4d. besides reprises ; a carucate in Cloghanrawyn,
annual value 13s. 4a. besides reprises; a carucate in
Dammole, annual value 13s. 4d. besides reprises; a carucate
in Aghyrnecloye, annual value 13s. 4d. besides reprises ; a ca-
rucate in Cornehoure, annual value 13s. 4@. besides reprises ;
a carucate in Cravekynnewe, annual value 13s. 4d. besides
reprises ; a carucate in Mabege, annual value 13s. 4d. besides
reprises ; twocarucatesin Lyttelcorcaghand Tylaghtyry, annual
value 26s. 8d. besides reprises; a carucate in Grenan, alias
Borenymy, annual value 13s. 4d. besides reprises ; a carucate
with a wood called Fyglassan, in Clonlea, annual value 6s. 8d.
besides reprises ; the half of a carucate in Glasdromine, near
Newry, annual value 6s. 8d. besides reprises; a carucate in the
vill of Dyrreleragh, near Ballyhovenan, annual value 13s. 4d.
besides reprises.; a carucate in Edenmore near Dyrrelecagh,
which Sir Donald’ M‘Genys lays claim to; a carucate in
Ryan, annual value 13s. 4d. besides reprises ; two carucates
in Dysart, annual value 26s. 8d. besides reprises ; a carucate
in Behanagh, annual value 13s. 4d. besides reprises ; half
a carucate in Templehigryne, annual value 6s. 8d. besides
reprises ; two carucates in Croo and Dromformott, annual
value 26s. 8d. besides reprises ; two carucates in Shepetown,
one called Athiruthyn, the other Lyssennellagh, annual
value 26s. 8d. besides reprises; two carucates in
and Savelmore, annual value 26s. 8d. besides reprises ;
a carucate in Ballytoyrremore, annual value 13s. 4d.
besides reprises; a carucate in —————, annual value
13s. 4d. besides reprises ; a carucate in Karemykallye, annual
value 13s. 4d. besides reprises; a carucate in Corkryghaghe,
annual value 13s. 4d. besides reprifes ; a carucate in Ballylekan,
annual value 13s. 4d. besides reprises ; a carucate in Castel-
lanegan, annual value 6s. 8d. besides reprises ; a carucate in
Ballesthyne, annual value 13s. 4@. besides reprises ; a carucate
in Tollaghnesowe, annual value 13s. 4d. besides reprises; a
carucate in Lisnerye, annual value 13s. 4d. besides reprises ;
two carucates in Fynor, annual value 26s. 8d. besides reprifes ;
a carucate in Ballyownley, annual value 13s. 4a. besides re-
prises ; a carucate in Grange, annual value 13s. 4d. besides re-
prises ; a carucate in Ardarre, annual value 13s. 4a. besides
reprises; a carucate in Tawnaghmoreballe, annual value 5s.
besides reprises ; a carucate in Drommynvyballe, annual value
5s. besides reprises ; a carucate in -—, annual value 5s.
besides reprises ; a carucate in Beallaghecoraghtballe, annual
value §s. besides reprises ; a carucate in Ballekerronhunaght-
balle, annual value 5s. besides reprises; and a carucate in


--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-324.png ---
288 Ancient Monasteries of Ircland.

Balleowngnaballe, annual value 5s. besides reprises. These last
six carucates are in the country of the baron of Dungannon,
and all the said lands lie in the county of Down.—Chief
Rememb. ,

By another inquisition taken 13th August in same year,
it was found that the said warden and vicars were seized of
the walls of a chapel and thirty-three dyggs of land in Ean,
near Carlingford, in the county of Louth, annual value 6s. 8d,
besides reprises ; and of the rectory of Irishgraunge in Cowley,
annual value 33s. 4a. besides reprises, and the tithes of
Newton in Cowley, annual value 4os. besides reprises ; all
in the county of Louth, and appropriated to the said warden,
&c.— Chief Rememb.

22d April, 6th King Edward VI. a grant was made to
Nicholas Bagnall of this abbey, with the appurtenances,
seventy-two messuages cottages, and a carucate of land called
a ballyboe, in Newry aforesaid; the customs of Newry and
other customs, and several carucates of land in Moyturne,
Cormyne, alias Encthnynaghreta and Lyssene, Crasue, Lur-
gen, Dirrughboy, Cloughanrawyn, Dummole, Agher, Ne-
cloghe, Cornehoure, Crebehynnew, Mabege, Lyttillcorghe and
Tyllughterey, Grenan alias Borenmygan, Fyglassan in the half
town of Clonelea, Glassecoronade near Newry, Dirrelecagh
near Ballihovcenan, Edenmore near Dirrelecagh, Ryan, Dy-
serte, Kehanughe, half town of Tupyll, Hygrin, Croo and
Dromsconet, Steptoune, Athircenyn, Lessinellethe, Savel-
more, Ballyntoyrremore, Karremykkule, Corbrighaghe, Bally-
lecan, Castellanegan, Ballyshine, Sullaughnesowe, Eysnerye,
Fynnor, Ballyowneley, Graunge, Ardurre, Tawnaghmore in
the baronies of Dougeven’s country, Drounemynbybulle, Bal-
lyclonedroughballie, Balliaghcoraghtbulli, Balliheronhyun-
ughtbully, Ballicongua, with the rectory of Newry, parcel of
the possessions of said college, the tithes of Newry, Moy-
carice, Cromyne, alias Enagheonagthreta, Lysnerrasse near
Cromyne, Lurginderraghboy, Cloghaurawyn, Damole, Agher-
necloghe, Coruehoure, Crevekynewe, Mabege, Hytowlane,
Lytelcorcagh and Tillughtyrye, Brenan, alias Borenemygan,
half town of Clonelete near Mubege and Grasdron, Dirrele-
cagh near Ballihovenaue, Desarte, Kehanaghe, Croo and
Dromfernot, Shepetowne called Athruthin and Lissenellethe,
Savelmore, Ballyntorremore, Carrickmicstall, Corkreugh, Bal-
lilecan, half town of Castellanagan, Ballyshin, Tullaghnesowre,
Lysnery, Ballyownley, Granuge and Ardarre in the county of
Down, with the tithes of Newtone, in Cowley, in the county
of Louth, parcel of the said college, to hold the same for
ever in capite, without rent.—Chief Rememb.

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-327.png ---
County of Down. ; 289

Newtown ;* in the barony of Ardes, is a market and a
borough ; Walter de Burgh, Earl of Ulster, founded a monas-
tery here in honour of St. Columb,™ for Dominican friars,
A.D. 1244.7

1298 and 1312. Provincial chapters of the order were held
here.®

Patrick O’Doran, the last prior, voluntarily surrendered the
priory Ist of February, 32nd King Henry VIII., being then
seized of the same, and of the townlands of Newtown, Kil-
cowmon, and Bearnes, all in this county; annual value
135. 3a?

There are some remains of this monastery still to be
seen.4 .

Saul ;* In the barony of Lecale. St. Patrick founded an
abbey here for Canons Regular, and made his disciple, St.
Dunnius, or Modunn, abbot of it; the patron day is the 29th

™ Bourke, p. 242. ™Zd. Ann. Dom. de Trim. King, 87. ° War. Mon.
» Chief Rememb. % Bp. Pococke's Journal. * Called in Latin Saballum, in Irish
Sgibolphadraig, i.e, Patrick's Barn.

87 Newtown.--Newtownards priory was frequently called Villa Nova. To it
was appropriated the rectory of Newtown, valued in the Taxation of Pope
Nicholas at 14 Marks.

The priory chapel was converted intoa Protestant church by thé first Lord Mont-
gomery. It afterwards was used for a courthouse, but it is now abandoned to
ruin. The Dominicans, after they were forced to abandon Newtownards, found
a “ Locus Refugii” in the townland of Burren, in the parish of Kilcoo, but at a
somewhat later period the Dominicans of Burren moved off to the neighbouring
townland of Moneyscalp, where they occupied a cabin, the site of which is to this
day shown in the garden of Widow Mullan, who pointed out tothe writer the stone
that was their door-step and the stone that served them for an altar when their con-
gregation would be too large to find accommodation within their humble dwelling.
Here they were visited in 1751 by Dr. Thomas de Burgo, who, in his “ Hibernia
Dominicana,” says :—‘‘’The members of this convent, in the year 1756, are—
R. Father Preacher-General, Brother John Gribben, Prior, in the 54th year of
his age, and the 27th of his profession ; Father Brother Heber Magennis, Sub-
Prior, in the 49th year of his age, and the 24th of his profession; and Father
Brother James Hillon, Procurator, in the 53rd year of his age, and the 2oth of
his profession.” The writer was told by an old man, the nearest neighbour of Widow

~ Mullan, that the friars were forced to leave Moneyscalp because the landlords
(middlemen under the Downshire family), John and Felix O’Neill, who lived at
Banvale, near Hilltown, and their brother Hugh, who resided at Ardilea, near
Clough, had raised the rent of their little farm so high that they could not pay
it. In 1766 Friar Gribben was residing in the parish of Kilcoo. He died in
the house of a namesake and relative of his in Wateresk. Friar Hillan was
curate in 1766 to Dr. Macartan, in Downpatrick, He afterwards was curate in
Bright, where he died in the townland of Ballyvastin, and was buried in Ross-
glass. The writer has not been able to discover anything about Friar Magennis.
With these the Convent of Villa Nova (Newtownards) may be said to have become
defunct. There were, however, after their times, Friars Rice and Burns, who
assumed the name and garb, but they no longer lived in community, and the discip-
line of Villa Nova was gone.

38 Saud.—The “ Terrier” returns “the Abbey of Saule” as bound to pay the bishop
‘*in proxies, 3 marks; in refections, 3 marks ; and in synodals, 2s.” By aninqui-
sition taken at Downpatrick, April gth, 1622, it appears that Thomas Cromwell, Earl
of Ardglass, had been seized of the site and precincts of the late monastery of

vu

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-328.png ---
290 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

of May.* The founder died here the 17th of March, A.D. 493,
in his 120th year, and was interred with great solemnity at
Downpatrick.*

1011. Kennfailad of Saul, bishop, anachorite, and pilgrim,
died of the plague at Armagh." .

Malachy O’Morgair, whilst bishop of Down, rebuilt this
abbey with stone.” See under “ AMoville,” how this abbey
was treated by the abbot of Moville and the King of Ulidia.

1175. The son of the abbot of Moville was abbot of Saul,
and died in this year.* _P———,, the abbot, was a subscribing
witness to Sir John de Courcey’s charter to the- abbey of St.
Patrick in Downpatrick.

1273. ———Molys, prior of Bangor, was elected abbot;
but not having obtained the royal license, Galfrid de Stocks,
canon of Carleon, was appointed abbot by the bishop of Down,
with the consent of government.” :

* Usher, p. 453, and Tr. Th., p. 265. * Ann. Four Masters. © Tr. Th., p. 298.
~ War. Mon. * Ann. Annon. ¥ Prynne, vol. 3, p. 130.

Saul, and of two ruined castles and a garden within the said site, together with two
castles and three towns called ‘‘ Merrytowne and Ballysugah (Merrytown is an
attempted translation of the Irish name Ballysugah—sugach, merry), Ballymote,
Carrowvanny, Ballintlieve, Killyneeny, and 20s. per an. of head rent out of
Castlemoghan, Ballylenagh, and Carrintaggart.” Harris describes the state of the
castles of Saul in histime. A large portion of the castles of Saul was taken down
for the material at the erection of the Protestant church in 1770, and nearly all the
remains of the old church were removed at the same time. In the graveyard are
two ancient buildings, which are precisely in the same state as described by Harris
one hundred and thirty years ago :—‘‘ There are here two small vaulted rooms of
stone yet entire, about seven feet high, six feet long, and two feet and a half broad,
with a small window placed in one side. Perhaps these small chambers were
confessionals, or places of private devotion. One of them is now closed up and
used by some families for a tomb. the churchyard being a great burial place for the
natives.” These little vaults very much resemble the saints’ tombs at Bannagher,
Boveragh, and Tamlaghtard, in the diocese of Derry. Father MacCana describes
one of them as ‘‘a diminutive little chapel, in which St. Patrick is reported to
have passed the night in watching and prayer.”

Last year acemetery, which evidently was a portion of the ancient cemetery,
was discovered under the avenue, immediately outside the churchyard. The graves
were lined and covered with thin flag-stones, and each grave contained a number -
of small sea pebbles—round and white—which may have been used for beads (see
anote in Butler’s ‘‘ Lives of the Saints,” at Rosary Sunday) ; similar pebbles
have been found in other ancient graves in Derry, in the Ards, and in an ancient
cemetery in the townland of Ballynacraig, in the parish of Inch (see, “Sculptured
Stones of Scotland,” vol. ii.)

The seal of the abbey of Saul is attached to a petition preserved in the Chapter
House, Westminster. On the seal is inscribed ‘““S. commune capituli Sancti
Patricii de Saballo." The abbot, vested as a priest, sits in a rich chair, holding a
cross in his left hand, and raises his right hand, as in the act of giving benediction.
The lower compartment of the seal exhibits a bishop—probably St. Patrick—
holding a crozier.

A brass seal, which was found in the yard of the cathedral, Downpatrick, is pre-
served in the Belfast Museum. The inscription on it is “S. Fratris Johanis,
Abbatis de Saballo.” The abbot is represented fully vested asa priest ; he holds a
book in his left hand and a crozier in his right. The seal seems to belong to
the fifteenth century. -

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-329.png ---
County of Down. 291

1276. G——— was elected abbot.*

1296. 29th September, the King granted a license to this
convent, to re-purchase all such lands and tenements as they
had formerly possessed, but which had been alienated by the
predecessors of the abbot.*

1316. This abbey was plundered by Edward Bruce.»

1380. It was enacted that no mere Irishman should profess
himself here.* . :

1526. The abbot Glaisne, son of Hugh Magennis, was slain;
see Downpatrick.

This abbey, with two castles, a garden within the site there-
of, and three carucates in’Saul and Meritowne, alias Ballison-
nagh, were granted to Gerald Earl of Kildare ; see Lismullen,
in county of Meath.

Of this monastery large ruins still remain; there are yet
entire two vaulted rooms of stone, about seven feet high, six
long, and two and an half broad, with a small window in one side.

Sheve Donard,;® an high mountain in the barony of Upper
Iveagh.

St. Domangart, a disciple of St. Patrick, founded a noble
monastery at the foot of this mountain ; his festival is on the
4th of March. Yet the patron day seems to be July the 25th,
when the Roman Catholicks climb up the mountain to per-
form their penance.

Tamlachta Umhail near Lough Blisklau,* in the barony
of Iveagh.

"King, p. 191. * Prynne, vol. 3, p. 688. » Pembridge Ann. © King, p. 93.

1
4 Called in ancient times, Lough Brecreann or Bricirne.

Ina letter, dated Castlewellan, April 23rd, 1834, Dr.Q’ Donovan thus describes
the remains of the hermitage of St. Donard, or Domangart, perched on the high
mountain which still bears his name :—“ There are two circular cairns upon its
(Slieve Donard’s) summit, one to the N.E., the other tothe S.W. The form of
that to the N.E. is now much destroyed, and the well, which my guide informed
me, was springing in the centre of it, is filled with stones. This, he says, was done~
by sappers. If it were they who filled this, they seemed to have had very little to
do, but my opinion is, that it was done by some devout visitor, who thought that it
was his duty to destroy every vestige of superstition, The cairn to the S.W. is
much more perfect, but it is destroyed in a great measure to erect the Trigono-
metrical Station, which, in the course of ages, may puzzle antiquarians to discover
its scientific use. The well in this cairn is now dried up, and I scarcely believe
that it ever contained spring water. To the E. of the well is a stone which, to me,
appears to have been used by the Saint as an altar; and it would also appear
probable that he had roofed’this cairn and used it as a little chapel. This con-
Jecture is corroborated by the fact that Sir William Petty called it a chapel, and
Colgan a church. I am also of opinion that this cairn had been used as a Druidi-
cal place of worship, and that the hermit took advantage of the pile (as the sappers
have of the chapel) to form a little house and ‘a place of worship for himself and
his visitors.” —See Letters of Dr. O’Donovan to the Ordnance Survey Office. The
monastery at the foot of the mountain was at Maghera.

4\ Tamlachta Umhail seems to have been one of the ancient designations for a
church, which stood in the townland of Drumsallagh, a little to the west of the lake

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-330.png ---
292 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

There was an ancient abbey here, wherein the feasts of the
three Saints Nassad, Beoan, and Mellan, who flourished about
the middle of the seventh century, were observed on the 26th
of October.®

It is now unknown.

Teghdagobha ;** this abbey, which is now unknown, is said
to have been in the barony of Iveagh, on the river Bann; it
was founded by St. Gobhan, said to be the father of 1000
monks in this monastery ; although others say that his abbey
was at Killamery,' in the county of Kilkenny, and that he
was buried at Clonenagh,* in the Queen’s county ; there were
seven saints of this name.4

Toberglory ;* Sir John de Courcey founded an abbey to
the honour of St. Thomas the martyr near this well, which

* Act. SS., p. 90. * Called anciently, Killamhrindhe. % Called in ancient times,
Cluain Ednech. © Act. SS., pp. 92 and 750.

of Loughbrickland. It is thus noticed by the ancient gloss on the names Nasad,
Beon, and Meldan, in the Martyrology of Angus, at the 26th of October :—‘é.e.,
three saints from Britain, and are [interred] in one church, #.¢.,, Tamlacht Menand,
at Loch Bricrenn in Iveagh, in Ulidia.” The Calendar of the Four Masters
mentions only two names :—‘‘ Beoan, bishop, and Mellan of Tamlacht Menan, on
Loch Bricrenn.” These two persons are mentioned in the Life of St. Fursaeus
(Acta SS., p. 79, col 2), as concerned in an occurrence which the Annals of Ulster
refer to the year 626, and are noticed by Bede as “ Olim sacerdotali gradu potiti.”
—(4.E., iii., 19). A trace of the name Tamlaght Menan is preserved in the town-
land Meenan, which is situated in the southern part of the parish. The church is
also noticed by the Martyrology of Tamlaght, which differs from the gloss on AEngus
only in calling the spot Tamlacht Umhuil (77ias 7%., p. 378; Acta SS., pp. 90-
271). During the time that Bishop Percy presided over this See, the discovery of
an antique golden ornament (which, from M. Dubourdien’s description, appears
to have been a torque) in the townland Drumsallagh, gave rice to an examination
into the ecclesiastical history of the neighbourhood ; and it was found by Dr. Shiel,
the Vicar-General, that in the same townland ‘‘there had formerly been a monastery
of the Order of St. Francis ; that after the dissolution of the religious houses in
Ireland there remained several mendicant friars who still housed round the ruins
of their monastery, which was situated about two hundred yards from the old
church of Aghaderig, in the same townland ; the ruins of the church remain until
this day, but most of the ruins of the monastery, with its choicest stones, were
removed about an English mile, to the place where the church now stands. Dr.
Shiel found, upon further inquiry, from an old man, whose name was Fegan, and
above ninety years of age, that he remembered the walls of this building standing
to the height of three or four feet, and about ninety feet in length, but that above
forty years ago they had been removed to make room for a bleach green.”—
Daubourdien, Stat, Surv. See Reeves Eccl. Antig.

43 Teghdagobha ( 7¢ach-da-gobha), “ house of the two smiths,” was written, in
the fifteenth century, Teachgowo, Teachghawa ; in the following century the name
assumed, or at least approximated to the modern form Seagoe-Suidhe Gobha, “the
seat of Gobha,” from St. Gobhan, of whom the Calendar of Cashel, as cited by
Colgan, thus speaks :—“S. Gobanus de Kill-lamruidhe (now Killamery, in the
county Kilkenny), juxta montem Sliabh-na-nbhan-bfionn dictum : vel Gobanus de
Teg-da-goba ad ripam Bannii fluminis in Ibh-echach (the Bannin Iveagh), regione
Ultonie.”—See Reeves’ Eccl. Antig.

© Zoberglory.—Close to the wall which surrounds the county hospital in Down-
patrick, is an ancient well, called St. Dillon’s well ; and on the opposite side of the

--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-331.png ---
County of Dublin 293

adjoins the town of Downpatrick, between two roads, the one
leading to Crems, and the other to the Grange of Saul; he
gave it to the regular canons of the church of the Virgin
Mary at Carlisle, and endowed it with three carucates of land
adjacent thereto, together with all the lands, meadows, pas-
tures, mills, and other aisements thereunto belonging, a bur-
gage within the town of Down, and all the tithes of his house,
and house expenses and demesnes. King Edward II. con-

firmed this grant!
1 Mon. Angl.—Vol.ii., p. 1046.

road is a triangular field, bounded on one side by a bog, and on the other by two
roads, which lead respectively to Killyvees (Crems) and to Saul Quarter (the
Grange of Saul) : here human bones have been found in great quantities. This is
supposed to have been the site of the priory of St. Thomas the Martyr.—See
Papers on Down and Connor, by Rev. J. O’Laverty, P.P.

COUNTY OF DUBLIN.

Baldongan;* in the barony of Balruddery, and in the country
of Fingall.?

The Knights Templars, according to some writers, had an
house here dedicated to the Virgin Mary.*

The castle of Baldongan is about two miles from the sea,
and is boldly and conspicuously situated on a rising ground,
commanding an extensive prospect of the circumjacent
country. It consists, on the west end, of two large square
towers, with a parapet in front covering a passage between
each ; from these towers a regular building is carried on each
side, but narrower, to which a similar tower is joined at the
north east angle, but at the south east angle is only a smaller
tower, in which are the stairs leading to the battlements, and
on the front are the arms of the Lords of Howth.

® Sones's Life of St. Patrick.

1 Baldongan, or Ballindungan, i.e, V&ile én Odmzm. An ancient rath
or moat occupied the site of the ruined castle and church ; hence the name, the site
of the fortress or dungeon. The buildings referred to by Archdall are now in a very
ruinous state; some of the side walls of the castle are utterly destroyed. This castle
was defended by Col. Fitzwilliam for the Parliamentarians in 1641, but surrendered
to the Royalists, by whom it was dismantled. Within the last half century it has
been reduced to its present ruinous condition.

3Fingall (Fine Gaill), the territory of the foreigners, so called from the numerous
Danish settlements effected there in the ninth and tenth centuries, from A.D. 795,‘'for
the space of eight score and ten years.”—(W.G.G. p. clxxi., n. 3). Its northern
boundary is the River Delvin (Ailbhine). It extended southwards to the River
Tolca to Cnoc-Moel-Doid, west of Finglas. The locality called Shan-Magh-n-
alta-Edair formed the southern portion of Magh Breagh. The ancient name of
Fingall, conterminous with the northern part of the county Dublin, was Magh
Muiredha—(Annals, Four Masters, A.D. 460, Reeves’ Adamnan, p. 108). It

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-007.png ---
54
52

MONASTICON HIBERNICUM 7
\ on /

A HISTORY

ABBEYS, PRIORIES, AND OTHER RELIGIOUS HOUSES
IN IRELAND;

INTERSPERSED WITH

Memoirs of their several Founders and Benefactors, and of their
Sbbots and other Superiors,

TO THE TIME OF THEIR FINAL SUPPRESSION.

LIKEWISE

AN ACCOUNT OF THE MANNER IN WHICH THE POSSESSIONS BELQMGING TO THOSE
FOUNDATIONS WERE DISPOSED OF, AND THE PRESENT STATE OF THEIR RUINS,

COLLECTED FROM

English, Irish, and Foreign Historians, Records, and other Authentic Documents,
and from many Curious and Valuable Manuscripts. °
WITH

ENGRAVINGS IN GOLD AND COLORS OF THE SEVERAL RELIGIOUS
AND MILITARY ORDERS,

And aps and Views Fllusirating the Pistory.

B

YY
MERVYN ARCHDALL, AM,
Member of the Royal Irish Academy, and Chaplain to the Right Hon. Francis-Pierpoint Lord Conyngham.

Evited, with Extensibe Hotes,
By THE RiGHT Rev. PATRICK F. MORAN, D.D., Lorp BisHop oF Ossory,
AND OTHER DISTINGUISHED ANTIQUARIANS.

THREE VOLUMES.—VOL. II.

DUBLIN: 5
W. B. KELLY, 8, GRAFTON-STREET, ann 4, LOWER ORMOND.QUAY.

\ 87°)

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-009.png ---
CONTENTS OF VOL. II.

PAGE.

* City and County of Dublin te oe oe oo +. TPto 145
County Fermanagh 00 oO Oo og OC Ee 146
» Galway .. Do a ag Oc 50 ee 170

» Kildare .. 50 00 oo 00 60 Ob 248

» Kilkenny .. os o Go ee oe on jor

ist of Plans and Jllustrations

Accompanying Monasticon, Vol. II.

YGround Plan of the Precincts of St. Patrick’s Cathedral, Dublin, showing the
extent of the Dean's Liberty.

vThe Monument of Dean Sutton.
YThe Monument of Dean Fyche.
‘Portrait of Archbishop King.
~ Ground Plan of the Cathedral Church of the Holy Trinity, Dublin, &c.
y St. Doulough’s Church, County Dublin.
v Devenish Isle, County Fermanagh.
“vTuam Abbey, County Galway.
y Howth Abbey, County Dublin.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-171.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 147

Clinish = An island in Lough-Earn, three miles south of
Enniskillen. St. Synell, son of Manacus, or Maynacur, was
abbot of Cluain Inis about the middle of the sixth century ;
his feast is held 11th of October. St. Fintan dwelt with this
saint upwards of eighteen years.°

Cleenishe is now a parish church in the diocese of Clogher.4

° Usher, p. 485, and Calendar.  Bps. Visitation Book.

ariaght aforesaid ; the half ballibetagh of Ballihanulty, the four quarters and a half
of Derrimoielan ; one quarter of Caricke, the half quarter of Enishmore; and that
over and besides the said lands, there were-five quarters called Brade, in the count:
of Tyrone, theretofore parcel of the said parish ; and that in said parish was both
a parson and vicar colative, and the whole tithes of the said parish (except the
tithes of Farrenarioght and Ballivarrall) were paid in kind. and the parish church
repaired in such manner as the tithes were paid, and the church repaired in the
parish of Maghericoolemanny ; and that the said parson and vicar paid yearly to
the Bishop of Clogher, viz.: the parson 8s., and the vicar 4s.; and it was also
found that in said parish one chapel called Magherinecrosse, in Farrenerioght, with
two small tates of land, the duoghasa whereof paid thereout yearly unto the said
bishop 35. 4d. per annum, and that there was a vicar endowed with care of souls ;
and that one-fourth part of the tithes of Ballivarroll and Farrenarioght were paid
to the said vicar, another fourth to the Bishop of Clogher, and the other two fourths
to the parson of Derrimoyllan, and that the bishop’s proxies out of said chapel was
2s. per annum, ;

The chapelry of Magherinecrosse, whereof the Clan McRoony were corbes, has
been long since erected into a civil parish, lying in the baronies of Lurg and Tir-
kennedy, county Fermanagh, and East Omagh, county Tyrone.

The Duoghasa mentioned in the foregoing Inquisition would seem to have been
a sub-collector of tribute under the corbe, derived from dubhchios, signifying tribute,
or black rent, as explained in O’ Reilly's Dictionary.

In 1704 the Rev. Philip McGwyre, residing at Boyoghill, was parish priest of
pag Ales and Derrybrosk, being then fifty-six years old, and had received orders
in November, 1671, in Dublin, from Dr. Oliver Plunket, Primate of Ireland.

® Clinish, now Cleenish, a corruption of the original name Claen-inis, or Cleen-
inish, which, as Joyce informs us, means ‘‘the slopingisland.” The Martyrology
of Donegal has at 12th November—“ Sinell, son of Mianach (or Moenach), of
Claoin-inis, in Loch Eirne.” St. Sinell was a disciple of St. Finnian of Clonard,
and founded the Monastery of Claein-inis about the year 550. It was here that
the great missionary, St. Columbanus, first applied himself to sacred studies ; and
before he quitted this monastery he composed his Commentary on the Psalms,
which affords abundant proof that the Greek and Hebrew languages were pro-
foundly studied by the disciples of St. Sinell. Another illustrious ornament of
Cleenish was St. Fintan Munnu, who, towards the close of the 6th century, passed
sixteen years in the paths of sanctity on this island.

The survey of County Fermanagh (Ulst. Ing. xxxiv.) has, under the barony
of Clynawley, among the spiritual lands :—

“The parish church of Cloaninis hath five quarters of land : it is by
Sleught Laughlin Maguire as corbes. The chappell of Temple Anaaiffrin hath two
tates of land: it is possessed by Clangillilaisn as corbes; all these lands are like-
wise small measure.”

In the margin is printed :—‘‘We find these said lands belonging to these
churches to be hospital or termon land, and that the king’s majesty is justly entitled
thereunto by Act of Parliament within this realm, in the 33rd thal of King Henry
VIIL, of famous memory, and that the same are now actually and ly in his
majesty’s rightful possession.”

‘emple Anaaiffrin, now Templenaffrin, signifying ‘‘the tempie or church of the
pees is now the name of a townland containing 1592. 2r. 369. in the parish of
lenish.

By an Inquisition taken at Enniskillen 18th September, 1609, it was found “ that

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-172.png ---
148 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Derough > There was a corbeship here, which was in the
nature of a collegiate church ; and Archbishop Usher tells
us, that a corbeship was subject to the visitation of the bishop,
and sometimes also was sequestered by him in like manner as
other ecclesiastical places were. This corbeship, with its
possessions, was vested in the crown on the general suppression
of religious houses *

© Sir Fohn Davis's Letter to the Earl of Salisbury. Collectanea, No. 2,
PP. 156, 190.
in the barony of Clanawlie was the parish of Clenys, the parish church whereof
stood in the island of Clenys, in which parish was both a parson and viccar colla-
tive, that the tithes were paid in kind, one-fourth part to the Bishop of Clogher,
another fourth part to the viccar, and the other two fourth parts to the parson, the
parish church to be repaired by the parson and vicar, bearing one-third part, and
the herenagh the other two-third parts. And it was also found that in the said
parish were three acres of glebe, or thereabouts, belonging to the viccarage of
Clenys ; and that the said parson paid unto the Bishop of Clogher yerelie proxies,
8s., and the viccar 4s. ; and that the bounds of said parish were as followeth, viz. :
it extends unto the half-barony of Tircannada, and boundeth upon Lough M‘Kealie;
on the north and north-east upon the bog of Eskenanawde, in the barony of
Magheristeffanagh ; and on the south upon the river of Bealaghinmlagh, within
the said barony of Clonawlie ; and on the west, to the hill of Dromboy, ia the
same barony.”

The Annals of the Four Masters make the following references to this island :—

A.D. 1394. Mathew MacGilla-Coisgle, Vicar of Claoin-inis, died.

1423. Maurice, the son of Matthew, son of Osgar Maguire, Archdeacon of
Clogher, Parson of Aghalurcher, and Lord of Claoin-inis, died on the 6th of the
Calends of May.

1450. Pierce Maguire, Bishop of Clogher, died at Cleenish, and was interred at
Lisgool. :

1489. Brian O’Corcran, Vicar of Cleenish,a 1d Denis MacGilla-Coisgle, Erenagh
and Vicar of Derrybrusk, died.

1495. John Maguire, the son of Pierce, son of Maurice, Parson of Doire-Maelain
[Derryvullan] and Erenagh of Cleenish, who kept a house of general hospitality,
and the Parson O'Elay (Patrick) died.

1515. James, the son of Thomas Roe, son of the Abbot Maguire, was slain by
Maguire, the Coarb, on the land of Cleenish. Gilla-Patrick O’Hultachain, Parson
of Achadh-beithe (Aghavea in the same county), died the same year.

1518. Hugh, the son of Rossa, son of Thomas Oge Maguire, Canon Chorister
at Clogher, Parson of Aghalurcher and Parson of Cleenish, in Lough Ere, a hos-
pitable and cheerful man, and learned ecclesiastic, died.

1524. Ross, son of Rory, son of Thomas Oge Maguire, was drowned in the
port of Cleenish, after having carried off a prey from the son of Maguire, i.¢.,
Gilla-Patrick, the son of Conor. 7

In 1704 the Rev. Charles Scolloge, aged 58, residing at Mullaghdon. where
there is now a Catholic chapel of ease, was parish priest of Clenish, having re-
ceived holy orders, May, 1670. in Dublin, from the martyred Primate, Oliver Plunket.

® Derough.—Sir John Davies, whom Archdall gives as his authority for this
corbeship, merely states that it was in the County of Fermanagh, but affords no
clue to its precise locality, nor does the name appear in the Fermanagh Inquisi-
tions published by the Record Commissioners. It seems. however, to have been
one of the two Dooras, near Edernagh, in the present civil parish of Drumkeeran,
formerly part of the ecclesiastical parish of Magheraculmoney and barony of Lure
granted, with other lands, to Thomas Blennerhasset_by James I. ; and in whicl
parish there was, in that king’s reign, the chapel of Ballioconnell, having one tate
of land, whereof O'Connelly was Herenagh, paying to the Bishop of Clogher
2s. 8d. yearly ; the name, however, has disappeared from the Ordnance Survey of
Fermanagh.

in the above named parish of Magheracoolmoney, on two islands lying near


--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-173.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 149

Devenish ;* An island in Lough-Earn, and one mile and an
half N.W. of Enniskillen.

Regular Canons ; St. Laserian, called also Molaisse, built a
celebrated monastery, under the invocation of the Virgin Mary,

in Daimh-inis, ie. the Ox’s Island. St. Laserian died
September 12th, A.D. 563, and was succeeded by St. Natalis,
son of AEngusius, King of Connaught ; he was also abbot of
Inbernaile, in the County of Donegall, and of Kilnaille in
Breffinia.&

! Usher, p. 498. Act. SS. p.192. © Act. SS. p. 169.

each other in the lake, as also on the neighbouring mainland, are the remains of
remarkable ecclesiastical buildings*-‘One of these islands. called White Island,
contains an old graveyard and the ruins of a church, whilst on Davy’s Island, to
the south, otherwise Inishmore, are the remains of an abbey. Opposite to White
Island, on the mainland, lies the townland of Drumbarna, supposed to be identical
with Drumbarr, commemorated in our Calendars in connexion with the festival of
the ‘* Sons of Ailill.” Here, also in the deerpark attached to the residence of the
Archdall family, are remains of some monastic buildings. The portion of the
townland of Drumbarna extending towards White Island (like so many similar
promontories all along Lough Erne) is locally known by the common Fermanagh
designation of *‘the derry.” Could Derough be merely another form of this word,
so frequent asa place-name on the shores “f the Erne? And if so, could our
author, under the present Derough, have referred to some of the above group of
religious foundations ?

* The Afartyrology of Donegal gives the following notice of St. Molaise on the
12th of September :—* Molaissi, son of Nadfraech, Abbot of Devenish. He was
of the race of Irial, son of Conall Cormach. Monua was the name of his mother,
according to his own Life, chapter fifth. On a certain time as he and his monks
were taking their scanty meal, the refectory took fire and the monks rose up
suddenly to fly from the house. He requested of them to remain, to go on their
knees, and to make prayer ; and he himself did the same, and he reached forth
his hand to the fire, and the ridge-pole of the house fell in, and the fire did them
no further injury than that ; then he permitted the monks to rise from their posture
of prayer. Cuimin, otf Coindeire, states in the poem which begins ‘ Patrick of the
fort of Macha,’ &c., that Molaiss loved to be in a stone prison, and also to keep
a house of hospitality for every one in Erin. Thus he says :—

“** Molaissi, of the lake, loves
To be in a prison of hard stone,
To have a guest-house for the men of Erin,
Without refusal, without a particle of churlishness.’

“The Life of Ciaran of Clonmacnotse states that the order of Molaissi was one
of the eight orders that were in Erin ; but perhaps it speaks of some other saint of
the same name. After completing thirty years, he went to heaven, A.D. 563.
On the 15th of this same month (September) is celebrated the festival and holiday
of Molaissein his own parish and termon at Bealach Mi-Michein, as Brother
Michein testifies.” So far for the Martyrology of Donegal. In the notes is added
the following extract from an ancient office for St. Molaise, who is also called
Laserian, or Lasrean :—“ Antiphona communis. Vir Dei, dum verbum vitae
populo, praedicaret, visus est a terra paululum sublimari, et in aere pendere, et
mirati sunt universi. Oratio. Adesto nobis quaesumus Domine ut beati Lasreani
confessoris tui atque abbatis interventu ab omni inquinatione mundemur mentis
et corporis, per Christum Dominum nostrum.”

The death of St. Molaise, founder of the Monastery of Devenish, is entered in the
Annals of Ulster and of the Four Masters, in 563; and in the Chronicon Scotorum
in 564. There is, however, a second entry in the Annals of Ulster, at the year
571, from which it appears that some ancient authorities referred his demise to

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-174.png ---
150 Ancient Monasterics of Ireland.

658. Sillan, bishop of Daivinis, died May 17th.*

746. Died Keledulaffius of Daminis.'

822. The Danes plundered this island, and spared not the
abbey.*

834. They repeated their devastations.'

867. Died the learned Martin; he was a scribe of this
abbey.

868. Died Moyledor, anchorite and scribe."

894. Died Fogartach, another scribe.°

917. Died the abbot St. Queran.?

961. The island was again plundered this year.9

995. Died the abbot Cormac Hua Congaile."

1025. Died Christian, the professor of this abbey.*

1157. In this year we find that the abbey, although not
wholly consumed, was much hurt by fire.t

1360. It also suffered much from fire this year."

» Act. SS. index. ‘Id. “Ann. Munst. ' MGeogh. ™ Tr. Th. p. 632.
= M-Geogh. _° Tr. Th. index. ° M'Geogh. Tr. Th. p. 633. Act. SS.
p- 360. * Tr. Th. p. 632. * Id. p. 633. “dd.

that year. His name appears in all our Martyrologies on 12th September. and
his monastery was regarded as one of the most famous in the kingdom. The
Feliré of St. Aengus, in the Leashar Breac, gives the following quatrain as com-
posed by St. Molaise in praise of Devenish :—

“ Good is the discovery we have made ;
A broad lake with mountain and field—
A general cemetery for the Gaedhil ;
The rightful residence of God the Father.”

In the Royal Irish Academy there is a transcript of a very ancient Irish Life
of our saint, from which we take the following particulars :—He was seventh in
descent from Crund Badrai, King of Uladh, by whom Muiredhach Tireach, King
of Ireland, was slain. St. Molaise’s mother is called Monoa, or Monollain. She
was daughter of Midhloca of the Corca-Raidhe (a tribe seated in the barony of
Corkaree, county Westmeath) who was descended from the regal stock of Tara
and of Cashel. The following is the account of the saint’s birth:—‘‘Molaise’s mother
saw a vision in the night, viz., that she had found seven sweet apples, and the last
of them which she took in her hand, she could not hold it on account of its bulk,
and it seemed to her that gold was not more beautiful than this apple. She told
her vision to her husband. ‘I understand it,’ he replied.; ‘ you will bring forth an
illustrious son, who will excel ail his contemporaries.’ In the meantime, the period
of her travail came, and a druid said to her : ‘If the birth of your child is delayed
till after sunrise to-morrow, he shall be an illustrious, dignified, miraculous, truly
righteous, and truly noble man ; and the son whom thou wilt bring forth will be
a man of blessing and salvation to the western world.’ The true God detained the
infant in Monoa’s womb until.she brought him forth at Airiud-Bhairr, upon the
flagstone, after sunrise on the morrow. And he was brought to Bishop
Eochaidh, who baptized and blessed him, and it was this bishop that conferred the
first orders on him afterwards.” From his earliest years, the grace of the Holy
Ghost shone forth in him, and he often spoke the praises of God. As he grew up,
he was remarkable for his charity, bestowing even his meals on the poor for the
love of his Creator ; he fasted most ri idly, and so great were the austerities of his
Penitential life, that “ his body was reduced to mere skin and bone.” The sons of

eclan visiting him, he besought them to write a Soscel,ie., a copy of the Gospels
for him. They did so, and completed the whole Gospels in two days, the light

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-175.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 151

1449. Bartholomew O’Flannagan was prior ; and same year
the church was built.

1462. Died the prior O’Flannagan.”

This abbey was a large and curious building, and the work-
manship remarkably good ; to the east of it stands a beautiful
round tower, 76 feet high and 41 in circumference ; the walls,
which are 3 feet thick, are built of hewn stone, each stone
about a foot square, within and without, and with scarcely any
cement or mortar ; the roof is in the form of a cone, and of
the same materials, and finished with one large stone, shaped
like a bell ; with four windows (and the form of a man’s face
over each) near the top, and opposite to the cardinal points ;

w Annals Four Masters.

during the night being as bright as the day. He proceeded to Clonard, “like the
other Apostles of Erin,” to learn the Gospel under the guidance of St. Finnian; and
when he returned thence, St. Finnian accompanied him, and remained a year with
him in Devenish. The men of Erin attributed to Molaise’s prayers that they
were freed from the plague called the Buidhe Conall, and on that account offered
many gifts and tributes to him. Among the latter were “ a screpall from
every Bouse having three in family ; a cow from every king of a tricha-ced; a
steed from every provincial king 5 and the horse and battle-dress from the King
of Erin; these to be paid every Lughussadh (é., the rst of August) to Molaise.
Travelling one time in Crich-Cairpre, he, by his prayers, and by giving blessed
water to drink, obtained the happy birth of Bishop Finnchadh of Cill-Earga, who
was the fifth successor of St. Mulaise.

Conall Derg, son of Damhin, was king of the territory in which Devenish is
situated, and at the instigation of the Druids, resolved to expel the saint from his
tranquil retreat. Proceeding towards Devenish, the feet of his horses became
immovable at Omhna-gabhtha, which place thence derived its name. Moved by
this and other miracles, the King made a gift of the island to Molaise. From
another local king he received Drmcleathchoir, our saint having performed
a remarkable miracle there. He visited King Aedh at Magh-Caim and received
from him also a gift of territory.

Having acquired great fame throughout Ireland for sanctity and miracles,
St. Molaise resolved to go to Rome, there to perfect himself more and more in the

aths of holiness, and “ that he might bring over some of its clay and Relics to
Erin.” He proceeded first to Ferns to visit his bosom friend, St. Aidan, and
with him entered into the closest spiritual covenant. [See many particulars
relating to the friendship of these two saints,in /rish Ecclesiastical Record, vol. vii.,
Rae 318, seqq.] Afterwards he proceeded to Tours to visit the relics of St. Martin.
ence journeying on to Rome, he reproved on the way some artificers whom he
saw negligent at their work, whereupon they resolved to murder him ; he was, how-
ever, miraculously freed from their hands. He found the gates of Rome closed
against him, and was at first refused admission to the city. When, at length,
permission was given him to enter, the whole city was in the greatest commotion ;
and he “was forthwith led to the Abbot of Rome.” Pope John III. at this
time sat on the Cathedra of St. Peter, and his Pontificate was marked by the
ravages of the Lombards, who, with the exception of Rome, and one or two other
cities, subjugated the whole of Italy. No wonder, then, that the citizens viewed
his arrival with suspicion: when, however, he was found to bea pilgrim from Erin,
the Pope showed him every kindness, and permitted him to say Mass at the
shrines of the Aposles, ‘in the presence of the Pope and the whole community of
Rome.” When Molaise had come ‘‘to the great altar of Peter in Rome, the
altar was clothed in his presence but no Mass Book was put upon it, nor chalice,
nor bell.” Without these three things Molaise never celebrated the divine
mysteries, and whilst he prayed, they were divinely sent upon the altar. After

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-176.png ---
152 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

the door is 9 feet from the ground ; the inside of the build-
ing is nearly as smooth as the barrel of a gun, and on the
outside, at the base, a circle of stone projects § inches.
The church, which is the most easterly building, was large
and beautiful, with a nuble, carved window over the high-
altar; next to this window, to the right, about 10 feet from
the ground, is the following inscription, the letters and points
of which are raised :

“Matheus O’Dubagan hoc opus fecit Bartholomeo
O’Flannagan priori de Daminis, A.D. 1449.”

Round this inscription is a frame, somewhat raised, with
another inscription on it, which is now illegible.

he had said Mass the Pope offered him these three things as gifts, but Molaise
consented only to accept the Soiscel Bec, or small Mass Book, which was after-
wards enshrined in a rich case, and was held in the highest veneration throughout
Ireland, asthe Soscel Bec of St. Molaise. Other gifts were also given to him by
the Pope, and especially some holy retics, as he had desired, viz., of SS. Peter and
Paul, of SS. Lawrence, and Clement, and Stephen, of the garment of the Blessed
Virgin Mary, of St. Martin, and other relics. With these sacred treasures St.
Molaise hastened back to Erin ; a portion of them he bestowed on his friend, St.
Aidan, of Ferns; the rest were deposited in the Relic Sic, or small cemetery,
to which, on this account, great privileges were attached.

Of the other facts connected with St. Molaisc’s life, suffice it to mention that the
settlement of the dispute between Dermid McCerbhaill and St. Kuadhan, of
Lothra, was referred to him, and he found fault with the latter for the cursing of
Tara; he, too, it was that, after the battle of Cuildremne, advised St. Columba “to
serve God on a foreign soil,” adding the prophetic assurance that ‘‘he would
there lead many souls to God.” The T.C.D. extracts from the old Register
of the See of Clogher, also inform us that St. Molaise, on his return from Rome,
exercised, by special delegation from the Pope, a general jurisdiction over
the whole Insh Church, “ non solum Ergalliae sed totius Hiberniae principatum
habens tamquam sedis Apostolicae legatus.”

Among the memorials of St. Molaise that have come down to us is the shrine
known as the Soisce! Molaise, which is now preserved in the Museum of the Royal
Irish Academy, and has been admirably illustrated by Miss Stokes for the Society
of Antiquaries in London. See Archacologia, vol. xliii, 1871.“ This venerable
work of early Irish Art,” writes Miss Stokes, “is a small box, or cumdach, of
yellow mixed metal, such as that made to hold the Gospel of St. Moling, or the
Book of Dimma,in T.C.D., Dublin. The date of this reliquary, if so it may
be called, can hardly be of a period later than the close of the roth century. The
inscription which it bears, ‘A prayer for Cennfailad, the comharb of Molaise, by
whom this case was made, and for Gillabaithin, the artificer, who made these
ornaments,’ proves that it was executed for the use of Cennfailad, who died early
in the 11th century, as we are told in the Annals of the Four Masters, A.D. 1025,
*Cennfaeladh, son of Flacthbheartach, successor of Molaise of Daimhinis,
died,’ . . . . On one side of the case is seen a robed ecclesiastical figure holding
an object, believed by Dr. Petrie to be a pastoral staff of a very ancient form.
Details are revealed, however, by the magnified photograph, which would rather
lead us to believe it to be the aspersory in use at the present day in the service of
the Roman Catholic Church. A book is held in the other hand. The figure was
probably intended to represent St. Molaise himself. The chasuble worn by this
ecclesiastic was evidently embroidered. The design upon it would appear to have
been palm-leaves.”

As regards the island, its name DaimAinss, is interpreted in the old records
to mean ‘‘island of oxen.’ Thus, in the ancient Latin Lives of St. Aidan ;

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-177.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 153

Next to the tower is a vaulted building of hewn stone,
which ends in a point, and is called St. Molaise’s house ; near
to this is his bed, in the shape of a stone coffin, in which he
used to pray. The neighbouring inhabitants say, that pains
in the back are relieved by lying in this bed.

‘* Beatissimus Lasreanus ad aquilonalem partem Hiberniae exivit, et construxit
clarissimum monasterium in stagno Herne, nomine Daimhinis qui sonat latine
Bovis insula :” and again: “ regebat plures monachos in insula posita in stagno Ere,
quam Scoti nominant Daimhinis, id est, Bovium insulam.” The ruins of the
sacred edifices, which,in early times, adorned this island, are some of the most
interesting in Ireland. Of these the oldest was known as “the House of St.
Molaise.” Within the memory of the present generation it was preserved almost
in a perfect state, and was a small, oblong, stone-roofed structure, with a square-
headed doorway at its western end. Only a few feet of its walls now remain
standing. The walls were of great thickness, built of large stones, in what has
been termed the Cyclopean style. The Round Tower of Devenish is the most
perfect that now remains in Ireland. Its conical cap is still complete, and the
ornamentation on its cornice seems as fresh as it was a thousand years ago. The
“*great church” is all but a featureless ruin. It consisted of a nave and chancel,
with a transept to the south. Its style of architecture and building is much more
modern than that of the Round Tower, and has been referred to the t1th or 12th
century. Many other details connected with the holy well of the saint, and the
font, and the monumental cross, and other antiquities of the island, will be found
in a valuable paper, ‘‘ The Antiquities of Devenish,” contributed by Mr.
‘Wakeman to the Royal Historical and Archzeological Association of Ireland, and
published in its Journal for January. 1874. He remarks that in the general
simplicity of construction, the building known as “ the Devenish House or Oratory
of St. Molaise” is ‘(a remarkable connecting link between what is usually
admitted to be the oldest style of stone church, as found in Ireland, and storeyed
and crossed edifices like the Houses of St. Columba and St. Kevin.” The font,
which once belonged to the Abbey Church. is now preserved in the parish church
at Monea. There is a tradition that the bells of the monastery were thrown into
the lake, in order to preserve them from sacrilegious hands. Mr. Wakeman
inserts in his paper some letters regarding Devenish, written in 1808, which refer
to some interesting features of the island und its ruins, now entirely destroyed.
The church, dedicated to St. Molaise, he describes as 80 feet long and 23 feet
wide. The south aisle is the burial-place of the Maguire family of Tempo;
however, ‘‘ a violent storm, twenty years ago. threw down the entire gable of the
south aisle, and a dreadful hurricane, the 20th of January, 1803, threw down the
top of the upper gable of the above church with several houses, and tore up many
trees from the roots.” He adds, that the structure known as St. Molaisse’s
house, £4 yards from the church, was 30 feet long. and 18 feet wide: it was
covered ou-side with cut stone till one of the Protestant Bishops of Clogher had
it stripped in order to flag the floor of Enniskillen Church.

By the survey of County Fermanagh, 1st James I., it was found that in the
barony of Magheryboy was the ‘‘ monastery or abbey of Channons, in Devenishe,
whereunto belonged in the same barony, 8 tathes (tates) of land, and the tithes of
Ballyosey, and the tithes of 3 half tates of land belonging to the chappel of Collydea,
and that the Prior O’Flanegan possessed this intirely by authoritie from Roome,
and had held it 3 yeres, notwithstanding the king’s majestie was justly entitled to
all the landes, possessions, &c., of this abbey.” It was also found that the parish
church of Devenish * whereunto belonged two quarters of land, were possessed by
Hugh M ‘Hugh Maguir, as corbe ; and that the Chappell of Collydea possessed
3 tates of land, possessed by Rory Ballogh C'’Corcon, as corbe.””

By another Inquisition taken at Eniskilline, 18th September, 1609, it was found
that the Bishop of Clogher was, in right of his bishoprick, entitled out of the
herenagh land of Devenish, containing in all four quarters. of which, so much as lay
in the island of Devenish (excepting Rossimartine, containing a fourth part of a
tate) was free, and belonged to the corbe or chief herenagh of that place, four


--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-178.png ---
154 Ancient Monasterics of Ireland.

There appears to have been many ancient inscriptions here,
but they are all erased and destroyed by time.*

Priory of Colidei ; In the interpolations of the Udster Annals,
at the year 1130 we read, that the Moriastery of Daminis
was founded that year; the author must mean either the
repairing of the ancient Monastery of St. Laserian, or the
founding of this priory of the Colidei, or secular priests.”

* James Butler's Tour., Ms. Twiss's Tour p. 114. 7 War. Mon.

marks, every mark being but 26 groats sterling, and 2 white groats per annum,
and eight days’ cosheire in his visitation, as in Maghericoolmanny, and for want of
flesh and wine, or aquavite, four shillings, and three score sroaghans [stroans or
baunocks] of oatbread, and a beef per annum, or ten shillings in lieu of said
bread, and a noble per annum in lieu of the beef ; and it was also found that there
were three herenaghs of the said land, viz :—O’Tullie, who was chief and herenagh
of one half of the said land; O'Cassidie, who was herenagh of one quarter ; and
O'Casy, who was herenagh of the other quarter of said land ; and it was also found
that in the said barony, eight tates on the south side of Lough Erne, therein
specified, all of which, together with the tithes thereof, belonged to the late
dissolved abbey of Devenish; and that the said abbey, with one orchard and more,
were situate in the island of Devenish, and that out of the said abbey the Bishop of
Clogher had yearly a refection for a day, or ten shillings in lieu thereof, and not
else, but not to stay all night. And it was also found that the late priory, or
house of secular priests of Collidea, with an orchard thereunto belonging, was
likewise situate in the said island of Devenish, and that to said priory belonged
four tates of land in the said barony, viz. :—two tates of Fanagrane, and two tates
of Tullagh; and that out of the said priory the Bishop of Clogher had a beef per
annum. or twenty groats in lieu thereof. And it was also found that the two small
tates of Gorticloghem and Farrenerioght, in the pecen of Derrimoillan (Derry-
vullan), were parcel of the possessions of the said Priory of Collidea.

Doctor Reeves, in his ‘‘ Essay on the Culdees” ( 7runsactions of the Royal Irish
Academy, vol. xxiv., p. 140), referring to the foundation of St. Molaisi, states,
though without quoting his authority, that in the twelfth or thirteenth century
a body of regular canons superseded the ancient community of the island, and
became possessed of their church and endowments, allowing, however, a small
society of secular canons, probably the representatives of the original occupants,
to remain, but in a subordinate position. At the dissolution of monasteries, there
were two conventual societies on the island—one a priory of regular canons, and
the other described as ‘‘ the late priory or house of secular priests in the same
island, with an orchard thereunto belonging, and four tathes of land possessed by
Rory Ballogh O'Corcon” (recte, Corcron), ‘‘as corbe ; the tithes of which were
possessed by the Prior O'Flanagan of the abbey.” In a patent of James I., the

wildings are described as a cell or chapel called Cal/dca, alias Colldea, in said
island, to said abbey, near and belonging. In the table annexed to the Martyr-
ology of Donegal (under Molaissi), Michael O’Clery writes in 1630:—‘ Ubi
prioratus saecularis Colideorum, pertinens ad templum magnum ecclesiae parochi-
alis 8S. Molassi (ita antiquitus), et vicaria ar ecclesiae.' The house of these
secular priests appears to have been a relic of the ancient establishment of St.
Molaisi, who were superseded by the regular canons, and to whom they stood in
the same relation that the Colidei of Armagh did to the cathedral chapter.”

St. Natalis, otherwise Naile, referred to in the text of Archdall as immediate
successor of St. Laserian, is thus mentioned in the Calendar of the O’Clerys, at
27th January :—

“*Naile, of Inbher Naile, in Tir-Baghuine, in Cinel-Conaill” (now the parish
of Inver, barony of Banagh, county Donegal), ‘‘and afterwards Abbot of Cill-
Naile” (now incorrectly anglicized Kinawley, the name of an old church and
parish in the barony of Knockninny, in the County of Fermanagh, extending into
the barony of Tullyhaw, in the County of Cavan, where his well of pure spring
water is still in existence, according to O'Donovan’s Note in Four Mastcrs, at

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-181.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 155

At the dissolution of religious houses, the possessions
belonging to this pricry were found to be as follows :—The
circuit and precinct of the priory, with an orchard adjoining ;
a church and a building joining to it, together with a cellar
under that building, and some chambers lately built thereon,
and also some other small buildings ; an orchard, with a small
garden and a few closes, containing three acres, within the
said precincts ; the whole island of Devenish, containing thirty
acres of small measure, four tates of old measure, with their

1387), “and Daimhinis in Feara-Manach. He was a son of Aenghus (son of
Nadfraech, son of Corc, son of Lughaidh), who was King of Munster ; and
Eithne, daughter of Crimhthann Cosgrach, was his mother, according to his own
life. It was to him God gave water from the hard stony rock when great thirst
had seized him, and Meadhog of Ferna, with the monks of both, when he made
a distant cast of his crozier at the hard stony rock, so that a stream of pure
spring water gushed therefrom ; just as the spring is now to be seen at Cill-Naile,
according to Naile’s own life, chap, to.” [This is the well referred to by O'Dono-
van as being still inexistence.] _“ The Life of Co/um-Cille, chap. 90, states that
Naile came into the presence of Colum-Cille for the first time, at the Inbher,
and that Colum-Cille and Naile blessed the place, and that it is from Naile
the church has been thenceforth named,’ In the Donegal Inquisitions and
Ecclesiastical Returns, it is always called the parish of Inver-nale.

The following entries taken from the Four Masters are wanting in Archdall's
text -—

ABBOTS AND CoMHARBAS OF DEVENISII.

A.C. 815. Reachtabhra-Ua n Andola, abbot of Daimhinis, died.

A.C. 867, Martin, abbot of Cluain-mic-nois and Daimhinis, a scribe of the sept
of Dartraighe-Daimhinsi (correctly Coininnsi), died.

A.C. 890. Loichene, abbot of Daimhinis, died.

A.C. 891. Maelachaidh, vice-abbot, ée., prior of Cluain-mic-nois, and abbot of
Daimhinis, suffered martyrdom from the Dealbhna-Eathra; and he took an oath
at his death, that he had no part in the killing of Scolaighe. This Scolaighe was
son of Macan, Lord of Dealbhna-Eathra, in the now King’s County, who had been
slain by the people of Clonmacnoise the year before.

A.C. 922. Maelmordha, son of Conghalach, abbot, died.

A.C. 944. Maelbeathadh, abbot, died.

A.C. 955. Colman, son of Conghal, successor of Molaise of Daimhinis, died.

A.C. 972. (recte, 974) Diarmaid, son of Dochartach, abbot, died.

A.C. 984. Fogharlach Ua Conghaile, a distinguished scribe and abbot, died.

A.C. 995. Cormac Ua Conghaile, abbot, died.

A.C. toor. Cathalan Ua Corcrain, abbot, died.

A.C. 1025. Ceannfaeladh, son of Flaithbheartach, successor of Molaisi ; and
Gillachrist, its rector, died. .

A.C. 1038. Colman Caech Ua Conghaile, successor of Molaisi, died.

A.C. 1049. Maelcainnigh Ua Taichligh, Comharba of Daimhinis, died.
O'Donovan writes that this name is now anglicized Tully and Tilly. In 1347,
Maelmaedhog O’Taichligh was official of Lough Ere.

A.C, 1114. Flann Mac Fla nchadha, now Mac Clancey and Clancy, successor
of Molaise, died.

A.C, 1168. The great priest, Ua Mongachain, successor of Molaisi, died.

A.C. 1336. O’Mechin, Coarb of St. Molaisse, died. O’Donovan in his note on
this entry writes however, that he was the coarb of the Church of Ballaghmeehin,
in the parish of Rossinver, in the north of the county of Leitrim, where his linea
descendant and representative still farms the termon lands. According to the
Fermanagh Inquisitions there was in that county a family named O’Manchan.

A.C. 1390. Niall O’Taichlich, Canon Chorister of Clogher and Coarb of
Devenish, died.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-182.png ---
156 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

tithes, viz.:—Fennagran, two tates ; Tallah, two tates; two
small tates, Gortaghlaghan and Farranaghreyaght, in the half
barony of Cool ; five tates in the barony of Coolmackernan ;
Bonanibber, one tate ; Tullagh and Toghill, one tate ; Killen-
cloghan, one tate ; Dromaklawnagh, one tate ; Arderry, half
a tate ; Ardinabyly, half a tate; and one quarter anda half
of land containing eight tates, each of which contain thirty
acres of the measure used there; and all the tithes of the
land of Ballyhasy, in the said county. The prior paid to the

BISHOPS AND Priors.

A.C. 658. St. Sillan, Bishop of Daimhinis, died on the 17th of May. The
aad of the O’Clerys spells the name St. Siollan, giving the same date for his

leath.

A.C. 868. Maelodhar, Anchorite, Bishop, and Abbot of Daimhinis, died.

A.C. 1379. James O'Conolly, Prior of Devenish, died.

A.C. 1462. The Prior of Devenish, é¢., Bartholomew, the son of Hugh
O’Flanagan, died on Lough Derg. O'Donovan in his note on this passage, writes,
this was the prior who repaired or rebuilt the great abbey church in 1449.

A.C. 1505. Laurence O'Flanagan, Prior of Devenish, died.

A.C. 1521. The Prior of Devenish, died—Redmond, son of the Parson of
Inis-Maighe-“amh, a clerical, kind, charitable, and humane man.

A.C. 1417. Master John, Parson of Devenish, died.

A.C. 1520. Nicholas, the son of Pierce O’Flanagan, Parson of Devenish, was
unjustly removed from his place by the influence of the laity, and died at Bohoe.
This is a parish lying in the baronies of Magheraboy and Clanawley, County of
Fermanagh.

OTHER REFERENCES.

A.C. 721. Deivir of Daimhinis, of the Ui-Colla, died.

A.C. 746. Ceile-Dulaisi of Daimhinis, died.

A.C. 836. The churches of Loch-Erne were destroyed by the foreigners, with
Cluain-Evis and Devenish.

A.C. 980. Kothectach of Daimhinis, a priest, died.

A.C. 1011 (recée, 1012). Crenchomrac Ua Scanlainn, Airchenneach of Daimhinis,
ied.

A.C. 1058. Maelfinnen Ua Guaire, anchorite of Daimhinis, died.

A.C. 1076. Gillachrist Ua Duibhdara, lord of Feara-Manach, was slain by the
Feara-Manach themselves, on the island of Daimhinis.

A.C. 1157. Daimhinis, Lismor, and Lothra, with their churches, were burned.

A.C. 1259. Hugh O’Conor and Brien O'Neill held a conference at Devenish,
in Lough Erne.
ry apc 1411. Conor O'Casey, Erenagh of the lands of Muintir-Casey, in Devenish,

led.

A.C. 1479. Piarus, otherwise Pierce, the son of Nicholas O’Flanagan, who had
been a canon chorister at Clogher, a parson and a prior of Culdees, a sacristan at
Devenish, an official on Lough Eme, a charitable, pious, truly hospitable, and
humane man, died, after having gained the victory over the devil and the world.

A.C. 1489. Nicholas, Vicar of Devenish, died.

A.C. 1537. Cuconnaught Maguire, Lord of Fermanagh, a charitable and
humane man, and the most renowned of the race of Colles for a long time, was
treacherously slain on the 8th of October on Creachan, an island in Lough Erne,
belonging to the Friars, by the descendants of Thomas Maguire. He was first
buried in Devenish, but was some time after disinterred by the Friars Minor, who
carried him to the Monastery of Donegal, and there interred him in a becoming
manner.

A.C. 1602. Niall Garv O'Donnell, with his brothers, and the English, went in
boats on Lough Erne, and took and destroyed Enniskillen. They also took (the
monasteries of) Devenish and Lisgoole, and left warden in them.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-183.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 157

bishop of Clogher a fat beef annually, or twenty groats in lieu
of it. .

The Herinagh of Devenish contains four quarters of the
new measure, beside the island which was free ; it paid
annually to the Bishop of Clogher four marcs, each marc
being twenty-six groats, with the liberty to coshire therein for
eight nights at his visitation, and sixty loaves (in Irish
stroughans) of oaten meal (or in lieu thereof Ios.) a fat ox
(or 6s. 8d. in lieu thereof) ; there were three erenarchs of this
land, viz., O’Tully the first, and he was erenarch of half of the
said land ; and O’Casy, erenarch of the other part ; and there
were eight tates of land of the ancient small measure, on the
fourth bank of the river of Loghern, belonging to the said
canons, viz..—Drumgemple, two tates; Enislern, Rosleagh,
Moynenergidi, Findraught and Charranchirrin, Magherine-
gananah, and Fogher ; and the prior to pay annually to the
Bishop of Clogher one refection on the day of his visitation,
but not to tarry all the night (or ros. in lieu of the said
refection.)*

Domhnagh-Mor => In Magh-ene,™ St. Nennidhius, or
Nennius, was abbot and bishop here ;* this place is now
unknown.

Gola 6 Adjoining Lough-Earn, five miles south-east of
Enniskillen, and within three miles of Maguire’s bridge.

® King, p. 238, &c. ** A small territory to the south of the river Erne,
having the lough to the east, and the ocean to the west ; in this territory are the ruins
of several churches. * Act. SS. pp. 113 and 115.

5 There are several Saints Nennius in the Ca/endar of Donezal, but none of them
appropriated to this church. According to the 7ripartite Life of St. Patrick, this
church was founded by him :—‘‘ Patrick went afterwards past Druim-cliabh
(Drumcliff) from Caisel-Ivra, by the Rosses eastwards, along Magh-Eni, and
founded Domhnach-mor of Magh-Eni.” This small territory of Magh-Eni was
sometimes called Magh-Cedne and Moggene, and is now called “the Moy,” a
plain lying between the rivers Erne and Drowes, in the south of the County

jonegal. Some have supposed that Domhnachmore is in the parish of Inish-
macsaint, where, in the vicinity of Carrick-lake, are the ruins of an ahcient church.

As however Carrick-lake is not situate in Magh-Ene, it is more probable that
Domhnachmor is identical with Tigh Tunny, an ancient graveyard lying on the
south bank of the Erne, half a mile west of Belleek, where formerly existed the
ruins of an abbey, the stones of which some forty years ago were used to form the
wall which at present surrounds the little graveyard. The name Tigh ‘unny may
be a corruption or transformation of the name of the founder, St. Ninny, or St.
Dianach, who is said to have been Bishop at Donaghmore in Magh-Ene. The
situation of Tigh Tunny is within the territory of Magh-Ene, and though not
within the limits of the County Fermanagh, it is on the confines of same, in the
townland of Clyhore, and County Donegal. Here also isa holy well and little
island close by in the Erne, where was formerly held a station on a day not well
remembered now in the locality. The river scenery of the Eme at this spot is
surpassingly beautiful.

Gola is now the name of a townland in the parish of Derrybrusk, barony of
Magherastephana, county Fermanagh. There is another townland of the same
name in the parish of Aghavea, same barony and county. When Lewis’s Topo-
graphical Dictionary of Ireland was compiled in 1837, some ruins of the ancient


--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-184.png ---
158 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

A monastery dedicated to the Nativity of the Virgin Mary,
was founded at Gaula for Dominican friars, by M‘Manus, lord
of the place ; Maguire, the dynast of Fermanagh, contributed
largely to the foundation, and John, the son of the founder,
who had been educated at the Dominican friary of Athenry,
was extremely solicitous in forwarding this work ; some
remains of the monastery are yet to be seen, and particularly
where formerly stood the village of Gola.”

> Burke, pp. 331 and 333.

monastery were in existence ; but when Mr. Wakeman published his work on Lough
Emme in 1870, he writes that not one stone remained above ground. Mr. Wakeman
also writes, that Gola was of ancient foundation—one of those seminaries where,
according to the Venerable Bede. Saxons and other foreigners were so hospitably
entertained, educated, and furnished with books, &c., and all gratuitously, or for
the love of God, by the since libelled “ barbarous Irish ;” and that it was stated
that here Alfred, King of the Northumbrian Saxons, tarried so long that he learned
not only to speak, but to become a bard in the Irish tongue. He then gives the
late Dr. O’Donovan's translation of Alfred’s poem on his experience of Ireland.
Mr, Wakeman, however, gives no authority for the ancient foundation of Gola, or
Alfred’s residence therein ; and it is most likely that any traditions to that effect ~
ought to be referred to Lisgoole, which is partly similar in name, and dates from
the early Irish church.

Gola is not returned in the Great Survey of Fermanagh made at Devenish, 7th
July, 1603, of the temporal and spiritual lands of that county; and in the Inquisi-
tion sped at Enniskillen, 18th September, 1609, to inquire into the ecclesiastical
lands, the only mention of the place is that it was then part of the herenagh lands
of Derrivoruske, now Derrybrusk, in which parish, as previously stated, it is still
situate. It was probably at the time too inconsiderable to excite the cupidity of
the settlers and be formally escheated to the Crown. _It appears from Dr. Burke's
Hibernia Dominicana, p. 332, that in 1660, shortly after the restoration of Charles
IL, the Dominicans being desirous to revive their old houses in Ulster, Father
Dominic O'Connor, of Sligo, sent Father John O’ Hart, the Provincial of the Order,
to restore this monastery and others in Ulster; and that subsequently Fathers
Cathal M‘Manus, then returning from his studies in Italy, and Father Thomas
M‘Mahon, of the Convent of Coleraine, erected a new house near the ancient
monastery, under patronage of Macmanus, likely a descendant of the founder, and
Maguire, Lord Inniskillin, where the society flourished for sometime, and obtained
the friendship of the nobility and people. He writes that the modern founder was
James King, Esquire, but no proprietor of that name appears in the Fermanagh

nquisition. The restoration agrees with the statements in the letters of Primate
Oliver Plunket, as published in the Life of Dr. Plunkett, p. 242, ef seg. A dispute
having arisen between the Dominicans and Franciscans as to the right of soliciting
alms, or questing, as it was called, in the dioceses of Armagh, Down, Dromore,
and Clogher, the decision was referred by Rome in 1671 to the Primate, who
associated with himself as consultors the Most Rev. Patrick Plunket, Bishop of
Meath ; the Very Rev. Oliver Dease, Vicar-General of that diocese; and Dr.
Thomas Fitzsimons, Vicar-General of Kilmore. The Primate made visitations of
the convents in dispute, where, as Dr. Moran writes, the Dominicans, to their
surprise, found that these convents were in the hands of other religious (the Fran-
ciscans), who attempted not only to withhold them, but even controverted their
right to quest. The Primate made his report 18th September, 1672, in favor of the
Dominicans, and in it he refers to Gola, or Gaula, as follows ; and itis deeply
to be regretted, that the ancient Irish annals of Enniskillen, which were adduced
in evidence, are now lost, or their habitat unknown ; as, if extant, we would have
an authentic account of the foundation and history of the house, and much infor-
mation as to the families of MacManus and Maguire, and the countries of which
they were lords :—

“ T went to the diocese of Clogher, and near Enniskillen, in the Convent of the

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-185.png ---
, County of Fermanagh. 159

Iniscaoin ;” An island in the great Lough-Earn ; in the early
ages we find an abbey here, of which St. Mochaimoc, the son of
Endeus, was abbot, about the middle of the 7th century ; his
festival is observed 13th of April.¢

, © Act. SS. p. 598.

Franciscan Friars, called the contending parties. The Dominicans adduced the
authority of the ancient annals of that town, written in the Irish language, which

ives the name of the Convent of Gaula, the year in which it was founded, the

ope in whose pontificate it was founded for the Dominicans. They also brought
forward the testimony of an old priest, who swore that he heard from his father
that the Convent of Gaula belonged to the Dominicans ; they also produced other
witnesses who gave like evidence. Now, on the other hand, the Franciscans could
bring forward nothing but negative arguments, that is, the signatures of those who
attested that they had never seen or heard of the Dominicans being in these
convents ; that the people were not able to support both Dominicans and Francis-
cans ; that the secular clergy were opposed to the Dominicans. They went about
seeking the signatures of the gentry and others against the Dominicans ; and, what
is more strange, they even went to Protestant gentlemen asking them to speak to
me against the Dominicans, and, de facto, many of these spoke to me, and almost
threatened me if I did not remove the Dominicans from these dioceses. The
Franciscans, moreover, added, that the Dominicans, in case these convents once
belonged to them, must, nevertheless, have lost their right to them, having aban-
doned and deserted them for many years. so that prescription now holds against
them. The Dominicans, however, replied, that in the time of war, pestilence,
and persecution, no prescription can hold good against those who abandon their
convents.” :

The Franciscans appealed to Rome against the Primate’s judgment, which was
not finally settled till 1678, when it was confirmed by the acts of the Propaganda ;
but in the interim, in the storm of persecution, especially in 1673. all the convents
and novitiates were destroyed, thus for the time putting an end to the controversy.
Eventually, the Convent of Gola was in some degree restored; and here, as we
find from Bishop Burke, were educated Dr. Dominick Maguire, Archbishop of
Armagh, 1681 to 1708; Fathers Gelasius MacMahon, and Antony Maguire, Provin-
cials of the Order. In 1756, Father John Maguire, aged 55. was prior, and Fathers
Thomas Nolan and Antony Maguire brethren.

7 The Survey of Fermanagb 1st James I.. returns as in the half-barony of Cooil,
correctly Coole M‘Kernan, amongst the spiritual lands :—‘‘ The parish church of
Jniskeane, having five quarte-< of land possessed by Munterdoogan as corbes; the
chappell of Popui, alias Collidea, having two tates of land possessed by Gilleroe
O'Haine as corbes ; and the chappell of Maghery ne Cross, having two tates of
lund possessed by Clan M‘Roory as corbes.” This half-barony of Cooile, being
the northern, has been incorporated into the present barony of ‘Tirkennedy. The
ecclesiastical districts of Tniskeane and Popul have been absorbed into the present
civil parish of Enniskillen, the former being represented by the townland of Inis-
keen, containing 260a. 17. 159. ; the la ter by the townland of Pubble, containing
2704. Ir. 209.

In an Inquisition taken at Enishkilline 18th September, 1609, it was found that in
the half-baronies of Cuyle and Tirrecannada (Tirkennedy) was the parish of Enis-
kine, containing én ¢ofo, six ballibetaghs, viz. : Badlieniskine one ballibetagh, Bally-
breaghan and Garvorie one ballibetagh and two tates (now the townland of Garvany,
containing 330. or. 37%. in the civil parirh of Enniskillen), and the three balli-
betaghs and three quarters of Tirecannadz , and that the parish church standeth in
the island of Eniskin: ; and that in the said parish is both a parson and vicar
collative, the tithes being paid in kind, and the parish church repaired as in
Maghcrecoolemanny, that was: the parson and vicar bearing one-third part of the
charge, and the herenagh the other two-third parts; and they also found that the
Bishop of Clogher received yearly, proxies from the said parson, eight shillings,
and from the vicar four shillings, and that to the vicarage belonged half an acre of
glebe ; and it was also found that in the said parish of Eniskine was a chapel of

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-186.png ---
160 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

St. Fergus, the son of Endeus, was also abbot here ; his
festival is held 29th of March.4

4 Jd. p. 713.

ease, called Puble, with half a quarter of herenagh land called Puble- Patricke,
and Drumkenada thereunto adjoining, out of which the said Bishop of Clogher
had two shillings per annum, and that the herenagh of the said land was Munter-
owen, who had to maintain the said chapel, and the said vicar to maintain a
curate. It was also found that the Bishop of Clogher was seized in fee, in right of
his bishopric of, and in several rents and duties issuing out of, certain parcels of
herenagh land, within the half baronies of Cuyle and Tircannada, viz.. out of the
herenagh land of Eniskine, containing three quarters aud an half tate (whereof
Munterowen was the herenagh, and half a quarter and half a tate free to himself)
two marks per annum, and also cosherie and refections.

The following entries are taken from the Four asters :—

A.D. 1389 ‘The Vicar of Inis-Cain, died. O'Donovan adds, in a note that
according to the Dublin copy of the Annuals of Ulster, this vicar's name was
Nemeas O’h-Eoghain, a name still common in this parish, but anzlicized Owen

1393. Matthew O’Howen. Chaplain of Inis Caon, died. O'Donovan in his note
writes, that the island of Inis Caoin, now Inishkeen, having an area of 260 acres,
English measure, contains the ruins of the old church in a burial ground,

1394. Gilla-Downey O’Howen, Official of Lough Eme, and Parson and
Erenagh of Inis-Caoin, died.

1467. Miall, son of Mahon Magrath, Official of Lough Erne, and Parson of
Inis-Caoin, died.

1490. Fergus, the son of John, son of Mathew [O’Howen], Anchorite of Inis-
Cavan. died.

1498. MacManus of Seanadh, #.¢., Cathal Oge, the son of Cathal, son of Gilla-
Patrick, son of Matthew, &c., a man who had kept a house of general hospitality,
a biatach at Seanadh-Mic-Manus, a canon chorister in Armagh, and in the
bishopric of Clogher. Parson of Inis-Caoin, Deacon of Lough Ere, and Coadjutor
of the Bishop of Clogher for fifteen years before his death, the repertory of
the wisdom and science of his own country, fruitful branch of the canon, and a
fountain of charity and mercy to the poor and the indigent of the Lord : he it was
who had collected together many historical books, from which he had compiled
the historical book of Baile.Mic-Manus, for his own use—died of galar breac
[the small-pox], on the tenth of the Calends of April, which fell on a Friday, and
in the sixtieth year of his age.

The following is Doctor O'Donovan’s note on this entry :—‘‘Scanadh. This was
the ancient name of an island situated in the Upper Lough Eme, between the
baronies of Magherastephana and Clanawley, in the County of Fermanagh. It
is called Ballymacmanus Island, in various deeds and leases, and by the natives of
Clanawley, who speak the Irish language ; but it has lately received the fancy
name of Belle-Isle, from its beauty. The Cathal Oge MacManus here men-
tioned, was the compiler of the Asmna/s of Ulster, which are often called Annales
Senatenses, from this island in Lough Erne, where they were compiled, the
situation of which has not been hitherto pointed out. The Amnals of Ulster, of
which the late Dr. Charles O’Conor has published an edition, begin with the
year 444, and were carried down to 1498, the year of his death, by the original
compiler. and they were continued to the year 1537, by Rory O'Cassidy, and to the
end of the 17th century, by the O’Luinins of Arda, and others.”—See also Harris's
Edition of Ware's W’riters of Ireland, p. 90.

The Calendar of Donegal has, at 10th January, “ St. Diomman of Inis-Caoin,’
not given by Archdall. Wakeman in his Lough Erne, p. 58, mentions Iniskeen
as ‘the beautiful island,” and as once the site of the parish church of the district
including Enniskillen, adding that some fragments of the old edifice remain, but
in a state of utter ruin, and that portions of stone crosses of early Irish type indicate
the very ancient importance of the place, the cemetery being still, next to that
of Devenish, the most sought for place of sepulture among the old families of
the district.

In 1704. the Rev. William O'Hoyne, aged 56, was parish priest of Eniskeen,
having received orders in November, 1670, from Primate Oliver Plunket.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-187.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 168

Inis-Eo, or Eonots * Another island in the same lough ; St.
Constans, the son of Fuasclac, who was abbot and anchorite
here, died November 14th, A.D. 777.2 His bones were
translated into a shrine by Matthew, Bishop of Clogher, on the
6th of September, 1308.!

Inis-Mac-Saint ;® An island in Lough-Earn, about half-a-
mile from the shore of the barony of Maghereboy.

* Act. SS. p. 222, * War. Bps. p.183. © Called anciently Inis-mhuighe-samh.

® Iniseo, or Eonois, now Aughnish. There do not seem to be any ancient
remains now existing on this island, which lies in the Upper Lough Erne, in the
parish of Kinawley, and not far from the island called Friar’s Island, in the parish
of Aughalurcher, on which there were ruins within present memory, but which
have now disappeared.

*The Martyrology of Donegal records at 18th January :--‘‘ Ninnidh, Bishop of
Inis-Muighe-Samh, in Loch Eime ; and he was Ninnidh Saebhruisc, who was of
the race of Enda, son of Niall, It was he who was usually called Ninnidh Laim-
hodhan, to my knowledge.—See the Life of Brigid, chap. 41. The Book of
Aymns states that Ninnidh, son of Eochaidh, was Ninnidh Laimhiodhan.”
According to Joyce (/rish Names of Places, 2nd Edition, page 427), the name in
Irish signifies ‘the island of the plain of sorrel,”’ now by a very mispronun-
ciation called Inishmacsaint. The fame of St. Ninnidh, or Nened, who flourished
on the island must, no doubt, have facilitated the change of name. He was a dis-
ciple of St. Finnian of Clonard. and a cotemporary of St. Sinell and St. Columba.
He erected his monastery here before the close of the sixth century, and judging
from the remains of the earth-works and foundations which may yet be traced, it
was of great extent and importance.. The church seems to have been a small
oblong structure. One window remains in a tolerably perfect state. The stone
cross is very rudely cut, and may be as ancient as the time of the saint himself.
To the west and north of the church are mounds of earth, which mark the form
and position of the community-dwellings ; and enclosing all, was a rampart of
mixed earth and stones, which formed a sort of rath, and served the double pur-
pose of enclosure and defence.

Besides his connexion with the present island and parish of Inis-Mac-Saint, on
Lower Lough Erne, St. Ninny must have been connected also in some way with a
widely remote territory on the Upper Lough Erne, where he has given his name to
the barony and remarkable hill oF Knockninny, and where there is still pointed
out a holy well called after the saint. His festival is given in the Calendars on the
16th as well as the 18th January. St. Dianach’s festival is also marked on the
former day. Could they have been the same person? Both are stated to have
been Bishops of Donaghmore Magh-Ene. Besides the place of this name already
alluded to, there is a Donagh in the parish of Galloon, in the plain of the Upper
Lough Erne, on its eastern side, nearly opposite to Knockninny. In this old
burying ground of Donagh (much used to the present day) was an ancient
church.

The survey of County Fermanagh, Ist James I., finds that amongst the spiritual
lands in the barony of Magheryboy, is the parish church of Inismoysoan, having
two quarters of land, and Ball-osey, containing four quarters and a half, being

Patrick O’ Flan: , as corbe.

An Inquisition taken at Eniskilline, 18th SePiemtee 1609, finds that in the
barony of Magheriboy and Twora, is tte parish of Enishmissaugh, wherein is both
@ parson and a viccar collative ; and that the parson paieth yerely to the bushopp
of Clogher, eight shillings, and the viccar, fower shillings, proxies, per annum ;
and that the tithes of the said parish are paid in kinde, one-fourth parte thereof
to the said bushopp of Clogher, one other fourth parte to the said viccar, and
the other two-fourth partes to the parson ; and that the said parson and viccar are
equallie to beare one-third parte of the charge in repairinge and maintaininge
the parish church, and the herenaghe to beare the other two-third partes of the

VoL. 11. _ Mf

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-188.png ---
162 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

St. Nenn, or Nennid, of the blood royal of Ireland, who
was educated under St. Fiech at Sletty, and afterwards
under St. Finian at Clonard, founded this famous abbey, and
died in the year 523 or 530; his festival is commemorated
here 18th of January. The saint’s bell, ornamented with gold
and silver, is yet preserved here as a precious relic, and is
held in so great veneration amongst the lower class of people,
that it is often judicially tendered them to swear on.

This ancient abbey, in process of time, was converted into
a parish church, with a very large district, being a rectory and
a vicarage in the diocese of Clogher, but the situation being
at length found to be highly inconvenient, it was, in the reign
of Queen Anne, removed to Drumenagh, in the same parish,
on the main land.

Innis-Rocha © In Lough-Earn, about the beginning of the
sixth century, St. Berchan, the son of Declan, son of Fieg,
son of Deodatus, son of Rochad, son of Colla Dachrioch, was
abbot here, where his festival is held 24th of November.'

Kilskirry s™ A monastery of this name was founded A.D.

49. :
7 Kilskirry is now a parish church in the diocese of Clogher!

® Act. SS. pp. IIT, 113, and 114. Vard. Vita Rumd. p.160. Act. SS. p. 713.
® Conry. Liber. visit.

said charge; and they alsoe saie, that in the said parish is a chapple of ease, called
Ffennoare in Macginy, unto which said chapple the viccar of the said parish is to
send a curate to saie divine service ; and that in the said parish also is an other
chapple called Ballihanny, with a quarter of herenagh land of the ould measure,
belonging thereto, whereof M‘Gackequin is the herenagh, and paieth thereout
yerelie to the lord bushopp of Clogher, three shillings and fower ce per
annum ; and that the said parish for soe much thereof as lieth within the said
county of Ffermannagh is bounded as followeth, &c.; and they also found that the
Bishop of Clogher was seized in right of his bishoprick out of the herenagh land
of containing one quarter, whereof OFlanagen was herenagh,
one mark and not else. At present there is in the civil parish of Inishmacsaint, so
far as it extends into the County Fermanagh, 36,9932. 37. 359., and 7,126a. 37.
30/., in the barony of Tirhugh, County Dosesat The chapel of ease called in the
above Inquisition Ffennoare, is now called Finner, it and Ballyhanny being in
the county Donegal portion.

At an Inquisition held at Liffer (Lifford), rath September, 1609, it was found
that the Bishop of Clogher was entitled to divers tithes and duties out of that
part of the parish of Enismisaugh, lying in the barony of Tirhugh, county of Done-
gal, which are all enumerated, as also out of the quarter of land called Ballymac-
gockquin, whereof M‘Gockquin was herenagh.

10 There is an Inishroosk in Upper Lough-Earn, not far from Aughnish and
Friar’s-island.

11 There was another church or monastery of this name in the County Meath,
where St. Sgire, Virgin, was commemorated at the 24th March, according to the
Martyrology of Donegal. and the Felir€ of St. Angus. The Martyrology adds, that
there was another Cill-scire in Fermanagh, which probably was dedicated to the
same saint. The situation of this place corresponds with that of the Disert called
Sirach, alluded to by Colgan asin the upper part of Glendorachy, where St. Foillan
is stated tu have built a church previous to his connexion with Scotland. The
name of Glendorachy seems to be still preserved in that townland of Glen not far

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-189.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 163

Lisgool ; On the west bank of the river Earn, near Ennis-
killen.

In the early ages of Christianity, a monastery was founded
here, where we find the festival of St. Aid, or Hugh, of
Lisgovel, was observed 25th of January.”

An abbey, under the invocation of the Virgin Mary, was
afterwards founded here, and probably on the site of the
ancient monastery, for regular canons following the rule of St.
Augustin, by McNoellus Mackenlef, King of Ulster, in the
year 1106."

1287. Matthew McCatasaid was consecrated Bishop of
Clogher, in this abbey.

h 1320. Nicholas McCatasaid was also consecrated bishop
ere.°

1360. This abbey was consumed by fire.?

1380. The prior Domnald ua Unnain died this year.4

™ Vard. Vita Rum. ~.158 °% War. Mon. * King, p.201. ” M‘Geogh.
@ Annal Dungal.

from Kilskerry, on the confines of Fermanagh and Tyrone. The designation of
“Glendorachy,” dark or shady Glen, would accurately describe this ce at the
present day, which is overhung with hills covered with dark heath. is Glen, or
Glendorachy, situated 6 miles north of Enniskillen, is mentioned as the spot
where Ever M‘Mahon was captured by a detachment from the garrison of that
town on his flight from Letterkenny. The entire parish of Kilskeery, containing
20,4362. Ir, 279., is altogether in the barony of East Omagh, in the present County
Tyrone, no. portion thereof being in Fermanagh.

This parish contains Trelic, ‘‘the three stones,” now Trillick, where, according
to Conry, there was an abbey at 613. The Martyrology of Donegal has, at
2gth May, St. Mobecce, at Trelic ; and the Four Masters at A.C. 809 (recte 814),
record the death of Cinardh, son of Ceallach, Bishop and Airchinneach of Trelecc.
O'Donovan, in his note on this passage writes, that the Annals of Ulster at 813,
call it Trelic-moer. Joyce, in his admirable work, /riskh Names of Places, second
Edition, p. 252, in writing of the triple combinations in the names of places,
quoting fom the Book of Lismore, observes that Duntryleague, near Galbally,
in County Limerick owes the origin of the name to the fact, that when Cormac
Cas, King of Munster, was dying, his attendants placed him in a Dus, with three
Giagars (pillar stones) around it, on which was laid the bed of the King, so that
his head was in the middle between the three pillars. He died there, and was
buried in a cave within the dus ; and from that arose the name of the place,
Dun-tri-liag, the fortress of the three pillar stones. He further observes that
a similar erection of three stones must have been very usual, as we find several
names containing the compound #i-/iag, and simply in the form of Trillick, the
name of a village in Tyrone, and of two townlands—one in Donegal, and the
other in Fermanagh.

The parish priest of Kilskerry in 1704 was Bryan O’Kerulan, aged 45, who had
received Holy Orders in April, 1688, in Kilkenny, from Dr. James Phelan,
Bishop of Ossory. = Fi th J

Lisgoole, in Irish Lis-gabhail. The Martyrology of Donegal, at 25) fanuary,
reserves the memory of Fe. Aedh, Bishop of otha on Loch Eire.” e

S. Martyrology of Tallaght has, on the same day, ‘‘ Sancti Aedha Episcopi.”
Duald Mac Finis in his Tract on Certain Bishops of Ireland. gives, under the
heading of Gobhuil, two bishops, viz., ‘‘Guaire, Bishop of the Gobhuil : and
Aodh (4.2., Hugh), Bishop of Lisgabhuil, on Loch Eme, 25th January.” The
mounds which mark this district prove it to have been a secure place of refuge,
and it is probable that its monastery was founded at a very early period. It

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-190.png ---
164 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Cohonaught More McGuire, the grandfather of Brien Oge,
held the whole right of presentation and patronage of all the
churches and vicarages in the County of Fermanagh, until the
Pope, in the Council of Trent, deprived him of that
patronage.’

This abbey having gone to ruin for want of necessary
repairs, and divine service being totally neglected therein, the

* King, p. 201.

is supposed that Alfred of Northumbria lay concealed here for a considerable
time, when he was compelled to seek safety by flight from the shores of England.
A poem written by this royal exile, to commemorate his sojourn in Erin, is still
preserved in the most ancient Gaedhlic dialect, and has been thus translated by
the learned Celtic scholar, O'Donovan :—

‘*T found in the fair Inisfail,
In Ireland, while in exile,
Many women, no silly crowd,
Many laics, many clerics.

“*T found in each province
Of the five provinces of Ireland,
Both in Church and State,
Much of food—much raiment.

“*T found gold and silver,
I found honey and wheat,
I found affection with the people of God,
I found banquets and cities.

**I found in Armagh, the splendid,
Meekness, wisdom, circumspection,
Fasting in obedience to the Son of God,
Noble, prosperous sages.

‘*I found in eaeh great church—
Whether inland, on shore, or island—
Learning, wisdom, devotion to God,
Holy welcome, and protection.

“TI found the lay monks
Of alms the active advocates,
And, in proper order with them,
The Scriptures without corruption.

‘*T found in Munster, without prohibition,
Kings, queens, and royal bards,
In every species of poetry well skilled—
Happiness, comfort, pleasure.

“I found in Conact, famed for justice,
Affluence, milk in full abundance,
Hospitality, lasting vigour, fame,

In this territory of Croghan of heroes.

“IT found in the country of Tirconnel
Brave, victorious heroes,
Fierce men with fair complexion,
The high stars of Ireland,

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-191.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 165

abbot, Cahill McBrian McCuchonnaght Maguire, entered into
articles with Cuchonnaght Fitz-Cuchonnaght Maguire, Lord
of the County of Fermanagh, to restore it to its pristine state.
Maguire being grieved at seeing the church, which he and the
principal people of the country had chosen for the place of
their sepulture, so nearly demolished, requested the before-
mentioned lord-abbot to surrender his title, and suffer him to

**T found in the province of Ulster
Long-blooming beauty, hereditary vigour,
Young scions of energy—

Though fair, yet fit for war, and brave.

“I found in the territory of Boyle
v a (MS. effaced),
Brehons, Erenachs, palaces,
Good military weapons, active horsemen.

**] found in the fair-surfaced Leinster,
From Dublin to Slewmargy,
Long-living men, health, prosperity,
Bravery, hardihood, and traffic.

“*I found from Ara to Gle,
In the rich country of Ossory,
Sweet fruit, strict jurisdiction,
Men of truth, chess playing.

‘I found in the great fortress of Meath
Valour, hospitality, and truth,
Bravery, purity, and mirth—

The protection of all Ireland.

“*T found the aged of strict morals
The historians recording truth—
Each good, each benefit that I have sung
In Ireland I have seen.”

The Survey of County Fermanagh (1st James I., Ul. In. xxxiv.) returns
among the spiritual lands of the barony of Clynawley, ‘The Monastery or
Abbey of Channonsg, at Lisgoole, whereunto belongeth in the same barony twenty
tathes of land and certain medders of barley, with the appurtenances of butter,
arisinge as a chief rent out of Ballymacsagart. This is éntirely possessed by Shane
Mc, an abbot for ten years past, as prior from the Pope. The Abbay of St.
Fraunces, in Lyssgoole, whereunto belongeth no landes or lyving, save onely the
gardens and croftes about yt. It is possessed by the said Shane, notwithstanding
wee find the king’s matie. intiteled to all the landes and possessions of theis 2
abbayes, by act of pliam*, enacted within this realme, in the 33rd yere of King
Henry ye Eight of famous memory, and so actually possessed thereof.”

An Inquisition held at Enniskillen 18th September, 1609, after finding the lands
belonging to Lisgoole, as stated in the text, further found that the Bishop of
Clogher was entitled out of said abbey to one meal per ann., if he came, and six
shillings and eight pence proxies, for the impropriation of Rosserririe.

The following entries, not given by Archdall occur in the Four Masters :—

A.C. 1329. Augustine, Abbot of Lisgabhail, died. O’Donovan, in his note on
this e, writes Lisgabhail, é.¢, the fort of the fork, now anglicized Lisgole,
or Lisgool.

A.C. 1345. Gilla-na-naemh O’Keenan, Abbot of Lisgabhail, died. His death
is repeated at 1348.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-192.png ---
166 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

provide another order for the house, who should keep it in
proper repair, and engage that there should be constantly
divine service therein. The abbot, together with the bishop
and chapter, entered into an agreement, which received the
confirmation of the Pope, who ordered the Franciscan friars
to take possession of the abbey ; and the Lord Maguire made
a recompense to the abbot Cahill of ten dry cows yearly, to

A.C. 1360. Roscommon, Devenish, Sligo, the Monastery of Lisgool, Fenagh,
and Drumlias, were burned.

A.C. 1373. Adam O’Keenan, a canon and learned historian, died at Lisgool.
O'Reilly states in his /rish Writers, p. 102, that he had in his possession two
volumes on vellum in his handwriting.

A.C. 1380. Donnell O’Lennan, prior of Lisgool, died.

A.C. 1390. Bartholomew O’Congaile, canon and sacristan of Lisgool, died.

A.C. 1419. Hugh O’ Fla: » prior of Lisgool, died.

A.C. 1430. Gilla-na-neer O’Leannain, canon and sacristan of Lisgool, died.

+ 1431. Simon MacGaraghan, a canon of the family of Lisgool, died.
- 1434. Lucas O’Leannain, prior of Lisgool, died.

. 1443. AEngus MacGillafinnen, abbot of Lisgool died.

. 1445. Thomas O'Leannain, canon and sacristan of Lisgool. died.

. 1446. John O'Leannain, prior of the Monastery of Lissgool, died.

A.C. 1447. Donnell Ballagh Maguire, who was slain by John, son of Philip
Maguire, was interred in the Monastery of Lisgool.

A.C. 1450. Pierce Maguire, Bishop of Clogher, died at Cleenish, and was in-
terred in Lisgool.

Pr ae 1465. Thomas, the son of Maurice, son of Matthew, abbot of Lisgool,
ied.

A.C. 1466. Brian, the son of Gillapatrick Maguire, abbot of Lisgool, and

“. Donnell O'Leannain, a canon of the family of Lisgool, died.

A.C. 1477. Ailbhe, the daughter of Hugh Maguire, a woman who, a year before
her death, had retired with all her fortune to the Monastery of Lisgoole, died.

A.C. 1515. Teige O’Higgin and Walter Walsh, two priests, were drowned
alongside of Lisgoole.

A.C, 1522. Redmond Roe Maguire, prior of Lisg»ol, died.

A.C. 1527. Laurence, abbot of Lisgool, died.

A.C, 1602, Niall Garv O'Donnell, with his brothers, and the English, went in
boats on Lough Erne, and took and destroyed Enniskillen. They also took the
Monasteries of Devenish and Lisgoole, and left warders in them.

Archdall, following Ware, incorrectly states this monastery to have been founded
by M‘Noellus Mackenlef, King of Ulster, in 1106, whose correct name was Niall
McDuinsleve Ui Eochada, slain in 1127. The house founded by him was Carryke,
near Downpatrick, and was afterwards called St. Finian’s of Greencastel, and
was destroyed by Sir John de Courcy on his first invasion of Ulster.

In 1106, Maguire, Prince of Fermanagh, founded a house for Regular Canons
at Lisgool, and there the lords of that delightful territory had their last Bee
place, and there, too, were interred their historians and poets, the O’Keenans
the O’Husseys. _ It is not easy to determine the precise time when the Franciscans
superseded the Canons of St. Augustine. Archdall seems to imply that it was
before the year 1530, but it was certainly some years later. Cornelius MacCardell,
whose name appears in the deed of transfer, was not appointed to the See of
Clogher till the year 1560, and it was about the same time that Turlogh O'Neill
was inaugurated Lord of Tyrone. The Franciscans continued to reside in the
monastery till 1598, when they were compelled by the violence of the persecution
to seek refuge in the neighbouring mountains. They soon, however, returned to
this hallowed retreat, and we find them here in 1631, when Michael O’Clery and
his four assistants to compile the Book of Jnvasions, under the protection of
Brian Roe Maguire, first baron of Enniskillen. It was the son of this baron who,
as Lord Maguire, was one of the originators of the great Irish Revolution of 1641.

P>p>
aaaan

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-193.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 167

him and his lineal heirs for ever. In this deed, a fine was
ordered of cows to the O’Hosies and M‘Crifferties, the
poets, who were to reprove, infame, and reprehend, in their
satiric writings, every disturber of the friars, otherwise the
ordinary fine of 20 cows was to be levied out of their own
proper goods and lands. At the perfecting of this deed,

urlogh O'Neill, Lord of Tyrone ; Hugh McManus O'Donnell,
Lord of Tirconnell ; Cuchonnaght Maguire, Lord of Ferma-
nagh; Brian McBrian O’Roirk, Lord of the Breiny ; and
Daniel McTaig O’Conor, Lord of Lower Connaught, were
present ; as also Connor McCardell, Bishop of Clogher ; and
Owyn O’Duffie, Minister Provincial. Maguire afterwards
began to rebuild the abbey in a most agreeable and eligible

He was, however, betrayed at the very outset, and committed to the tower of
London, where he was executed in 1644. A short time before execution, he made
his will, which clearly proves that he never forgot the convent on the shore of
Lough Eme, before whose altar he often knelt in youth, and at which he desired
to be rememl ered after his heroic soul had gone to its account :—

“I doenjoin my said heirs and executors, to make equal distributions, and give fifty
pounds to those convents or friaries following :—that is, Lisgool, twenty pounds ;
ten pounds to sundry of the convents of Ardmagh, Cavan, and Monaghan ; and
that to have Masses said for my.soul. And I do most ardently pray that this
money be given with the greatest s) that may be... ..

“ I'do desire those, my friends herein mentioned, and all other my friends, to
have many Masses and prayers said for my soul ; and, last of all, [do appoint this,
my will, to be and remain in custody of the friars of Lisgool, whom I entreat to
keep it safely in their custody, until it pleases God that the contents be fulfilled ;
and also, to send authorised copies of it to each of those, my friends, entrusted and
mentioned by me as above mentioned. I do likewise beseech the said Friars to
solicit, frequently and earnestly, all those that ought from time to time to fulfil
and perform this, my last will and testament, to be mindful of their duties in dis-
charging their parts ; and also, I do desire the said friars to be mindful always in
all their Masses and prayers to pray for my soul... . .

“ What is in this paper contained, although with many blots and interlinings, is
my last will and testament, and so I desire it may be confirmed and taken to all
intents. I did intend to have it fairly written after this form and meaning herein
contained, but that I was denied this. I enjoin and desire it may be fulfilled in
all as if it had been fairly engrossed, and to that intent I now have put my hand
and seal to this draft the day and year above written.

‘©CoNNOR ENNISKILLEN.”

Mr. Wakeman (Lough Erne, p. §7) thus writes :—‘‘ Before us we have Lisgoole
Abbey (Lisgoole, ‘the fort of the river fork’), once a monastery of considerable
note, but at present the seat of —— Jones, Esq. The foundation of the abbey is
of early date : of the old building a very small portion has been incorporated in
the modern house. Indeed, nearly every trace of monastic character disap-
peared, even the graveyard being devoted to agricultural purposes. Of the date
of the dissolution of Li: le we have not been able to trace any information.
Probably the community may have been obliged to remove to some other site, still
keeping up the old name. The Rev. G. N. Wright states in 1834, that a chalice,
formerly belonging to Lisgoole Abbey, is still preserved in the family of a learned
member of the medical profession, a well-known and much esteemed resident in
Enniskillen, bearing the following epigraph :—

**¢ This chalice was given by Sir Bryan Maguire, Knight of the Noble Order
Militaire of St. Louis, for the use of the Convent of Lisgoole, in the county of Fer-
managh, near Inniskilling, Anno Domini 1739.’”

The Maguires’ arms and motto, Pro Deo e patria, were engraved beneath.


--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-194.png ---
168 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

situation ; but before the completion of the building, the
destroying powers of King Henry VIII. overwhelmed it in the
year 1530.*

By several Inquisitions, it appears that this abbey was
possessed of Drumcion, two tates; Gortret, one tate ; Colkie,
three tates ; Grangeth, three tates ; Lifredy, two tates ; Cap-
poge, one tate ; Lanchall, two tates ; Drumkeen, two tates ;
Moyleat, four tates ; all of the ancient measure, with their
tithes, in the County of Fermanagh. They had six quarters
of land, containing twenty-four tates, each tate being thirty
acres of this country measure, with the tithes thereof, and
certain liberties, payable out of the lands of Ballynasagard,
all in this county.‘

Temple Mullin (a chapel of ease), in the parish of Boghae,
and barony of Clonawley, in M‘Garrahan’s country, paying
yearly to the abbot five gallons of butter and an axe;
and also the rectory and vicarage of the parish of Rossierrie,
in same barony, were appropriated to the abbey ; one-fourth
part of the tithes did belong to the Bishop of Clogher
(excepting only the tithes of Ballinbort), and the other three
parts were the property of the abbot ; a moiety of the tithes
of Ballinbort was appropriated to the use of the parson of
Iniskeen, one-fourth part to the vicar of Rosberry, the half of
the last fourth part to the Bishop of Clogher, and the remain-
ing half to the abbot." The chapel, and grange of Bally
M'‘Mataggart, containing one tate of the new measure (which
is two tates of the old measure), together with the tithes of
the same; the lands of the sept of Munteraran, paid annually
to the abbot four meathers of butter and five of barley, each
meather to contain six quarters ; and it also paid 6s. for the
tithes of said lands, and 2s. yearly to the bishop. These,
together with the site, &c., of the monastery, a small church,
and cemetery, and certain tofts, gardens, and closes adjoining,
containing three acres, were granted to Sir John Davis,
Knight.”

Lough Uva ;*® An abbey was founded here in the year
500.% It is now unknown.

* King, p. 319. tid. " Jd. p.202. ¥ Id. p. 319. * Conry.

13 Loch Uva.—This is incorrectly placed in Fermanagh by Archdall. It was near
Drumlease, in the County of Leitrim, where St. Patrick had erected a church.

The Four Masters, at 811 [recte, 816], record the death of Nuadha of Loch-
Uamha, Bishop, Anchorite, and Abbot of Ard-macha. Colgan gives a short but
meagre life of him at 19th February ( Acta Sanctorum, p. 373). He was abbot
of this place, and in 808 succeeded Torbach in the primacy of Armagh, and made
@ primatial visit of Connaught in 810 (recte, 815). O'Donovan, when annotating
the Annals, at the year 811, was unable to identify Loch-Uamha, ‘‘ the lake of
the cave,” but in his Addenda, vol. ii., p. 1193, states it to be a small lake, con-

taining twenty acres, between the townlands of Fawn and Mullagh, and in
process of draining when he wrote.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-195.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 169

Ress Orry ;* On the west side of Lough-Earn, near
Enniskillen. St. Fanchea, or Fuinchea, founded a nunnery

6 The entry in the Calendar of Donegal is:—‘‘ Funiche Garbh, Virgin, of Ros-
airthir [the eastern promontory], on Loch Eirne, in Ulster, of the race of Eoghan,
son of Niall.”

St. Fanchea, whose name is also written Fuinche and Funchea, was daughter of
Conall Derg, King of Oriel, in Ulster. Her mother was Briga, surnamed Aib-
finnia, é.z., the Fair, daughter of Ainmire, of the Dalaradian race. Four other saints
sprung from the same holy family—St. Enda, the patron of Arann, and Saints
Lochina, Carecha, and Darenia. This last named saint was espoused to Aengus,
son of Natfraich, King of Munster, and is supposed to have been the mother of
St. Colman, Bishop and Abbot of Derrymore. St. Fanchea grew up in the
practice of virtue, and we find her numbered among the holy virgins who received
the veil at the hands of our Apostle St. Patrick. It was to her prayers and holy
influence that St. Enda owed his conversion ; and to prove his gratitude, he
wished to labour with his own hands in fencing in her monastery, and erecting a
rath or earthen wall, and other necessary works for its protection. Two-thirds of
this enclosure yet remain, and at the western side the earthen wall is 18 feet in
thickness. A neighbouring church, that of St. Lasser, also of the sixth century,
is surrounded by a very marked earthen wall, which likewise measures about
18 feet in thickness. The relics of St. Fanchea were deposited at Killaine,
now Killany, in the County of Louth, which was a branch house of her monastery
and which is supposed by Colgan to have derived its name from our saint, and to
have been originally known as Kill-Fainche. The saint’s death must be referred
to adate at least thirty years later than that marked by Archdall.

In the Fermanagh Survey of 1st James 1., it is returned amongst the spiritual lands
of the barony of Clynawley, as ‘‘The parish church of Lassassaire, having one
tath of land, and possessed by Munterclaryk as corbes, the lands being hospital or
neg land.” This munter, or family, was probably the O’Clearys, anglicized
Clerk.

The Inquisition of 18th September, 1609, finds, that in the barony of Clonawley
is the parish of Rosseriere; the parsonage and vicarage are impropriate to the late
dissolved abbey of Lisgoole ; and that the one-fourth part of the tithes (except the
tithes of Ballinebort) are paid to the Bushop of Clogher, and the other three parts
belong to the late dissolved abbey of Lisgoole ; and that the tithes of Ballinebort,
before excepted, are paid as followeth, viz. :—two fourth-parts thereof to the parson
of Inishkine, another fourth part belongeth to the vicarage of Rosseriere, and the
moiety of the other fourth belongeth to the Bishop of Clogher. and the other moiety
to the late abbey of Lisgoole ; and they also say, that the said parish of Rossericre
is bounded as followeth, viz. :—on the west, upon the half tate of Moyglass, called
Lieugh ; on the east, upon Loughglassan; on the south, by the river of Srougho-
dromconrie; and upon Loughearne, on the north. The same Inquisition found
that the Bishop of Clogher was entitled out of the herenagh land, containing two
quarters (whereof the chief herenagh had two acres free), to two marks perannum,
with like refections as out of Maghericoolmanny, which were four nights’ refections
in the bishop’s two visitations, and not else, viz.: two nights’ in May visitation,
and two nights’ at Allhallowtide visitation, and for want of flesh and wine or
aquavite, four shillings ; and also at every Hallowtide, half a beofe, or three
shillings and fourpence, and thirty sroghans of oate breade, or five shillings in lieu
thereof. And it was also found that there were three herenaghs of the said land,
namely, Slut Laughlin MacGuire, Munterluynn, and Munter Connellie.

The following are extracts from the Four Masters :—

A.D. 1084. The monastery of Fuinche. f¢., Ross-airthir, was founded. This
was probably a reconstruction of the old monastery.

A.D. 1365. Paidin O’Congaile, Parson and Erenagh of Ross-airthir, died.
O’Donovan, in his notes, writes that the name Paidin O’Conghaile in modern
times would be anglicized Paddy Conneely, and that it is to be distinguished
from O’Congalaig, pronounced O'Connalaig, and now always anglicized Connolly.
without the prefix é The Munter Conyly were also corbes of the parish of Bally
Congaile, according to the Fermanagh Survey, but in the Inquisition of 18th Sep-

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-196.png ---
170 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

at Ross-Oirthir, near Lough-Earn ; she died about the year
480; and her festival is observed here the Ist of January.”
Ross Orry is now a parish church in the diocese of Clogher.*

¥ Act. SS. p.3. ——* Lid, visit.

tember, 1609, Ballioconnell is retumed as a chapelry of the parish of Magherie-
coolemanny, having one tate of land, whereof O’Connelly is the herenagh, paying
yearly unto the Bishop of Clogher two shillings and eightpence per annum,

A.D. 1379 James O'Conolly, Prior of Devenish, and Flaherty O'Mongan,
Erenagh of Ossory, died.

A.D. 1411. Conor O’Casey, Erenagh of the lands of Muintir-Casey, in Devenish,
and Johannes Mac Sgoloige, Erenagh of his own lands at Ross-airthir, died.
O'Donovan writes that Mac Sgoloige signifies the son of the farmer, and very
common in Fermanagh, but anglicized Farmer.

A.D. 1423. Maurice, the son of Matthew, son of Osgar Maguire, Archdeacon of
Clogher, Parson of Achadh-Urchair [Aghalurcher], and rd of Claoin-inis
(Cleenish) and Ross-airthir, died on the sixth of the Calends of May.

A.D. 1434. Lucas O’Leannain, Prior of Lisgool, and Matthew O'Conghaile,
Erenagh of Rossory, died.

COUNTY OF GALWAY.

Abbey Gormogan ;\ In the barony of Longford, and situated
about nine miles east of Loughrea.

Monaster O’Gormogan, alias de Via Nova, was founded
for regular canons of St. Augustin, under the invocation of
the Virgin Mary, by O’Gormogan.,*

We find that Dermod O’Feigher was abbot here some time
before the year 1309, in which year William, son of William
Hacket, sued the abbot of this house for five acres of pasture
and forty acres of turbary in Corbellynenegall. Richard, son
of Gilbert de Valle, did also sue the prior for fifty-four acres
of land, with their appurtenances, in Fynounta, of which
Dermod O’Feigher, the former abbot, had unjustly disseized
Gilbert, his father.>

July 1st, 34th King Henry VIIL, this abbey was granted to
Ulick, the first Earl of Clanricarde.*

Abbey Knockmoy ** Is situated six miles south-east of

* War. Mon. » King, p. 141. * Lodge, vol. i., p. 60 * Or Knock-muighe,
.2., Hill of Victory.

1 This monastery was commonly called ‘‘de via nova.” In the Patent Rolls
of Henry VIII. there is entered on rst gy 1535, a grant to “ Willic Boruc,
otherwise MacWilliam,” of the style and dignity of Earl of Clanrickard and Baron
of Dunkellyn ; and further, a grant to him of ‘‘all that, the Monastery of Via Nova,
Clonfertensis Dioecesis, with all the lands, houses, &c., appurtenant thereto.”

® The Abbey of Knockmoy is situated six miles to the south-east of Tuam. The
name originally was written Cnoc-Muaide, i.e., “the hill of Muadh” a woman's
name, which, according to O’Clery’s and Cormac’s glossaries, means “the noble
or venerable.” The monastery was founded in 1189 by Cathal Croibdearg, in

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-197.png ---
County of Galway. 171

Tuam, in Imaney, or O’Kelly’s country, in the barony of
Tiaquin.

An abbey, under the invocation of the Virgin Mary, was
founded here for Cistercians in the year 1189, or 1190, by
Cathol O’Conor, surnamed Crove-derge, or Red-Hand,
King of Connaught. This house was a daughter of the abbey
of Boyle.&

* Pembridge. * Ann. Munst. and B. V. M. D. and Stal. Cister. © War.
Cenob. p. 75.
fulfilment of a vow, when he achieved a great victory on this spot over Sir
Amoric St, Lawrence, who was slain in the battle. It was granted by its founder
to the Cistercians, and from the occasion of its erection is often called in medizval
records ‘‘ Monasterium Sanctae Mariae de Colle Victoriae.” There are still some
fine remains of the ancient abbey. ‘‘Several capitals of pillars, beautifully
sculptured, lie about the churchyard. The chancel is vaulted with stone; and on
the north wall is the tomb of the founder ; but that which gives most interest to
this ruin are the remains of the frescoes on the north side of the chancel. The
martyrdom of St. Sebastian is one of the subjects represented, and though mde in
design and faded in colour, the paintings are inestimably interesting to the
antiquary, as the most authentic memorials of ancient Irish costumes now to be
found. The inscriptions on the wall, while they show that the paintings are not
of the time of Cathal O'Connor, yet prove them incontrovertibly to belong to the
13th or 14th century.”"—AZ. Stokes, ‘‘ Christian Inscriptions,” vol. ii., page 82,
One of these paintings represents the Crucifixion of our Lord, with the Blessed
Virgin and St. John at the foot of the cross. This painting is in the recess of an
arch which still remains, and over which is artistically carved a man’s head,
wearing a crown. This is traditionally believed to represent the royal founder,
Cathal Croibhderg.

1190. The Chief of Muntir-Murchada, with the consent of Cathal, King of
Connaught, granted the town or village of Lismacuan, in Clanfergail, to C.D.
Abbot, and to the Abbey of Knockmoy, the witnesses present being Cathal, King
of Connaught ; E.D., his son; C., Archbishop of Tuam; H., Bishop of
Aghado ; L. Bishop of Elphin; D. Earl of Maglur; T. O'Flanagan; D.
Maccoiraghty, and T. Cormacain Cantore.

1201. This year Cardinal Johanes de Monte-Celio came to Ireland as the
Pope's Legate, and convened a great synod at Dublin. All the bishops, abbots,
priests, friars. monks, &c., with many of the nobility, were present.

1211. Roderick, son of Roderick, the son of Torlough O’Connor, was slain
by the people of Lieney, in Connaught. He was interred at Knockmoy.

1217. More, or Mary, daughter of Donald O’Brien, and wife of Cathal Croibh-
dearg (the founder of this abbey) died, and was interred here with great solemnity.

1218. Loughlin O’Conor, a man who was remarkable for his piety and hospi-
tality, died at the monastery here. The Annals of the Four Masters thus record
his death :—" Loughlin O’Conor died in the Monastery of Cnoc Muaidhe.”

1224. The Monastery of St. Francis, at Athlone, in the diocese of Clonmacnoise,
on the east bank of the Shannon, was erected by the founder of Knockmoy
Abbey, Cathal, King of Connaught. The Abbey of Clare Island, which was
founded this year, was afterwards annexed to Knockmoy, as appears by Sir James
Ware's Jnguiries concerning Ireland and its Antiquities, which says:—‘‘To
this convent was afterwards annexed the Cell of Cleary, in an island of the same
name in Mayo.” This year King Cathal died. His death is thus recorded in the
Annals of the Four Masters :—‘' An awful and strange shower fell in Connaught,
extending over Hy Maine, Sedain, Hy Diarmada, and other parts, followed by
terrible diseases and distémpers among the cattle that grazed on the lands where
this snow fell, and their mill produced in the persons who drank it extraordinary
internal diseases. It was manifest that these were evil omens foreboding mis-
fortunes to the people of Connaught, as they sustained irreparable loss and
calamity in the same year by the death of Cathal Crovdearg, the son of Turlogh
Mor O'Conor and King of Connaught, the man who had during a long time


--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-198.png ---
172 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Cornelius de Muntir-moroghow, with the consent of Cathol,
King of Connaught, granted to this abbey the village of Lis-
macuan, in Clonfergaile. Witnesses, Cathol, the King ;
Catholicus, Archbishop of Tuam, who died A. D.1201; H.,
Bishop of Anaghdun ; and L., Bishop of Elphin, &c., &c.»

King Cathol, the founder, was expelled his kingdom in the
year 1200. During his exile, William Burke totally spoiled
the abbey ;' but Cathol was again restored in 1202."

» Ogyg. p. 30. ' M'Geogh.  * Pembridge.

destroyed more of the traitors and enemies of Ireland than any other had done,
the chief supporter of the clergy, and benefactor of the poor and indigent—a man
in whom God had planted more goodness and greater virtues than in any other
of the Irish nobility of his time. ‘rom the period of his wife's death till his own,
he led a single and virtuous life. During his reign, tithes were first lawfully col-
lected in Ireland. This upright and noble prince, this warrior of pure piety and
just judgments, died on the 28th day of Summer, on a Monday, in the habit of a
grey friar, in the Monastery of Knockmoy, which he himself had dedicated to God,
and granted to the monks, with its site and lands, and in which he was interred
with due honours and solemnity. The place of Cathal-Crovdearg’s birth was at
the Port of Lough Mask, and he was nurtured and educated in Hy Diarmada,
with Teige O’Conceanain.”

1228. This year the Abbey of Knockmoy was plundered of its treasures.

1240. According to Martene, tom. iv., col. 1347, the Abbot of Knockmoy,
because he allowed his head to be washed by a woman, narrowly escaped being
deprived of his office, and @ penance was imposed upon him for six days, on two
of which he was only allowed bread and water diet. He was also interdicted the
abbots’ stall ‘for forty days, and a caution was given that no person in Holy
Orders should again be guilty of a like tran: sion,

1249. Marian O’Laghnan, Archbishop of Tuam, died. He appropriated the
Church of Kilfelge to the Abbey of Knockmoy. Sir James Ware says of him,
after speaking of Felix O'Ruaden, Archbishop of Tuam, who died in 1238 :—“It
was Marian, or Mcelmurry, O’Laghlan, Dean of Tuam, that succeeded him, a
very great canonist. Presently upon his election, he posted to Rome to receive
Confirmation from the Pope, where, being appproved of by Pope Gregor IX,,
he also obtained the pall. This man undertook a pilgrimage (whether before or
after he was Bishop I know not) to Jerusalem. He died at Athlone a little
before Christmas, in 1249. He appropriated the Church of Kilfelge to the Abbey
of Knockmoy, a/ias Conquest Hill.”

1262. Thomas O'Conor, Archbishop of Tuam, having received the consent of
the chiefs of Hydermader, united the Rectory of Hydermader to Knockmoy.

1266. Turlough, son of Hugh, son of Cathal Croibdearg, died here, having
previously taken the habit of the order, where he was interred.

Sava, daughter of Cathal Croibdearg, was here interred.

1267. Bryan, son of Turlough, son of Roderick O'Connor, died here, and was
interred in the same tomb with the other members of his family.

Donough, son of Roderick, son of Hugh O'Connor, having been slain by the
English, was interred at Knockmoy.

1290. Laurence O’Laghnan. Abbot of Knockmoy, was consecrated Bishop of
Kilmacduach. Sir James Ware says of him:—‘‘ Laurence O’Laghnan, a
cystercean monk, abbot, first of Ashro, afterwards of Buelly, and at last of Knock-
moy, succeeded.”

1295. Donald O'Kelly, son of Connor O’Kelly, chieftain of Hy-Many, by his
wife, the daughter of O’Hynes, died. The Four Masters thus record his death :—
** Donald O’Kelly, lord of Hy-Maine, the most wise of counsel in his time, died
in a monastic habit, and was interred in the Monastery of Knockmoy.”

1401. This year Malachy O'Kelly, who had become chief of Hy-Many in 1375,
six years before his father’s death, died and was interred in the choir of Knockmoy

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-199.png ---
County of Galway. 173

' King Cathol, the founder, of this abbey, took on him the
Cistercian habit, and dying the 28th of May, 1224, was
interred here ;! where his tomb yet remains.

Marian, who was made Archbishop of Tuam int he year
1235, and died in 1249, appropriated to this abbey the chutch
of Kilfelge.™

1 War. Cenob. and Monast, ™ War. Bps. p. 605.

Abbey. He was very much lamented by the monks, as he was during his life a
great benefactor of this abbey.

1402, There was a monument erected to the memory of Malachy O'Kelly, by
his second wife, Finola, daughter of Turlough O’Conor. _ It bore an Irish inscrip-
tion, of which the following is a translation :—" For Mceleachlainn O'Kelly, King
of Hy-Many, and Finola, daughter of O’Conor, Matthew O’Anli erected this
monument.”

1403. Finola O'Kelly died and was interred with her husband at Knockmoy.
Her death is thus recorded in the Anna/s :—‘‘ Fionnguala, daughter of Torlogh,
son of Hugh, son of Owen O’Conor, the wife of Malachy O'Kelly, lord of Hy-
Maine, died after a well-spent life.”

1484. This year Pope Innocent VIII., by a Bull, established the wardenship
of Galway, and gave certain dues heretofore paid to the Church of St. Nicholas in
that town, by Knockmoy Abbey, towards the support of the warden.

1542. On the 24th of May, Hugh O'Kelly, the last Lord Abbot of Knockmoy,
son of Teige O'Kelly, of Callagh Castle, chief of Hy-Many, and his wife, the
daughter of Donough O’Kelly, surrendered this abbey to Henry VIII., but was
allowed to retain it on undertaking to furnish a ‘‘ battle of Gallowglasses" and
sixty kern in Conaght, twelve horsemen and twenty-four kern out of Conaght.

1585. It appears by the treaty made by Sir John Perrot, the Lord Deputy, on
behalf of Queen Elizabeth, with the lords, chieftains, knights, &c., of Connaught,
that Domnick Lynch was “ Farmor” (farmer) of Knockmoy this year. At this
period, Knockmoy was valued at £209 4s. per annum.

1590. In Lodge's Peerage of Ireland it is stated that Sir Patrick Barnewall, of
Turvey and of Gracedieu, had a lease this year of the lands of Ardnesaddan, Cor-
bally, Uranbegg, Knocknemanagh, Clonkrane, parcel of the possessions of the
Monastery of Knockmoy, for 60 years, at the rent of £31 7s. 9¢. Itis also said
that the Lords Justices received a warrant dated at Windsor Castle 12th
November, 1582, to make him a new lease, without fine, for 60 years, to commence
at the expiration of the former lease.

1604. Rotwithstanding the severe measures put in force against the Catholics, in
obedience to the order of the Lord Deputy, they repaired several abbeys and
monasteries amongst the first of which was Knockmoy.

1611. Valentine Blake, Esq. (to whom the abbey was granted in 1586) was
elected Mayor of Galway, but ha ing refused to take the oath of supremacy, was
deprived of office by Sir Oliver St. John, in the presence of William O’Donnell,
Protestant Archbishop of Tuam.

1622. On the roth of July, Valentine Blake, Esq., of Menlough Castle, was
created a Baronet of Ireland, received a patent to hold a fair at Knockmoy on the
toth of August annually, with the privilege of holding a manor court and the
power of creating five tenures by service of a knight's fee. Knockmoy having been
erected into a manor, Sir Valentine was first lord of the manor.

1630. Sir Valentine Blake, knt. and bart., was again elected Mayor of Galway,
but this time was not disturbed in office.

1652, This year an army of Cromwellian fanatics took possession of the town of
Galway, and among the numerous native Catholic families who suffered exile by
the confiscation which followed were the Blakes. Sir Valentine Blake, Bart.,
M.P., of Menlough Castle, lord of the manor of Knockmoy, and his younger
brother, Sir Walter Blake, knt., were both obli; to leave Menlough Castle in
consequence ofthe great zeal they invariably displayed in behalf of their religion
and country. Sir Valentine had been one of the first, in conjunction with the Rev.
Walter Lynch, the patriotic warden of the town, to close the gates of Galway

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-200.png ---
174 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

An Englishman, whose name is not mentioned, was made
abbot in 1268."

Laurence O’Laghtnan was removed from the government
of Boyle to this abbey ; in the year 1290 he was made Bishop
of Kilmacduagh, and died in 1307.°

In 1306, Peter, the son of James Bermingham, brought his

writ against the abbot to suffer him to present a proper
® M Gogh. ° Ann. Laoghkee.

against the English, for which he was expelled by the then existing government

from the Irish House of Commons, on the 22nd of June, 1642. His estate and

castle of Menlough were granted to John Matthews, an English Cromwellian

soldier, and Knockmoy was given to another of the regicide party. The tithes

of Knockmoy were granted to an Englishman named R. Bogle.

1660. On the restoration of King Charles II., Sir Valentine Blake, bart., who
was by right lord of the manor of Knockmoy, was restored his castle of Menlough,
and 2,000 acres of land adjoining thereto, by a clause in the Act of Settlement, but
he did not receive a re-grant for any portion of the lands of Knockmoy,

1668. Sir Walter Blake, knt., the younger brother of Sir Valentine Blake,
bart., of Menlough Castle, mentioned under the year 1652, obtained a patent from
the Crown for part of the ancient manor of Knockmoy, including the venerable
abbey, and the division known as Abbey—namely, Cullagh, four quarters ; the
quarter of the Abbey, and the mills thereupon ; and the quarter of the Nayle,
otherwise Feigh, amounting to 1,372 acres, besides 43 acres in Lissuniskie. How-
ever, though Sir Walter Blake received a patent for this portion of the lands of
his ancestors, the tithes of Killoscobe were not restored to him by the King,
though they had, previous to Cromwell’s time, been the property of his forefathers.
They were granted to the Protestant Church of Tuam.

1677. Nicholas Browne, Esq., received a patent for a portion of the lands of
Knockmoy, namely, Newtewn, 4 quarters, 877 acres; Moyne, 1 quarter, 326
acres; Figh, I quarter, 144 acres ; and Lisniski, 1 quarter and 65 acres ; and also
various other lands,

1737. This year the monks were living at Knockmoy, as appears by a report
made to the Irish House of Commons.

The hill of Knockmoy, which is within a short distance of the abbey, is 557 feet
above the level of the sea, and is called by the try ‘* Knock Rua” (or the
red hill). Nearly on the summit is a ‘bl well” dedicated to St. Bernard.
On every 20th of August tents are pitched on the hill, and multitudes of people
assemble to invoke the intercession of this saint. The fishermen from the Clad-
dagh, at Galway, particularly attend. Relative to the origin of this well, tradition
relates that the night previous to the battle with St. Lawrence, Cathal, the Red-
handed, was in want of water to quench the thirst of his army, caused by the long
march they had made for the purpose of intercepting the Normans. Cathal, who
was always remarkable for his devotion and hi in the aid of Providence, had
recourse to prayer, and the result was that a well sprung up through the rock, and
is never since without a good supply of water.

To the east of the abbey is a well called after the founder, Tubber Cathal (‘.¢.,
Charles's well). To the north is another called ‘‘ Tubber na fion,” formerly said
to have the same effect as wine ; and there is a third called “ Tubber Frinchais,”
believed to possess powerful medicinal qualities.

Forts are very numerous in the neighbourhood of Knockmoy Abbey. There is
a fort or lis on the lands of Cullagh, called Lis na Cinadouna, or the Court of
the People of the World ; and at Cahir Phooka is another called the City of the
Pooka. There was in former times a church or monastery built on part of the
lands of South Cullagh, now called Pullogh. According to tradition, the monks
who commenced the work became so disgusted with the conduct of those who
resided in the neighbourhood, that they abandoned it, and removed to New Castle,
in the parish of Athenry. The foundations can be still traced, and it is also said
that this part of the lands of Knockmoy was called Bally Bernard. At some dis-
tance from this place is a very curious cave.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-201.png ---
County of Galway. 175

person to the church of Odermode ; he gave half a marc for
licence to amend his writ.

The abbot, Hugh O’Kelly, surrendered the abbey and its
possessions, by indenture, on the 24th of May, 1542, at the
same time renouncing the supremacy of the Pope, &c. ; he also
covenanted to furnish the King with sixty horse, a battle of
gallowglasses,1 and sixty kern, when the Lord Deputy should
come into Connaught, and with twelve horse and twenty-four
kern any where out of the province; on these conditions,
the abbey was granted to him during life."

The 27th of Queen Elizabeth (1584), this abbey was found to
be in possession of the following lands, &c. :—Their demesne,
being twelve quarters of land in the village and lands of Knock-
moy, subject to the following chief rents, viz., 13s. 4d. sterling, _
out of the two quarters of Knocknemannagh ; 13s. 4d. sterling
out of the two quarters of Dulysse ; 40s. out of the four quarters
of Uraniebegg ; 13s. 4d. out of the six quarters of the townland
of Agherim, alias Monksgrange ; 20s. out of the four quarters
of Grange-Maghery-Reogh ; 16s. 8d. out of the two quarters of
Tawnagh ; 10s. out of the two quarters of Grange Cawlreagh ;
10s. out of the two quarters of Ardnefallagh ; 20s. out of the
quarter of Coolortin, in the barony of Tiaquin ; 10s. out of
the quarter of Dryssaghan ; 20s. out of the four quarters of
Corbally ; with the tithes of all the said townlands ; Coolortin
and Dryssaghan excepted; the tithes of the rectories of
Kiloscoby and Moylaghe, in O’Kelly’s country, and the half
quarter of the tithes, glebe, fisheries, alterages, oblations, &c.,
of the rectory of the town of Galway, both within the town
and without; and in the towns of Clogh-Lynch, Tyrellia,
Ballnebritt, and Corgaddere. Ss.

da.
Knockmoy and tithes, yearly value sterling - & (ae)
Ardnesallagh and tithes - 030 0
Grange de Maghery-Reogh and tithes, and Aghe-
rim and tithes -
Knocknemannagh and tithes
Uraniebegge and tithes -
Corbally and tithes -
Kiloscoby - . .
Tawnagh and tithes -
Coolortin and tithes -

Cawlreagh and tithes
Dryssaghan .

Dowlyssan and tithes
Galway rectory,
Moylaghe, 10 13

P King, p. 368. ° Gallowglasses were the heavy, and the kern light, armed foot.
* Cox. vol. é, p. 272.

CODDO AAA

ied N

85&B Boo0e00
POOCORDMD000N

ao
°

i sterling money

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-202.png ---
176 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

In the County of Mayo. 4s a.
The island of Clare, eae one Cras and
the tithes = - O13 4
Grange of Tirawly, a small quarter and the tithes 213 4
Ballywourry, alias Ballymurry, four small quarters
and tithes - - - 213 4
Altearenane, a small quarter and tithes - 013 4

The chapel of Altuenan, in the barony of Tyre-

ragh, in the County of Sligo, with one quarter

of land and the Es eo to

said chapel - O13 4
all sterling money.*

Inquisition 1st April, 27th Queen Elizabeth, anes that the
abbot was seized of twelve quarters of land in the townland
of Knockmoy, being the demesne of the abbey, also the fol-
lowing chief rents, viz—out of Knocknemannaghe, which
contains two quarters, 13s. 4d.; Duliffe, fgur quarters, 16s. 8d. ;
Uranbegge, four quarters, 4os.; Aghrem, alias Munck’s
Grange, six quarters, 13s. 4¢.; Grange Maghery Reoghe, six
quarters, 20s.; Corbally, four quarters, 20s.; Tawnagh, two
quarters, 16s. 8¢.; Grange Cowbreogh, two quarters, 10s. ;
Ardnesalaghe, two quarters, 10s.; a quarter of land called
Cooloorta, in the barony of Tiaquin, 20s.; and another
quarter called Dryssegan, 1os., all sterling money ; the tithes
of the said lands appertained to the said abbot ; as also the
rectories of Kyllaskobo and Moylaghe, in O’Kelly’s country,
and three half-quarters of the tithes, glebes, fisheries, alterages,
oblations, and other spiritualities of the rectory of Galway,
both in the town thereof, and in the townlands of Cloghlynch,
Tyrolla, Ballenebritt, and Corgaddere, did also belong to the
abbot.

First of September, 27th Queen Elizabeth, it was found that
the abbot was seized of twelve quarters of land in Knockmoy
and the tithes thereof, annual value, besides reprises, 16s. ;
also the following lands with the tithes thereof, Ardnesalaghe,
annual value, 30s.; Grange of Maghery, Revagh, and Aghrim,
annual value, £8; Knocknemanagh, annual value, 535. 4d. ;
Oranbegge, annual value, £4; Corbally, annual value, 44;
Tawnagh, annual value, 26s.; Cowlourtin, annual value, 40s. ;
Grange of Cowbrewd, annual value, 53s. 4a. ; and Drisseghan,
annual value, 1os.; the following rectories were also ap-
propriated to the abbot :—Galway, annual value, £8; Doulisse,
20s.; Moylagh £10 13s. 4a.; and Killoscobyin, £6, all
sterling money."

Inquisition 29th January, same year, finds, that John de
Burgh was, in his life-time, seized of the castle of Carnane,

* King, p. 368. * Chief Rememb. ‘id.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-203.png ---
SS

County of Galway. , 177

and two quarters of land commonly called Knocknemanaghe,
parcel of the abbey of Knockmoy ; annual value, besides
reprises, 20s. Irish money."

nquisition 7th October, 29th same reign, finds, that the
chapel of Aiterenan, with a quarter of land in the barony of
Tyereragh and County of Sligo, annual value, besides reprises,
13s. 4@., was parcel of the possession of this abbey.*

The parsonage of Galway did belong to this abbey,‘ as did
also the Cell of Cleary, in the County of Mayo."

There are yet to be seen some beautiful remains of this
abbey.

March 22nd, 1620, Valentine Blake, Esq., held and enjoyed
the site of this abbey, in which was a church and hall of stone
covered with shingles, a cellar under the hall, a dormitory,
cloister, an enclosure wherein was formerly another hall
and sundry buildings, three houses or cottages now within the
circuit of the said abbey ; with twelve tofts, twelve gardens, and
twelve quarters of land, viz.,the monastery quarter, alias
Carownemanesteragh ; the town and village of Coulagh, and the
four quarters commonly called the four quarters of Cnolagh ;
the two quarters of Sewenemannagh; the quarterof Moyne; the
quarter of Bealacheren ; the quarter of Kilgarrowe; the quarter
of Carroweleynnenaghlowe; the quarter of Carrownemaddagh;
all in the County of Galway, with all the tithes, alterages,
oblations, and obventions arising and accruing therefrom; a
water-mill upon the quarter called the monastery quarter;
the rectories of the church or chapel of Killoskobe, in O’Kelly’s
country, in the county of Galway ; the moiety of all the tithes,
and of all alterages, oblations, and obventions growing due out
of the four quarters of tithes in Killaskarla and Ballinagrossin,
with their appurtenances, called O’Kelly’s country; of the
four quarters as aforesaid in the town and lands of Drumnadda
and Ballinesowragh, in the said country ; four quarters of
tithes as aforesaid of all the lands, with the alterages, &c.,
yearly, out of the four quarters of the land of Moulagh Cro-
soughter, and also the rectory of the church or chapel of
Moylagh, with the moiety of the tithes in the town and lands
of Moylagh ; a moiety of all the tithes in Trosnagh and
Annaghmore; the moiety of the quarters of all the tithes in
the town and lands of Coolove ; the moiety of all the tithes
of the town and lands of Mullaghmore aforesaid ; the moiety
of all the tithes in Annaghlyne, Cargarne, and Bonlyneon ;
the moiety of all the tithes in the town and lands of Clonoran
and Cloncolgy ; the moiety of all the tithes in the town, &c.,
of Tonleghy and Ballyronane ; the moiety of all the town and

® Chief Rememb, "id, * King, p. 368. * War. Mon.
VOL. IL. XN

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-204.png ---
178 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

lands of Corvally, Clonerurrin, Caldragh, and Cillkagh, with
their appurtenances ; together with the moiety of all the tithes,
alterages, &c., accruing out of the several towns and lands of
Moylagh, Trasnagh, Annaghmore, Coolowe, Mullaghmore,
Annaghleyne, Corgarroue, Boevoynen, Cloonoran, Cloone-
halgy, Tonelegy, Ballyroioau, Conbally, Coonecurry, Caldraght,
and Cillkagh aforesaid; all the tithes out of -Coolereogh,
Togher, and the grange respectively ; the moiety of all the
tithes and of all oblations, &c., yearly, out of the town and
lands of Coolewortagh and Drisughan ; the fourth part of the
tithes, &c., out of Tacenagh; the fourth part of all the tithes
&c., out of Corbally ; the fourth part of all the tithes of Cor-
bally, Curanbegg ; the fourth part of all the tithes of Grange,
with the lands of Agherein ; the fourth part and the half of a
fourth part of all the tithes in Ardneshadda, with all the alte-
rages, &c., out of the said lands of Grange, Curanbegg,
Aghenan, and Arneshadda; all which lands, &c., aforesaid,
situated in the County of Galway, are worth in the whole,
yearly, £25 10s. Irish money, besides reprises.”

Aghrim ;> In the barony of Kilconnell, and about four
miles west of Ballinasloe and the river Suck.

At Aghrim O’Many, or Eachraim, was a priory of canons
regular of St. Augustin, under the invocation of St. Catherine ;
some say it was founded in the 13th century by Theobald, the
first Butler of Ireland ; but we cannot find any authenticated
account of this abbey.*

On the surrender of this priory, the prior was seized of a
messuage, or toft, in the town of Athlone, County of West-
meath, value 6d.; twelve gardens beyond the east part of
Athlone, value 3s. ; two parcels of land called Aghavallebeg
and Aghavallemore, near O’Brien’s land, containing an acre

-and a half in the town and lands of Athlone, value 6¢.; a
meadow extending from the said gardens to the river Shannon,
containing seven acres, value 2s. 4d.; a parcel of pasture
ground, near the meadow, called Stradmakan, containing eight
acres, value 2s.; and an eel weir on the said river.”

When the monastery was suppressed, it was granted,
together with those of Clonthuskert, St. John the Baptist, in
Tuam, Kilcreunata, Rosserelly, Loughrea, Kilbought, and
Anagdowne, to Richard, Earl of Clanricarde, and his heirs, in
capite, at the yearly rent of £68 gs. 6d.*

Ahaskeragh ; Inthe barony of Kilconnell, and situated near
the river Suck.

v Lib. Ing. in Bibl. Honoratis. W. Conyngham. = War. Mon. » King,
p. 236. * Audit. General.

3 At this place was fought the decisive battle so fatal to the cause of James the
‘Second, on the 12th of July (old style), 1691,

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-205.png ---
County of Galway. 179

St. Cuan, of Ath-ascrath, died A.D. 788.

Ahaskerath is now a parish church in the diocese of Elphin.

Aull Farannain ; A monastery of this name was situated in
some part of Connaught, and was given by Tipraid, Prince
of Hy-Fiachria,> to St. Columb, who placed St. Farannan
over it. We know nothing farther of this abbey.

The Isles of Arran ;* Three islands in the western ocean,

* Act. SS. p. 251. > Hy-Finchria-aidhne contained the present baronies of
Leitrim, Loughvreagh, Kiltartan, Doonkillen. Athenree and Clare, in the County
of Galway. ° Tr. Th. p. 440. ¢ These islands are counted to be in the half
barony of Arran, and are commontly called the Great Isle, the Small East Island,and
the Island of Inishmain. The second Act of Settlement.

« When Colgan was preparing his Acta Sanctorum Hiberniae for publication, he
received from Dr. Malachy O’Kealy, Archbishop of Tuam, a description of all
the churches of that diocese, from which he published, in the Appendix to S¢.
Enda's Life, the following portion that referred to the Aran Islands :—

“ Of the three Islands of Aran and their churches—

1, ‘The parish church, commonly called Xi#/-Enda, lies in the County of Gal-
way, and half barony of Aran, and in it St. Endeus, or St. Enna, is venerated as
patron on the 21st of March.

2. ‘*The church called Zeglach-Enda, to which is annexed a cemetery, wherein
is the sepulchre of St. Endeus, with one hundred and twenty-seven other sepul-
chres, wherein none but saints were ever buried.

3. “The church called Zempull Mac Longa, dedicated to St. Mac Longius, is
situated near the parish church, which is called sometimes Xs//-Enda, that is, the
Car or cellof St. Endeus, and sometimes 7empull mor Enda, or the great church
of Endeus,

4. “The church called Zempul! Mic Canonn, near the aforesaid parish church.

Fy “ The church called of St. Mary. not far from the same parish church.

“ The church which is named 7empull Benain, or the temple of St. Benignus.

7. ‘* The church called AMainistir Connachtach, that is, the Connaught Monastery,
in place, of which, being afterwards demolished, was built a chapel to St. Kieran..

. “ The church called Xi//-na-manach, that is, the church or cell of the monks,
which was dedicated to St. Cathradochus, or Caradoc, the monk, surnamed Gardh,
or the rough.

9. ‘The church Zempull Assurnuidhe (or, perhaps, Esserninus) ; and this
church is held in the greatest veneration among the islanders.

to. ‘* The church called Zempull an cheathruir aluinn, or the church of the
four beautiful (saints), who were SS. Fursey, Brendan of Birr, Conall, and Ber-
chann, whose bodies are also said to be buried in the same tomb, lying in the
cemetery of the same church.

11. “ The church called 7empull-mic-Duach, or the church of St. Mac Duagh,
(who is also called Colmanus, surnamed Mac Duagh), which is a handsome church
dedicated to that saint.

12, ‘‘ The handsome, and formerly parochial, church, called Zampull Breccain,
or the church of Brecan, in which also his feast is celebrated on the 22nd of May.

13. ‘‘ The church near the aforesaid church of St. Brecan, which is commonly
called Zempull a Phuill.”

Thus far of the churches and chapels of the first island. We read in our
Martyrologies that the natalis of St. Enda is celebrated of the 21st of March ;
that of St. Goban, on the 3oth of March and 3othof May; of St. Cronan, on
the 2nd of March ; St. Nehemias, on the 14th of June; and St. Benedict, on the
same 14th of June: ‘ wherefore,” adds Colgan, “I think that he is the same saint
who is called by the Calendar of Cashel Benedict, and by other Martyrologies
Nehemias.”

In the second island, according to the same list, there is one church called 7ém-
pull Ceannannach, dedicated to the same St. Ceannannach, and another church
dedicated to the Blessed Virgin, both subject to the parish of St. Enda.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-206.png ---
180 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

opposite to the bay of Galway; the principal of them was
called Aranmore.

Inquisition 11th April, 1581, finds, that these islands called
Arrynmore, Inishmine, and Inisherye, were parcel of the pos-

“In the third island of Aran :—1. The church of Kill-Choemhain, dedicated to
St. Colman, and in which also he is venerated. 2. The church consecrated to St.
Paul. 3. The church called Kill-gradh-an Domhain, in which St. Gobnata is
venerated on the 11th of February. In this island there was formerly a celebrated
monastery called Kill-Cholmain, in which St. Colman was venerated on the 12th of
June, from which also the island itself is sometimes called Ara-cholmain.”

Half a century later O’Flaherty, in his description of West Connaught (pub-
lished by Hardiman for the I. A.S., in 1846) gave a more detailed account of some
ot the holy places of Aran, from which a few extracts will suffice :-—“ The isles of
Aran are famous for the multitude of saints there living of old and interred, or
there trained in religious austerity and propagating monastic discipline in other
parts ; venerable for many sacred churches, chapels, wells, crosses, sepulchres, and
other holy relics of saints still there extant as monuments of their piety;
reverenced for many rare privileges of sacred places therein, and the instant divine
punishments inflicted on such as dare violate or profane them ; frequently visited by
oe in pilgrimage for devotion, acts of penance, and miraculous virtues there
wrought.

‘*Aranmore, the greatest of these islands, contains twenty-four quarters of land,
and is twenty-four miles in compass; wherein, on the south side, stands Dun-
Engus, a large fortified place on the brim of a high cliff (this fortress of the Belgic
colonists, dating from the first century of the Christian era, is styled by Petrie one
of the most magnificent barbaric monuments now remaining in Europe). This
island was inhabited by infidels out of Corcomroe, in the County of Clare, when
St. Enda got it by donation of Engus, Kigg of Munster, about the year 480. He
there Jaid the first foundation of Christian piety, and sowed that small grain of
mustard seed which so increased, that this island was called Aran of the Saints.
The Life of St. Kieran of Clonmacnoise thus expresseth the infinite number of
saints in that island in his own time :—‘In qua multitudo sanctorum virorum
manet, et innumerabiles sancti omnibus incogniti nisi soli Deo omnipotenti, ibi
jacent.’ The like expression is to be found in the Life of St. Ailbhe of Emly :—
“ Magna est illa insula et est terra sanctorum ; quia nemo scit numerum sanctorum
qui sepulti sunt ibi, nisi solus Deus.’ St. Enda, son of Conall Dearg, of the
noble Oirghiellian family in Ulster, and brother-in-law, by his sister, to King
Engus of Munster, followed the evangelical precept, forsaking a rich patrimony
for Christ, and his merits brought him to be abbot beyond seas in Italy, before he
came with one hundred and fifty religious persons to Aran, where he lived to his
decrepit age, being upwards of fifty-eight years in the island ; for St. Kieran of
Clonmacnoise lived nine years under his discipline and left in the year 538. His
successors, abbots of Aran, continued, I suppose, to the time of the suppression
of abbeys. The last of whom I find recorded was Donatus {O’Leyn, Abbot of
Aran, in the year 1400, The memory of St. Gregory the Great, kept in this
island, was doubtless because he was much reverenced of old in Ireland, and
honoured with the title of golden mouth, as Cumianus writes in his letter about
the year 634, by which name he is known to this day in Irish. Near the Castle
of Arkin was St. Enna’s church and an abbey of St. Francis, both demolished for
building the citadel in Cromwell’s time. Not far from thence, to the east, isa
small chapel of St. Enda, wherein Sir Morogh O'Flaherty, of Bunowan, was buried,
A.D. 1666. Outside this chapel, north-east, is the churchyard where anciently
were one hundred and twenty graves of saints, in one of which St. Enda was
buried, where the stone laid over him is as yet to be seen, together with diverse other
tombstones still extant (now, however, covered with the sand). Here numerous
saints interred, as in other parts of the island, rest in peace, till the day of gen-
eral resurrection, There is on the east side of this island Portdoibhche, 3.¢.,
Portus Dolii, mentioned in St, Enda's Life,now corruptly Port-eiche; and in each
of the two other islands is Trach-na-neach, or Tract-each, #.¢., the Horse’s-shore,

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-207.png ---
County of Galway. 181

sessions of the ——— religious houses of Fynbour, Annagh-
coyne, Kilseaney, and Corcomroe in this county, excepting
only that part of the same which belonged to the Bishop of
Annaghcoonste.®

Arran Naomh ; That is, Arran of the Saints, a number of

* Chief Rememb.

situated as in his life ; but Leamchoill, where he is suid to have first landed, should
be Ochoill. Besides which port, there is Port-Caradoc, called from St. Caradoc
Garth, to whom Kill-na-manach church is dedicated. Near this port is the pool of
Loughna-Keanainne, whereof mention is made in St. Enda’s Life.

“The middle island of Aran contains eight quarters of land, and has a fortification
like that of Dun-Engug, and named from Couchobhair (#.¢., Connor), brother to
Engus, as the tradition goes. Hallowed places in this island are, our Blessed
Lady’s chapel ; St. Kenanagh’s chapel : a hallowed place called Atharla-Kenerge ;
and the chapel of Seactmicrigh, or seven sons cf aking. Tradition says that St.
Kenanagh was a King of Leinster's son, and Kenerg, a King of Leinster's daugh-
ter. Her well (still called Tobar-na-Cindhirge, i.e, St. Kenerg’s well) is there in
a rock, and never becomes dry.

“The third island of ‘Aran, Laisoirthir, or the Eastern Isle (now commonly called
the South Island), contains four quarters of land, with a castle on a height. This
island was also called of old Ara-Coemham, from St. Colman of the ancient Dal-
Messincorb family, descended of the Kings of Leinster, brother to St. Coemgin,
Abbot of Glendalough, and probably disciple of St. Enda, as his brother was.
He lies buried in this island, on the north side of the church dedicated in his
name, where he is honoured the 3rd of November. There is a marble stone over
his tomb with a square wall built about it, on a plain green field in prospect of the
sea where sick people used to lie by night, and recover health from God, for his
sake. I have seen one grievously tormented by a thorn thrust into his eye, who,
by lying thus in St. Colman’s burying-place, had it-miraculously taken out without
the least feeling of the patient. As this Colman gave the name of Ara-Colmhan
to the island, so he from the island is called Colman-airne, #¢., ‘St. Colman of
Aran.’” This saint was born at the close of the fifth century, and is one of those
most honoured among the saints of Aran. He is venerated as special patron
against storms, and Hardiman, in his notes to Jar- Connaught, gives an instance of a
violent storm being appeased by the invocation of St. Colman.

A most valuable paper, headed ‘‘ A Visit to the Aran-Mor of St. Enda,” was
published in the /rish Ecclesiastical Record for 1870 by the Right Rev. Dr. Conroy,
the present learned Bishop of Ardagh ; and we select the following extracts from
it as giving a faithful picture of the present state of ‘‘ Aran of the Saints :—

“‘The Aran isles are three in number, named respectively, Inishmore (the large
island), Inishmain (the middle island), and Inisheen (the eastern island). The
eastern island is the smallest of the three, and is about two-and-a-half miles long ;
the middle island is three miles long; the largest is about nine miles in length?
and twenty-four in circumference, About the year of our Lord 480, the islands
were inhabited by infidels from Corcomroe, the adjacent part of Clare. About
that date St. Enda received the island by the donation of Engus, King of Munster,
whose wife, Darenia, was St. Enda’s own sister. The pagans were converted to
Christianity, or quitted the island, which, under St. Enda, soon became one of
the great Christian sanctuaries of the west of Europe. The Annals of the
Four Masters tell of a great conflagration at Aran in the year 1020, and of the
devastation wrought there by the Normans or Danes in the year 1081. Ata later
period it was held by the O’Briens, the head of whom, commonly called MacTeige
O'Brien, kept his residence at Aircin, or Arkin, on the great island. The O’Briens
were expelled in their turn by the O’Flahertys, who, again, were dispossessed by
Queen Elizabeth, under whom the castle of Arkin was erected in 1587, on the site
of the residence of the O’Briens. Elizabeth gave the island to John Ransom, from
whose hands it passed into the possession of Sir Robert Lynch, of Galway. In
Cromwell's time this castle was pulled down, and a strong fort erected in its place,

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-208.png ---
182 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

churches having been erected in this island, in which the
bodies of many saints repose. :

Engus, King of Cashel, at the request of St. Albeus,
granted this island to St. Enna, or Endeus, who built ten

of which fort we shall have occasion to speak further on. In December, 1650,
joo of the Irish landed here in boats, flying from defeat on the mainland, and were
speedily followed by 1,300 of the English foot, with a battery. The Irish sur-
rendered, and Sir R. Lynch having been declared a traitor, Erasmus Smith became
owner of Aran. This crafty undertaker disposed of his interest to the Butlers, one
of whom, in 1662, was created Earl of Aran; from the Butlers the islands passed
through the Fitzpatricks to the Digbys, who are the present owners.

“ The present inhabitants, about 3,400 in number, mainly belong to the race
that inhabits the south-western parts of Ireland. We bear cheerful witness to the
accuracy of the following account of their social state, given by Dr. Petrie :-—‘I
had heard so much of the virtues of the Aran islanders, of their primitive simpli-
city, their ingenuous manners, and their singular hospitality, that I could not help
doubting the truth of a picture so pleasing and romantic, and felt anxious to ascer-
tain, by personal observation, how far it might be real. . . . Collectively, the
inhabitants of the Aran islands may be said to exhibit the virtues of the Irish
character with, perhaps, as little intermixture of its vices as the lot of humanity
will permit. They are a brave and hardy race, industrious and enterprising, as
is sufficiently evinced, not only by the daily increasing number of their fishing
vessels. the barren rocks which they are covering with soil and making productive,
but still more by the frequency of their emigration from their beloved country and
friends to a distant wilderness, led solely by the hope that their indefatigable
Jabour may be employed there to the greater ultimate benefit of their families.
They are simple and innocent, but also thoughtful and intelligent. Lying and
drinking—the vices which Arthur Young considers as appertaining to the Irish
character—form, at least, no part of it in Aran, for happily their common poverty
holds out less temptation to the one or opportunity for the other. I do not mean
to say that they are rigialy temperate, or that instances of excess, followed by the

Irish consequences of broken heads, do not occasionally occur ; such could
not be expected when their convivial temperament and dangerous and laborious
occupations are remembered. They never swear, and they have a high sense of
decency and propriety, honour and justice, In appearance they are healthy,
comely, and prepossessing ; in their dress (with few exceptions), clean and com-
fortable ; in manner, serious, yet cheerful, and easily excited to gaiety ; frank and
familiar in conversation, and to strangers polite and respectful; but, at the same
time, wholly free from servile adulation. They are communicative, but not too
loquacious ; inquisitive after information, but delicate in seeking it, and grateful
for its communication.’ ”

After some interesting remarks on the various styles of architecture in the early
Trish Church, the learned writer thus continues :—

‘* We found a beautiful specimen of the class of larger churches here described,
in Tempul-Mac-Duagh, at Kilmurvey. It has the nave and chancel which charac-
terise the first-mentioned species of the Tempulls. The nave is little more than
18 feet long by 14 broad, and the chancel nearly 16 feet long by 11 broad.
The stones of the walls are of immense size, and the entire building has a
sombre, severe look. The doorway is a remarkable instance of the cyclopean
door, and resembles the doorway of the Cathedral Church of Kilmacduagh, erected
for St. Colman Macduagh by his kinsman Guaire Aidhne, King of Connaught,
about the year 610. It is 5 feet 6 inches in height, 2 feet in width at the
top, and 2 feet 3 inches at the bottom. The lintel is of granite, and measures
5 feet 6 inches in length, 1 foot 6 inches in height, and extends the entire
oe of the wall, which is 2 feet 6 inches.—(See Petrie’s Round Towers,
P. 174.

‘*Our chief interest, however, was naturally centred in the group of buildings
which exist at Killeany, and consist of the church of St. Benignus, the church of
St. Enda, the round tower of St. Enda, and the stone houses in its immediate

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-209.png ---
County of Galway. 183

churches on it ; and about the year 490 he was abbot of Kil-
lenda, the principal of those churches, and to which all the
rest were subject.£ The feast of St. Endeus, who died in the
beginning of the sixth century, is observed on the 21st of

£ Usher, p. 451. Act. SS. ~.714. Ware. Writers, p. 305.

vicinity. Our readers will have remarked that the first six churches named in Dr.
Keely’s list all stood near each other, and to the north of the present village of
Killeany. Out of the six, four have almost entirely disappeared, namely, Ki//-
Enda, called also Tempull-mor-Enda, or the great church of Enda; 7empull-mac-
Longa, Tempull-mic-Canonn, and the church of St. Mary. They were demolished
by the unholy hands of the invaders, for the sake of the materials which they sup-
plied, to build the castle of Arkin.

“«The church known as Teglach Enda still exists on the shore ; it is in good
preservation, and is a fine specimen of the single church without chancel It is
24 feet in length and 14 in breadth. All the walls now standing are by no
means of an equal antiquity. The eastern gable and part of the northern
side wall are the only parts belonging to St. Enda’s time, the remainder of the
building being the work of a later period. The eastern gable is built of large
stones like those at Tempull-Mac-Duagh, cemented with excellent mortar, one of
the stones extending almost the entire breadth of the gable. The window
in the eastern gable is 1 foot 17 inches high and 8 broad on the outside, and
on the inside 2 feet 3 inches high, and 1 foot 2 inches at the top, widening,
however, at the bottom to 1 foot 8 inches. The doorway is placed in the
northern wall, and is about 2 feet broad, and 5 high. It is in the modern
pointed style, and cannot be more than five hundred years old. There is a narrow
window in this northern wall of about 3 feet in height, of the same age as the
doorway. Beneath this window, on the outside of the edifice, we found inserted
in the wall a beautiful sepulchral slab inscribed, ‘or do Scandlain,’ a prayer for
Scanlan, which, however, was clearly not i sitw, since the lines ran not parallel
but at right angles with the ground. It was, probably, one of the many sepulchral
slabs belonging to the cemetery which surrounds the church, and was employed
by the restorers of the building. We do not know who this Scanlan was, but in
the list of saints of the family to which St. Enda belonged, we find mention made
of a Scanlan who was father of Flann Febhla, Archbishop of Armagh. Around
the church spreads the cemetery, now almost completely covered up by the sands,
in which the body of St. Enda, and those of one hundred and fifty other saints, are
interred. Between this cemetery and the castle of Arkin we found some remains
of masonry buried in the sands, which had left uncovered what seemed to be the

lintel of the doorway of one of the primitive buildings. Probably it was portion
of one of the four churches mentioned by Dr. Keely, and which had been de-
stroyed.

“A litde beyond this point, in the street of the village of Killeany, we entered a
narrow road, leading up the hill at the foot of which this ruined castle still frowns
on the sea, and soon reached a small well sunk deep in the ground, known to the
natives as the Friar’s well. It was the well that served the fathers of a Franciscan
Monastery, which was built, Ware says, in the year 1485, probably by the
O’Briens, on the slope of the hill just under the round tower of St. Enda, This
establishment also was demolished by the barbarians for the sake of its building
materials. It was easy for us, however, to trace its site by the lines formed by the
foundations of the walls ; and the base of a large stone cross, with portion of the
cross itself, was found lying in the middle of a field on which the building once
stood. The walls of loose stone on the road side were here festooned by thick
and verdant shoots of the hop plant, which spread in great luxuriance around.
This shrub is not found elsewhere on the island. It, and the miined cross, and a
few shapeless walls, are all that survive to tell where once stood garden and
cloister of the Franciscan Monastery.

“A little higher up, on the hill side, we came to St. Enda’s well and altar; the
atter surmounted by a rude cross, and betraying by its clumsiness the work of a

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-210.png ---
184 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

March. He was succeeded by St. Benedict, brother to St.
Kieran of Saiger.*
St. Cronan was abbot, but we cannot assign any date to
him:
6 Calendar. * Act. SS. p. 472. ‘Td. p. 564.

modem hand. St. Enda’s well, and indeed all the other wells we saw in the
island, are carefully protected by the Araners; the scarcity of water rendering the

session of a well almost as precious to tnem as it was to the Eastern shepherds

the days of Kebecca. At a short distance to the left of the well, stands the
remnant of the round tower of St. Enda. Once its height was worthy of the
cluster of sacred temple» which stood within the circle traversed by the shadow it
projected in the changing hours ; but now it is little more than 13 feet high.
An aged man who joined our group, told us that in St. Enda’s time the Mass was
not commenced in any of the churches of the island until the bell from St. Enda’s
tower announced that St. Enda himself had taken his place at the altar in his own
church. There have been many theories propounded concerning the uses of the
round towers less satisfactory than this of the simple Araner. The contrast
between the masonry of the round tower and that of the pagan forts is very
remarkable. The round tower was built of chiselled stones, bound together with
cement ; the pagan fortress of stones not dressed by the hand, and put ‘ther
without mortar. No one who has had an opportunity of comparing both, can
ae persuaded that they are the work oF the same period or of the same

uilders.

“Ascending the hill where it rises to the south-west behind the tower, we reached
the exquisitely beautiful duirteack known as Tempull Benain, or temple of St.
Benignus, pupil of St. Patrick, and Archbishop of Armagh, which crowned the
highest point of the hill above us, and stood out with its sharp lines clearly defined
against the sky. This church is erroneously called Temple Mionnain. It lies
north and south, a peculiarity which distinguishes it from the other churches of
these primitive ages, which, as a rule, lie east and west. A solitary arched
window in the eastern wall, where the altar stood, gave admittance to the light
through an opening a little more than a foot high and a foot broad. The doorway
is in the nort gu le, and commands an enchanting prospect over Casla Bay. It
is 6 feet 3 inches in height, and 1 foot 3 inches broad at top, while, like the
cyclopean doors, it widens at bottom to a width of 2 feet. The original height of
the side walls was 7 feet 4 inches ; the northern gable rose to the height of 17 feet,
but is now only 1§ feet high. In the western wall there is one large stone, in
size 4 feet by 4, and 11 inches in thickness. Tempull Benain measures on the
outside only 1§ feet t inch in length, and rt feet 3 inches in breadth. The
roof has totally disappeared, but was evidently a stone roof like that on the
building known as St. Kevin’s house, at Glendalough. Dr. O’Donovan, who, in
company with Dr. Petrie, examined all the churches in Aran, and to whose
accuracy we owe those details of measurement, unhesitatingly declares this church
of St. Benain to be an erection coeval with St. Benignus himself. It is well
known that this saint has always been the object of great devotion in the west, on
account of his apostolic labours in that portion of Ireland.

“And here, before leaving this part of our subject, we wish to quote Dr. Petrie’s
eloquent remarks on the primitive churches of our land, and what are ally
applicable to those on Aran, ‘That they have little in them,’ says the learned
man, ‘to interest the mind or attract regard as works of art, it would be childish
to deny ; yet, in their symmetrical simplicity—their dimly-lighted nave, entered
by its central-west doorway, and terminated on the other side by its chancel arch,
affonting to the devout worshipper an unimpeded view of that brighter sanctuary
in which were celebrated the divine mystenes which afforded him consolation in
this world and hope in the next—in the total absence of everything which could
distract his attention—there is an expression of fitness to their purpose too often
wanting in modern temples of the highest pretensions; as the artless strains s1
to the Creator, which, we may believe, were daily hymned in these unad
temples, were calculated, from their very simplicity and artlessness, to awaken

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-211.png ---
County of Galway. 185

A.D. 650. St. Nemius, or Nehemias Hua Birn, called the
comorb of St. Endeus, died the 19th of June this year.«

The tomb of St. Nemius is shewn in the church-yard of
another church in this island, called Teglagh-Enda.!

Act. SS. p.715, and Tr, Th. p. 182. | See Colgan, p. 21, and Butler, vol.iii. p. 253.

feelings of deep devotion, which the gorgeous artificial music of the modern
cathedral but too rarely excites even in minds most predisposed to feel its
influences and appreciate its refinement. In short, these ancient temples are just
such humble, unadorned structures as we might expect them to have been; but,
even if they were found to exhibit less of that expression of congruity and fitness,
and more of that humbleness so characteristic of a religion not made for the rich,
but for the poor and lowly, that mind is but little-to be envied which could look
with apathy on the remains of national structures so venerable for their antiquity,
and so interesting as being raised in honour of the Creator in the simplest ages of
Christianity.’

“But where, it may be asked, did all these religious men live? How were they
sheltered from the Atlantic tempests of which the first fury was necessarily spent
on the beetling cliffs of Aran? How were they protected from the wintry cold,
and from the rain?

“Let not our readers expect, in answer to this question, a description of any vast
structure sufficient for the adequate accommodation of communities as large as
those that were housed in the stately monasteries of the middle ages. In Aran, as
elsewhere in Ireland, the early monastic establishments were com; of separate
cells for the abbot, monks, and clergy, while the houses required for the accommo.
dation of strangers, the kitchen, etc., were all separate edifices, surrounded by a
cashel or circular wall, and forming a kind of monastery or ecclesiastical town,
like those of the early Christians in the East, and known among the Eg: ptians by
the name of Laura. The Laura herein differed from the Coenobium, that the
latter was but one habitation where the monks lived in common, whereas the
former consisted of many cells divided from each other. Such groups of cells are
frequently mentioned in the Lives of the Irish Saints.

“ These structures, it is fair to assume, were formed of the materials within easy
reach of the builders, and consequently, in many parts of Ireland, of perishable
materials, such as wood and clay. For this reason few vestiges of them remain in
the northern and eastern portions of the island. But in the west and south, many
such buildings yet survive ; and of these we found interesting specimens in
Aranmore. There, writes O'Flaherty, ‘they have cloghauns, a kind of building
of stones laid one upon another. which are brought to a roof, without any manner
of mortar to cement them, some of which cabins will hold forty men on their floor ;
so ancient that nobody knows how long ago any of them was made. Scarcity of
wood and store of fit stones, without peradventure, found out the first invention.’
These houses are of a circular or oval form, having dome roofs, constructed without
a knowledge of the principle of the arch, and without the use of cement. They
are formed upon the model left by the pagan Firbolg and Tuatha de Danaan
tribes, as is obvious from the resemblance they bear to the pagan circular stone
forts. One remarkable difference between the houses of the pagan and Christian
periods, is, that whereas the former are round internally and externally, the latter,
though externally round, are occasionally quadrangular in the interior, as if the
quadrangular form of the churches had been adopted also for the houses of
ecclesiastics. Whole villages of these houses exist on Aranmore.

“The neighbouring island of Ardillaun still exhibits the Laura, founded by
St. Fechin in the seventh century, which is one of the most interesting and best
preserved anchoretical establishments in Ireland, or perhaps in Europe. On the
crest of the hill, on which Tempull Benain stands, about 13 feet to the north-
west of the sacred edifice, there was a cloghaun, partly under the ground, 10 feet
in length, and 5 feet 4 inches in breadth; the doorway was more than 2
feet broad, and the walls 3 feet thick. O’Donovan, who describes it, is of
opinion that it was probably the house of St. Benignus himself, Our interest

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-212.png ---
186 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

703. Died Colmain M‘Comain.™
755. Died the abbot Goimdibla."
865. Died the abbot Moeltulius, the son of Gobhann.

™ Ann. Munst. ® Act. SS. p. 715.

was most cxcited by a cyclopean house of angular form, which measured from
north to south, 11 feet 8 inches, and 6 feet 10 inches across. It had two
doorways, about 2 feet broad, and 3 thick ; and in one of the chambers there
was a window. The double door is said to be more common in the Aran
cloghauns than in these found elsewhere. One of the chambers in this house
measures 4 feet 9 inches in length, and 4 feet in breadth. The entire
structure has suffered much from exposure. In addition to these separate cells
Dr. Petrie discovered on Aranmore the ruins of a building which would have
been large enough to serve the purpose of a refectory. It is situated near the
churches of St. Colman MacDuach, at Kilmurvey, and is an oval structure,
without cement, of 50 by 37 feet, external measurement, with a wall of 6 feet
in thickness, But it is now full time to bring our wanderings to a close. With
the permission of the excellent and hospitable priest who has charge of the island,
we resolved, on the last morning of our stay on Aran, to celebrate mass in the
ruined church of Teglach-Enda, where, in the year 540 or 542, St. Enda was
interred, and where likewise repose the relics of a countless army of white-robed
saints. The temporary altar was set up under the east window, on the site where
of old the altar stood; and there, in the midst of the loving and simple faithful,
within the walls which had been consecrated some twelve hundred years before,
over the very spot of earth where so many of the saints of Ireland lay awaitin,
their resurrection to glory, the solemn rite of the Christian Sacrifice was performed,
and once more, as in the days of which St. Columba wrote, the angels of God
came down to worship the Divine Victim in the Churches of Aran. And surel’,
not unworthy of the angelic company were the devotion and faith of the humble
worshippers around. Throughout the Mass. a hush and a silence came upon them,
and the only sounds that fell upon the ear was the solemn voice of the priest, or
the murmur of the waves breaking on the beach outside ; but at the moment of
the elevation, when they beheld the pure and holy and unspotted Host raised up
for them to Heaven, a cry of adoring faith and love went forth from their lips, and
every head was bowed to the dust before the Lord.”

We cannot close this note without a short sketch of the life of the great saint
who, whilst our Apostle St. Patrick was still living, laid the foundations of those
monasteries which won for the Aran group the title of ‘‘ Islands of Saints.” The
name of St. Enda is entered in all our Calendars on the 21st of March, The Féliré
of St. AEngus on that day has the following strophe :— c

“‘To the world a great victory was
Benedict, the strong pillar ;
On the same solemnity, with a numerous host,
Enda the illustrious, of Aran,”

And the marginal note is added in the Zeadhar Breac:—“ Enda of Aran was a
reat saint, the son of Conall Derg of the Airghialla ; the daughter of Ainmire,
King of Fir-n-Arda, was his mother.’ Colgan has published the life of the saint,
compiled from more ancient records by Magraidin of Lough Ree, in whose time a
copy of the Gospels that belonged to St. Enda was still preserved in Ly in
Arran, together with a casula wrought in silver and gold. The chief events of St.
Enda’s life are so well set forth in the paper already referred to of the Bishop of
Ardagh, that we take the following extracts from it :— . .
“St. Enda, whose name is written in Irish, Einne and Ende, and in Latin,
Endeus and Enna, was born in Louth about the middle of the fifth century, and
was the only son of Conall, King of Oriel, whose territories included the modern
counties of Louth, Monaghan. Armagh, and Fermanagh. Three of his sisters,
Fanchea, Lochinia, and Carecha, were nuns, and Darenia, the fourth sister, was
wife of Engus, King of Cashel, whose death is placed by the Four Masters in the

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-213.png ---
County of Galway. 187

916. Died Egnech, bishop, anchorite, and comorb of St.
Endeus.

100. Died Flann Hua Donnchadha, comorb of St. Endeus.

1020. About this year the abbey was destroyed by fire.°

° Act. SS., p. 715.

ear 489. On the death of his father, the youthful Enda was chosen to succeed
him as head of the men of Oriel. The warlike spirit of the times took strong hold
of the young prince's heart, and we find him at an early period of his life captivated
by the love of glory, and cager to show by his military prowess that he was worthy
of the royal race from which he had sprung, and of the throne which he filled.
His holy sister Fanchea was incessant in her exertions to win for God her brother’s
heart, which, with all its defects, she knew to be chivalrous and pure. For a time
her words of warning and entreaty remained without result; but the season of
grace came soon. Enda had asked from his sister in marriage one of the royal
maidens who were receiving their education in the convent which she ruled. Fan-
chea communicated his request to the maiden: ‘ Make thou thy choice, whether
wilt thou love Him whom I love, or this earthly bridegroom? ‘Whom thou
lovest,’ was the girl's sweet reply, ‘Him also will I love.’ She died soon after,
and gave her soul to God, the spouse whom she had chosen. ‘The holy virgin,”
says the ancient life, ‘ covered the face of the dead girl witha veil, and going again
to Enda said to him: “ Young man, come and see the maiden whom thou lovest.”
Then Enda with the virgin entered the chamber where was the dead girl, and the
holy virgin uncovering the face of the lifeless maiden, said to him: “* Now look upon
the face of her whom thou didst love.” And Enda cried out: ‘‘ Alas! she is fair
no longer, but ghastly white.” ‘* So also shalt thy face be,” replied the holy virgin.
And then St. Fanchea discoursed to him of the pains of hell and of the joys of
heaven, until the young man’s tears began to flow. O! the wondrous mercy of
God in the conversion of this man to the true faith ! for even as He changed the
haughty Saul into the humble Paul, so out of this worldly prince did he make a
spiritual and a holy teacher and pastor of His people 3; for, having heard the words
of the holy virgin, despising the vanities of the world, he took the monk's habit
and tonsure, and what the tonsure signified he fulfilled by his actions.’

“‘ After having founded a monastery in his native place, St. Enda is said to have
proceeded to Rosnat in Britain, where he remained for some time under the spiri-
tual direction of St. Mansenus, or Manchan. Thence, according to the above-
mentioned life, he went to Rome, where ‘attentively studying the examples of the
saints, and preparing himself in everything for the order of priesthood, having
at length been ordained priest, he was pleasing to the most high God.’ He built
a monastery called Lactinum, or the Place of 3 and rightly so called, adds the
life, ‘ because therein the command of loving God and our neighbour was most
faithfully carried out.’ Returning to Ireland, he landed at Drogheda, and built
several churches on either side of the river Boyne. He then proceeded southwards
to visit his brother-in-law, Engus, King of Munster. from whom he asked the island
of Aran, that he might dwell thereon, The king was first unwilling to comply
with his request ; not because he was ungenerous, but because he had learned from
St. Patrick ‘not to offer to the Lord his God any lands save such as were good
and fertile, and easy of access.’ But St. Enda declared that Aran was to be the place
of his resurrection ; and at length the king made an offering of the island ‘to God
and to St. Enda,’ asking in return the blessing of the saint. Having thus obtained
possession of what he rightly deemed a place of singular retirement, and well suited

for the rigours of a penitential life, St. Enda returned to his brethren and conducted
them in safety to the island, which was then inhabited by pagans from the adjacent
coast of Clare. He divided the island into ten parts, and built thereon ten monas-
teries, each under the rule of its proper superior. He chose a place for his own
residence on the eastern coast, and there erected a monastery, the name and site of
which is preserved to this day in the little village of Kil-eany (Kill-Enda), about
a mile from Kilronan. Then began the blessed days, when the sweet odour of
penance ascended to heaven from the angelic band of monks, who, under the severe

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-214.png ---
188 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1081. It was pillaged and destroyed by the Danes?
1110. Died Flann Hua Hoegha, comorb of St. Endeus.
1114. Died the comorb, Moel Columb Hua Cormacain.

P Annal. Munst.

rule of St. Enda, made Aran a burning light of sanctity for centuries in western
Europe. ‘The virginal saint from Aran Island,’ as Marianus O'Gorman styles
St. Enda, was to them a model of all the virtues of the religious life, but above
all he excelled in the exercise of penitential mortifications. St. Cuimin of
Connor tells us that —

‘Enda loved glorious mortification
In Aran—triumphant virtue !
A narrow dungeon of flinty stone,
To bring the people to heaven.’

*¢* Ayan,’ says Froude, ‘is no better than a wild rock. It is strewed over with
the ruins, which may still be seen, of the old hermitages; and at their best they
could have been but such places as sheep would huddle under in a storm, and
shiver in the cold and wet which would pierce through the chinks of the walls.
. » + « Yes; there on that wet soil, with that dripping roof above them, was
the chosen home of these poor men, Through winter frost, through rain and
storm, through summer sunshine, generation after generation o :them, there they
lived and prayed, and at last lay down and died.” These miracles of penance
were the first and immediate results of St. Enda’s work in Aran. We cannot,
indeed, describe the details of his daily life, for they have been hidden from
human view, as it is becoming that such secrets of the Heavenly King should be
hidden. But there yet survives the voice of one of those who lived with him in
Aran; and in the ideal of an abbot which St. Carthage sets before us, we un-
doubtedly find re-produced the traits which distinguished the abbot of Aranmore,
from whom St. Carthage first learned to serve God in the religious life. St. Enda
was his first model of the ‘patience, humility, prayer, fast, and cheerful abs-
tinence ; of the steadiness, modesty, calmness that are due from a leader of
religious men, whose office it iso teach in all truth, unity, forgiveness, purity,
rectitude in all that is moral ; whose chief works are the constant preaching of
the gospel for the instruction of all persons, and the sacrifice of the Body of the

eat Lord upon the holy altar.’ It was on Aranmore, and in St, Enda, that he

rst beheld at the altar of God that pattern priest after whose example he thus
warns all priests :—

* When you come into the Mass—
It is a noble office—
Let there be penitence of heart, shedding of tears,
And throwing up of hands.
There shall be no permanent love in thy heart,
But the love of God alone.
For pure is the body thou receivest.
Purely must thou go to receive it.’

“ The fame of St. Enda’s austere holiness, and of the angelical life which so
many were leading in Aran under his guidance, soon spread far and wide. The
sweet odour of Christ, diffused from the lonely island in the Atlantic, penetrated
to every part of Ireland. and wherever it reached, its gracious message stirred
with joy the hearts of the noblest and best among the servants of God. It told
them of a spot where men led a life of higher sanctity, and of more thorough
severance from fleshly ties than was known elsewhere ; and to souls hungering and
thirsting after perfection, to hear of the spiritual treasures stored up in Aran, was
to long for the wings of the dove to fly thither, to be made happy sharers in its

ces. Hence, soon, the Galway fishermen, whom St. Enda had blessed, found

y after day their corachs crowded with strangers—religious men, of meek eye

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-215.png ---
County of Galway. 189

1167. Died the comorb Gildagorius O’Dubhagain.4
1334. The isles of Arran.and Bophin were plundered and
burnt, and hostages were taken from thence by Sir John

@ Act. SS. p. 715.

and gentle face—seeking to cross over to the island ; and so frequently was the
journey made, that the words of the prophet seemed verified, and even in that
trackless sea ‘a path and a way was there, and it was called the holy way.’ The
ilgrims were men of every period of life, some in the spring of their youth,
fying from the pleasures that wooed their senses, and the earthly loves that laid
snares for their hearts; others inthe vigour of healthful manhood ; and others
ed and infirm, who came to close in religious peace the remnant of their days,
which at their best they had accounted as few and evil. And thus Aran gradually
came to be, as the writer of the Life of St. Kieran of Clonmacnoise describes it,
the home of a multitude of holy men, and the sanctuary where repose the relics
of countless saints, whose names are known only to the Almighty God. ‘Great
indeed is that island,’ exclaims another ancient writer, ‘and it is the land of
a saints, for no one, save God alone, knows how many holy men lie buried
rein.

. “ But, although it is not possible to learn the names of all the saints who were
formed to holiness by St. Enda in Aran, our ancient records have preserved the
names of a few at least out of that blessed multitude. Among them we find
almost every name of note that appears in the second part of the well-known
list of the saints of Ireland, and in addition to these many others of great
celebrity who are not included in that catalogue. The history of these men is
the history of St. Enda’s work on Aran. First among St. Enda’s disciples must
be ed St. Kieran, the founder of Clonmacnoise, who has been styled by
Alcuin the glory of the Irish race. St. Kieran came to Aran in his youth, and
for seven years lived faithfully in the service of God, under the direction of St.
Enda. His youth and strength fitted him in an especial manner for the active
duties, which were by no means inconsiderable in so large a community, and in
a place where the toil spent on an ungrateful soil was so scantily repaid. ‘ During
these seven years,’ says the ancient life of our saint, ‘ Kieran so diligently dis-
charged the duties of grinding the corn, that grdin in quantity sufficient to make
a heap never was found in the granary of the island.’ Upon these humble
labours the light of the future greatness of the founder of Clonmacnoise was
allowed to shine in visions, St. Kieran had a vision which he faithfully narrated
to his master, St, Enda. He dreamed that on the banks of the Shannon he saw
a mighty tree laden with leaves and fruits, which covered with its shade the entire
island of Erin. This dream he narrated to St. Enda, who said, ‘the tree laden
with fruit, thou art thyself, for thou shalt be great before God and man, and shalt
bring forth sweetest fruits of good works, and shalt be honoured throughout all
Ireland. Proceed, therefore,at once, and in obedience to the will of God, build thou
there a monastery.’ Upon this, St. Kieran, prepared himself for the building of
the monastery of Clonmacnoise. His first step was to receive the priesthood. But
he could not bring himself to sever the happy ties that bound him to his abbot.
He still longed to be under his guidance, and when recommending himself to
the prayers of his brethren, he said to St. Enda, in the presence of all, ‘O Father,
take me and my charge under thy protection, that all my disciples may be thine
likewise.’ ‘Not so,’ answered fete, ‘for it is not the will af God that you
should all live under my care in this scanty island ; but to thee, for thine admirable
humility and perfect charity, will Christ the Lord grant the half of Ireland as
the portion of thine inheritance.’ And when they had thus spoken, a cross was set
up in the Place, in sign of the brotherhood they had contracted between them-
selves, and those who were to come after them; and they said: ‘whosoever in
after times shall break the loving bond of this our brotherhood, shall not have
share in our love on earth, nor in our company in heaven.’

“*The love which St. Enda bore towards his holy pupil for his many and
wonderful virtues, made their parting singularly painful to them both. For a
me the holy abbot felt as if the angels of God were leaving Aran with Kieran,

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-216.png ---
190 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Darcy, Lord Justice of Ireland, who surrounded the island
with a fleet consisting of 56 sail.*

® Clyne’s Annals.

and he could find no relief for his anguish but in prayer. The sternness of re-
ligious discipline had not crushed but chastened the tenderness of an affectionate
disposition in St. Enda, any more than in St. Bernard, whose writings are the
truest expression of the best feelings of the religious heart. And as St. Bernard
deplored the loss of his brother Gerard, in whom the active and contemplative
virtues were admirably united, so might St. Enda have spoken of Kieran.
* Whom now shall I consult in doubtful matters? Who will my burdens?
His wise and gentle speech saved me from secular conversation, and gave me to
the silence which I loved. O diligent man! O faithful friend! He plunged
himself in cares that 1 might be spared them. but in this he sought not for his own
advantage, for he expected (such was his humility) more profit from my leisure than
from hisown. Who more strict than he in the preservation of discipline. ? Who
more stern in the chastening of his body? Who more rapt or more sublime in
contemplation ?”

“The last hours pan by St. Kieran on Aran, as described in the ancient Life
of St. Enda, are full of touching incidents, which reveal the tender and simple
affectionateness of those mortified religious. The entire community of the island
shared the sorrow that had come on their venerable abbot. When the moment
of departure was at hand, and the boat that was to bear him from Aran was
spreading its sails to the breeze, Kieran came slowly down to the shore, walking be-
tween St. Enda and St. Finnian, and followed by the entire brotherhood. His tears
flowed fast as he moved along, and those who accompanied him mingled their
tears with his. Peter de Blois, when leaving the Abbey of Croyland to return to
his own country, stayed his steps seven times to look back and contemplate once
again the place where he had been so happy; so, too, did Kieran's gaze linger
with tenderness upon the dark hills of Aran and on the oratories where he had
learned to love God, and to feel how good and joyous a thing it is to dwell with
brethren whose hearts are at one with each other in God. And when the shore
was reached, again he knelt to ask his father’s blessing ; and, entering the boat,
was carried away from the Aran that he was never to see again. The monastic
group stayed fora while on the rocks to follow with longing eyes the bark that
was bearing from them him they loved ; and when, at length, bending their steps
homewards, they had gone some distance from the shore, St. Enda’s tears once
more began to flow. ‘O my brethren,’ cried he, ‘good reason have I to weep,
for this day has our island lost the flower and strength of religious observance.’
What was loss to Aran, however, was gain to Clonmacnoise, and through Clon-
macnoise to the entire Irish Church, to which the venerable monastery on the
Shannon was the source of so many blessings and of so much glory. Those who
admire it even now in its ruins, should not forget that its splendours are reflected
back upon the rocky Aran, where St. Enda formed the spirit of its founder, and
fostered with his blessing the work he had undertaken to accomplish. St.
Kieran died at Clonmacnoise in the year 549, in the prime of life, having
governed his monastery for the short space of a single year.

‘*Next among the saints of Aran comes St. Brendan. _ The life of this illustrious
saint narrates ‘how the man of God went westward with fourteen brethren to a
certain island called Aran, where dwelt St Enda with his brethren. With these
the servant of God, Brendan remained for three days and three nights, after which,
having received the blessing of St. Enda, and of his holy monks, he set out with
his companions for Kerry.’

“St. Finnian of Moville is also mentioned in the ancient life of our saint as one
of St. Enda’s disciples at Aran. This remarkable man was first placed under the
care of St. Colman of Dromore, who flourished about the year 510; but it is
expressly mentioned in the life just quoted, that it was from Aran he set out on
his pilgrimage to Rame. This was probably his first visit to the Apostolic See.
Being of an active temperament. he there devoted himself with great ardour for
several years to the study of the ecclesiastical and apostolical traditions. He then

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-217.png ---
County of Galway. 19t

The Middle, or Second Island; On which are only two
churches; one is called Teampull-ceannannach ; each of

returned to Ireland, carrying with him a rich store of relics of the saints given him
by the Pope, and the penitential canons, which, in his biographer’s time, were still
called the Canons of St. Finnian. He also brought to Ireland a correct copy of
the Hieronymian Gospels, a treasure of such value in the estimation of his eccle-
siastical contemporaries, that the records of the period very frequently refer to St.
Finnian’s Gospels. In 540, he founded the great Monastery of Moville, where
St. Columba spent portion of his youth. After labouring with energy for many
years in Ireland, St. Finnian returned to Italy, where, according to the best
authorities, he was made Bishop of Lucca, in Tuscany, in which church he is
venerated under the name of St. Frigidian, or Fridian. The /talian Annals give
588 as the year of his death; the Annals of Ulster and Tigernach, 589.

‘The Irish Lif of St. Columbkille makes mention of the sojourn of that great
saint on Aran. ¢ traditions still current on the island confirm this statement.
The deep love of St. Columba for Aran, the sorrow with which he quitted its
shores for Iona, the spiritual excellencies which he had therein discovered, are
expressed with singular warmth of religious feeling in a poem written by him on
his departure, which has happily been preserved to us.

“The ancient Life of St. Enda also reckons among the inhabitants of Aran
St. Finnian the elder, the founder of the great school of Clonard, who died in
the second half of the sixth century ; St. Jarlath, the foundgr of the see of Tuam ;
St. MacCreiche, of the race of the men of Corcomroe, who were in possession of
Aran when St. Enda first went thither. The AMartyrology of Donegal makes
mention of St. Guigneus ; the Martyrology of Ai adds St. Papeus, St Kevin of
Glendaloch, St. Carthage of Lismore, St. Lonan Kerr, St. Nechatus or Nechanus,
and St. Libeus, brother of St. Enda. In the midst of this holy brotherhood, .5t.
Enda died in 540 or 542.

“ Among the saints to whom, as we shall soon see, churches were dedicated on
the island, we find St. Benignus of Armagh, who also most probably resided in
Aran, and St. Caradoc, or Carantoc, whose name recalls his British origin. These
two men may fairly be taken as representatives of the native and foreign elements
which at that period went to make up the Irish Church. It is remarkable to find
that on Aran, which seems to have been a common centre for the saints of the
second order, these two elements are found in harmony, and most closely connected
with each other. These facts contrast strangely with what we read in a late
writer, that ‘ the second order of saints do not appear to have had any connection
with Armagh, or the institutions of St. Patrick,’ and that ‘they were connected
with the British Church, and not with the church of St. Patrick.’ The history of
Aran and of its monuments forbids these attempts to disparage the unity of the
ancient Irish Church.

“ The sight of Aran peopled by this host of saints forcibly recalls to mind that
other island, where, in the age of wild and fierce passions, the arts of peace,
religious learning, and the highest Christian virtues, found a sanctuary. At the
beginning of the sixth century, Aran may, with truth, be styled the Lerins of the
northern seas. True, its bare flags and cold grey landscape contrast sadly with
‘the gushing streams, the green meadows, the luxuriant wealth of vines, the fair
valleys, and the fragrant scents which,’ according to St. Eucherius, ‘ made Lerins
the paradise of those who dwelled thereon.’ However, its very wildness did but
make it richer in those attractions so well described by St. Ambrose, which made
the outlying islands so dear to the religious men of that time. They loved those
islands, ‘ which, as a necklace of pearls, God has set upon the bosom of the sea,
and in which those who would fly from the irregular pleasures of the world, may
find a refuge wherein to practise austerity and save themselves from the snares of
this life. he sea that enfolds them becomes, as it were, a veil to hide from
mortal eye their deeds of penance; it aids them to acquire perfect continence; it
feeds grave and sober thought; it has the secret of peace ; and repels all the fierce

axsions of earth. In it these faithful and pious men find incentives to devotion.
he mysterious sound of the billows calls for the answering sound of sacred
psalmody ; and the peaceful voices of holy men, mingled with the gentle murmur of

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-218.png ---
192 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

them was dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and both were sub-
ordinate to the church of Killenda.*

© Usher, p. 451, and Act. SS. p. 714.

the waves breaking softly on the shore, rise in unison to the heavens.’ It must
have been one of these men, whose island home had shut out all sights of earth,
save that of the altar, of the sea, and of the wild birds disporting along the sunny
shore, who, in an ancient lrish treatise on the mass vestments, warns the priest
that his ‘heart should be chaste and shining, and his mind like the foam of the
wave, or the chalk on the gable of an oratory, or like the colour of the swan
in sunshine, that is, without any particle of sin, great or small, resting in his
heart.’

“*At Aran, too, as at Lerins, while men sought after eternal happiness, they
found that earthly happiness pure and without alloy was poured into their hearts.
« Oh ! how joyous was the life of that blessed company of the saints of Aran, where

the nobly-bora Enda and Kevin proved their kingly descent by the regal fulness
of their virtues as well as by the grace and dignity of their manners ; where
Columba could gratify his scholarly passion for fair manuscripts, and Kieran find
fresh treasures of ecclesiastical lore to acquire ; where Brendan could learn all that
man knew of the ocean and its mysteries, and Mochuda evermore delight in the
sacred harmonies that first had won his young heart to the religion of Christ:
where the highest form of oriental asceticism was happily united with the fire of
the active energy of the west. No wonder that Kieran wept to leave the beloved
shore! No wonder that through the farewell wail of the exiled Columba, there
runs such an intensity of almost passionate sorrow, that a thousand years have not
been able to efface it !”"

This note would not be complete without that venerable fragment of our early
church—the sweet poem composed by St. Columbkille as a farewell to Aran. The,
following verses are from a literal translation made for the Ordnance Survey by
O'Donovan :—

“* Farewell from me to Aran:
This it is that anguishes my heart,
That I am not westward at her billows,
Amidst the groups of phe saints of heaven.

“* Farewell from me to Aran;
It is the sad farewell,
And it filled with angels bright,
I without an attendant in my currach.

**O great Modan, son of Merseng,
Prosperity to thee is what I say,
1 being sent on a journey,
Thou remaining in

“ Alas, how far, alas, how far !
I have been sent from Aran the west
To the host of Monachs away,
Depending on the Albanians,

‘« The Son of the living, O, the Son of the living God !
It is who sent me to Iona;
It is He who gave to Enna—great the prosperity !
Aran, the Rome of the pilgrims.

“Aran, thou sun, O Aran, thou sun,
My affection lies in thee westward,
Alike to be under her pure earth,

As under the earth of Paul and Peter.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-219.png ---
VOL. II.

County of Galway. 193

“« Aran, thou sun, O Aran, thou sun,
Mv affection lies in it westward ;
Alike to be under its bell, 5
For me, as to be in happiness celestial.

“ Aran, thou sun, O Aran, thou sun,

- My affection lies in it westward ;
Each one who goes under its pure earth,
Him no eye of demon views.

“ Sacred Aran, O sacred Aran,
‘Woe to him who is an enemy to it ;
For unto him shall be given
Shortness of life and hell.

“¢ Saintly Aran, O saintly Aran,
Woe to him who is its foe ;
For angels come from heaven,
To visit it every day in the week.

“« Gabriel comes on every Sunday,
For it is Christ who ordered so,
And fifty angels—no weak cause—
Blessing its Masses (é.¢.), the Holy Sacrifice.

«* On every Monday, O ! on every Monday,
Michael comes—great the advantage—
With fifty angels--good their custom—
To bless her churches.

“ On every Tuesday, O ! on every Tuesday,
Raphael comes, of mysterious power,
To bless its houses, in which
The visitors of Aran are attended.

“On Wednesday hard, O! on Wednesday hard,
Uriel comes—great the advantage—
So that he blesses thrice
Her cemeteries high, angelic.

“ On every Thursday, O ! on every Thursday,
Comes Sariel, great the treasures,
So that he dispenses God’s benefits from heaven
On bare flags, on that day.

* On Friday, O! on Friday,
Ramael comes with his host,
So that every eye is satiated with the sight
Of bright and truly beauteous angels.

‘* Mary, Mother of the Son of God, comes,
And her train along with her,
And angels among her host,
To bless it on Saturday.

‘* Tho’ there should not be of life in it,
But listening to the angels of Aran,
Better than any life under heaven,
To hear their solemn canticles.”

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-220.png ---
194 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Ardoilen.> The third of the isles of Arran was anciently
called Aracoemhain, and took its name from St. Coemann,
the patron of it.

Three churches were erected here, that of Kil-choemhain,
where St. Columb is honoured ; another dedicated to St. Paul,
and the third, called Kil-gradh-an-domhain, in which St.
Gobnata is honoured on the 11th of February.

Kil-choemhain was a monastery of note, and was founded
by St. Fechin.

The abbot St. Gormgal, justly celebrated for his piety, died
A.D. 1017, on the 5th of August, on which day his feast is
held ;* from hence we must conclude, that this abbey existed
several ages.

Franciscan Friary ; Was founded on one of these islands in
the year 1485.'

Athenry ;~ Gives name to the barony, and is a market and
borough town, sending burgesses to parliament.

Dominican Friary § Meyer de Bermingham, the second
baron of Athenry, gave to the Dominican friars 160 marcs, to
assist in building this house, and granted the land whereon to
erect it ; he also presented to them (on the completion of the
building, as we suppose) a hogshead of wine. De Ber-
mingham was induced to begin this work by letters from
St. Dominick; and a noble monastery was erected here,

* Act. SS. pp. 135, 141, 714, and 715. * Act. SS. p. 715, and Allemande.
° Called also Athnery, Aghnary, Athunree, and Athenree.

® As Colgan fell into the error of giving the name of Ardoilen to the third of the
Aran Islands, Archdall and Lanigan were betrayed into the same mistake. All
that is said in the text, except what relates to St. Gormgal, belongs to the group,
and not to Ardoilen. Ardoilen is an island of difficult access, off the Galway
coast, opposite Imay, or Omey, and is at present uninhabited. Here St. Fechin
founded a monastery formerly of great repute: its ruins still remain. Several
ancient stone crosses erected there prove it to have been a favorite burial-place of
the chieftains of the neighbouring territory. There are in the island some stone
houses or cells called cloghans, which show that its first religious community
dates from a very early period. The second Life of St. Fechin (chapter 22nd),
states that the saint, after completing the Monastery of Imaidh (é.¢., Omey),
founded another religious house in Ardoilen. On this passage Colgan has added
the note—‘ This island is also in the ocean, and is distant afew leagues towards
the west from Immagia (Omey), and after St. Fechin. St. Gormgal, a man of
renowned sanctity, who died in the year 1017, on the 5th day of August, on which
day, according to Marianus, his natalis is kept, ennobled it very much by his
anachoretic virtues and most pious life. The elegant and very religious poem of
blessed Corranus (who flourished at the same time), concerning his praises and.
relics, is extant in my possession.”—Acéa, p. 141, n. 13. Elsewhere he gives the
following list of holy men who rest with St. Gormgal in Ardoilen, viz.—Moelsuthun,
Celechair, Dubthach, Dunadach, Cellach, Tressach, Ultan, Maelmartin, Coromach,
and Conmach. The Four Masters, recording the death of St. Gormgal in Ardoilen
in 1017,style him the chief Anmchara, #.¢. soul's friend or confessor, of all Ireland.—
See Hardiman’s notes to O'Flaherty’s W<st Connaught, p. 114.

® A copy of the Regestum of this monastery is preserved in the British Museum,
Sloane MSS., 4,784. The Annals of Lough-Cé register the death of William
O’Cinaedha, prior of the town of Athenry, in 1581.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-221.png ---
County of Galway. 195

under the invocation of St. Peter and St. Paul, in the
year 1241.

A.D. 1242. A general chapter of the order was held here.”

1252. Meyler, the founder, dying near Cashel this year, he
was removed from thence and interred in this friary.*

1256. Died Florence M‘Flin, archbishop of Tuam; he
founded a house for scholars in this friary, and bequeathed
many exemplary rules for the practice of the friars.

1263. Thomas O'Kelly, bishop of Clonfert, was interred in
this church ; he built the vault near the north side of the high
altar, whither he caused all the scattered bones to be removed ;
the bishop was a liberal benefactor to this friary, exclusive of
so particular an instance.”

1271. Died Walter, Earl of Ulster, a munificent benefactor
to this house.*

1297. A great dispute arose between the friars of this house
and William, archbishop of Tuam, the son of their founder ;
it is supposed, that the friars laid a claim to be exempt from
his visitation, on which the archbishop behaved with a violence
unbecoming his sacred character and dignity, but the end of
the contest is not known.>

1311. A general chapter of the order was held here ;° and
in the course of the next year, we meet with another general
chapter which also was held here.?

1324. Died William de Burgh, commonly called the Grey ;
he, together with his wife, Finola Nyn J. Brian, gave to the
friars above a hundred marcs, to assist in building the front
of their church. They also enlarged the choir upwards of
twenty feet, and granted to the abbot and convent the tithes
of all their farms, at the same time appointing this friary
to be the burial place of their family, which had formerly
been at Athassel.¢

1374. Thomas, Lord Athenry, who died this year, or in
1376,granted to the friary eighteen acres of arable land. He was
also a considerable benefactor to them in many other respects.

1400. Pope Boniface IX. granted certain indulgences to all
persons visiting this monastery on particular festivals, provided
they charitably assisted in the building and necessary repairs.

1423. This monastery, with its churches and other buildings,
being consumed by fire, Pope Martin V. did also grant certain
indulgences to all persons visiting it on the feasts of St.
Patrick and St. Peter ad Vincula, and contributing to its
repairs.»

~ King, p. 87. * Annal. Dominic. de Trim. King, p. 87. Burke, p. 221.
War. Mon. Harris's Collect. % War. Bps. p. 606. * Burke, p. 226. * War.
Eps. p. 648. Td. p.608. ° King, p.87. 41d. * Obituary. * Lodge, vol. 4,
b. 10. , © Burke, ~. 230, > fd.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-222.png ---
196 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1427. The same Pope issued a licence to the friars to found
two convents here.!

1445. Pope Eugene IV. enforced the bull of Martin V. for
repairing this house ; and it appears from this bull, dated
March 31st, that there were about thirty friars here.*

1451. Their chapel was built in this year. See 1484.

1456. The following grants were made to this friary :—By
the Lord Richard Burgh, a half-quarter of arable land in
Toulubane, called Ballyglass; by Richard Burgh, who did
afterwards take on him the cowl in this house, another quarter
in Carnan; by Ulick de Burgh, the cartron, a muir, and a
teampuil tualbane, and the cartron of Lisoylalayan, Gortora-
hiky, and Gortnavadag, with other particles annexed to these ;
and M‘Redmond Burke, of Cloghnanonvir, a half quarter of
Tempal an brahar.!

1484. Ulick Rufus Burgh, and his wife Mornia Ny
Cnougher, granted to them a quarter of arable land, called
Carrowardahrah, in the territory and village of Toulubane,
and on the north side of the river; on this land they built a
chapel in the year 1451. He (Burgh) did also present them
with many other gifts. This grant was confirmed by Ulick,
his son, who was also a benefactor to this friary.™

July 8th, and 6th year of Queen Elizabeth, this monastery,
with its appurtenances, thirty acres of land in Athenry,
and twelve in the town of Ballidana, were granted for ever, in
capite, to the portrive and burgesses of the town of Athenry,
at the yearly rent of 26s. 4d. Irish money.

Inquisition 29th January, 27th Queen Elizabeth, finds, that
John de Burgh, the younger, was in his life-time seized of the
lands of Killokelly in this county, parcel of this monastery ;
annual value, besides reprises, 5s. Irish money.”

Many persons of eminence were interred here, whose names
we shall give in order as they are placed in the obituary
belonging to this friary, which obituary is now in the custody
of the Dominican friary near Athenry.°

1243. Richard de Burgh, surnamed the Great, son of
William, and Lord of Connaught.

1263. Thomas O'Kelly, bishop of Clonfert.

1270. William Athankip, son of Richard de Burgh the Great.

1271. Walter de Burgh, Earl of Ulster.

1283. Maurice Ileyan, bishop of Kilmacduach.

1307. Pierce, Lord Athenry.

1316. Thomas, son of Richard de Burgh, Earl of Ulster; he
was buried in the Dominican habit.

! King, p. 231. * Id, p. 232. ‘dd. pp. 223 and 228, =1d. » Chief
Rememd, ° Burke, p. 223. .

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-223.png ---
County of Galway. 197

1324. William de Burgh, called the Grey, and his wife,
Finola Nyn J. Brian.

1326. Rickard, Earl of Ulster, called the Red Earl.

1333. William, Earl of Ulster, called Iarla Don.

1353. William, son of William the Grey, called Uliog
Anaghkeen.

1374, or 1376. Thomas, Lord Athenry.

1375. Edmund, son of William Burgh, ‘called Albanach.

1387. Rickard, son of William Anaghkeen, called Oge.

1396. Rickard, son of William Oge Burgh.

1399. Nicholas Ileyan, bishop of Kilmacduach.

1406. Rickard, son of Hubert de Burgh of Iserkeally.

1424. Ulick, son of Rickard Oge Burgh.

1429. William, son of the same.

1452. Edmund, son of Redmond Burgh.

1466. Rickard, son of William, the son of Rickard Oge.

1484, Ulick Rufus Burgh.

1509. Lord Ulick Fion de Knocto, son of the aforesaid
Ulick.

1530. Lord Rickard Burgh, of Dunkellin ; he was a con-
siderable benefactor to the convent.

In the beginning of this century, the following inscription
was legible over the gate of the refectory :—

‘* CAROLUS MANUS RUBR& ME FIERI FECIT.”

It cannot be the King of Connaught of that name, for he died
in the year 1224, seventeen years before the foundation of the
convent.°

This friary continued for many years the cemetery of the
Athenry family, and is at present that of many families of the
first rank.P

Here follows a rent roll of the possessions of this house.

In Athenry, a piece of ground walled in, containing a large
and excellent mill, at the very gate of the convent, and
several houses ; without the town, the village of Gluaimhean
Bhauin, which did formerly belong to the Benedictines ;
another very extensive field near the town to the south, called
the Forest of the Brethren ; at the north side, a field, called
Balle Dhay, where is a chapel belonging to the convent ;
a mile from the town, to the north-east, is another farm, called
Bingharra ; the cell of Kilcorban, with a good farm ; in the
parish of Grainseagh, between Binmor and Rathglass, is a
large and fertile village, called Rathchaluige-madh-lubain an
teampuill, together with a chapel.4

° Burke, p. 229. ? Jd. p. 222, and Lodge, vol. 4,p.3. % O'Heyn, p. 20, quoted
4 SEs
by Burke, p. 223.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-224.png ---
198 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

The ruins which remain of this friary, prove it to have been
a sumptuous building ; part of it was taken down to erect in its
room the present barracks, and the cloisters probably stood
where the barrack-yard is now ; the whole was well built of a
blue coloured stone ; the tower, for half its height, is larger
below than above. The great east window is bold and
of good workmanship ; there were here numbers of mauso-
leums, but the soldiers have erased them all, and with their
fragments the church is nearly covered.

Franciscan Friary ; Was founded here in the year 1464,
under the invocation of St. Michael, by Thomas, Earl of
Kildare ; his wife, Margaret Gibbon, erected the first chapel ;
the second was built by an Earl of Desmond, and the third
by O’Tully.

Ballynehinch ; This village gives name to the barony.

A monastery for Carmelites, or White friars, was founded
here by O'Flaherty,’ in the year 1356 ;' which is the only
account we can find of this friary.

Beach ,’ A monastery of the third order of Franciscans was
founded here some time after the year 1441."

In an Inquisition of the 28th year of the reign of Queen
Elizabeth (1585), it is called the ruined cell or chapel of
Beagh, in the barony of Clare; its possessions were half a
quarter of land, pasture, arable, &c., with its appurtenances
and tithes, which were long concealed, and were of the yearly
value of 6s. 8d., Irish money.”

Boilean Clair ,® In the diocese of Tuam ; a monastery was
founded here for Franciscan friars in the year 1291. Wadding
informs us, that this house was very rich, and that it had
considerable possessions.*

Burgakere, or Burgoflore ; Here was a monastery in the pos-
session of the Carmelites, or White friars, and which the regular
canons of St. Augustin laid claim to as belonging only to them

Clare Galway ;° Situated in the barony of Clare, five miles

 Allemande. * War. Mon. * Allemande. *% War. Mon. * King, p. 109.
* Allemande. ¥ Id.

7 Beagh, in Irish Beitheach, i.e., land abounding in birch, is situate in the barony
of Clare. In the same barony there is a Donaghpatrick dedicated to our Apostle
St. Patrick, and also Killower, #.2., Kill-Leabhair, or ‘‘ Church of the Book.” In
the parish of Killower lived the MacBeolans, keepers of the black bell of
St. Patrick, and from them it passed to the family of Geraghty. It was for
centuries exhibited to pilgrims on Domhnach-Cruim-Duibh, or Garland Sunday,
on the mountain of Croaghpatrick, where it was held in the highest veneration. It
was traditionally supposed that this bell was originally pure silver, but became
black by its contact with the demons when our national Apostle finally vanquished
them after his long penitential exercises on the summit of Croaghpatrick.

® This is another name for C/are-Ga/way, of which we will just now treat.

® Clare-Galway is called in Irish Basle-an-Chlair. On the banks of the gentle
stream that flows through this town, John de Cogan, in 1290, erected a Franciscan

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-225.png ---
County of Galway. 199

north-east of Galway, on a small river which falls into Lough-
Corrib.

- About the year 1290, John de Cogan built a monastery at
Clare-Yndowl for Franciscan friars ; he erected it in a very
elegant style, and at a great expense.*

In 1296, Philip de Blund, archdeacon of Tuam, was in-
dicted on the following charges: That the see of Enachdun
having been a long time vacant, the pontificalia thereof were
lodged in this friary, until a bishop should be appointed ; that
the said archdeacon took by violence the chest wherein the
said pontificalia were deposited from the friars, and at the
door of the mother church, did break open the said chest, and
forcibly carried off the episcopal mitre, together with the
pastoral staff, and sundry other things contained in the said
chest.*

On the 7th of March, 1368, Thomas, Lord Athenry, granted
the lands of Cloy-melayn, which lay contiguous to the town
of Clare, for the purposes of purchasing bread, wine, and
wax for the celebrating of mass in this friary.”

The high tower, in the middle of the church, erected on
arches, is a curious piece of architecture; and the chapel
is now the Romish Mass-house.*

Cloghin Cantualaig ; A house for Franciscan friars was
founded here, about the beginning of the 15th century, by
O’Madden. It is probable this friary might have been in the
barony of Longford, which was the original country of the
O’Maddens.4

Clonfert ;° A bishop’s see, in the barony of Longford,
and near the river Shannon.

® War. MS., vol. 34, and Monast. * King, p. 315. »> Lodge, vol. 4, p. 10.
° Pococke's Fournal. * Allemande.

monastery, which is described by the Annalists of the order as second to none of
the Irish houses in the perfection of its architectural details. From the State
Papers of Henry the Eighth’s reign, Ireland, vol. iii., we learn that Lord Leonard
Gray, in his journey through Connaught, ‘‘ visited the friary of Boilean Clare,” and
asa result, the friary, with its church, was rifled, so that “neither chalice. cross,
nor bell, was left in it.” Queen Elizabeth granted the convent, with all its
appurtenances, to Sir Richard de Burgh in 1570. The friars, however, continued.
to live near their cherished convent till the close of the century, when they were
compelled to fly before the soldiers of Bingham, Governor of Connaught, who
turned the church and convent into a garrison. After the accession of James the
First, the Franciscans again occupied a portion of the ruins of the convent, where
they peaceably dispensed the sacraments to the faithful. In 1641, some attempt
was made to restore the sacred buildings, but the repairs were never completed.
The friars, however, clung to the old walls persistently, and. towards the middle of
the last century, Pococke, Protestant Bishop of Meath, states in his Journal, that
their house was used as ‘a Romish Mass House.”

10 St. Brendan, of whom we will speak more at length under Ardfert, in County
Kerry. was from his infancy trained to piety by St. Ita, As he advanced in
years. he was the disciple and companion of St. Jarlath, St. Finnian of Clonard,
and the other great saints, who, in the sixth century, adorned our island by their

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-226.png ---
200 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

_ St. Brendan, the son of Findloga, studied under St. Finian
in the Academy of Clonard, and A.D. 553, or 562, he founded
an abbey here, under the invocation of the Virgin Mary. St.
Brendan was the founder of many other abbeys, and is said to
have presided over 3,000 monks, each of whom did indus-
triously earn a sufficiency for his support; this saint
instituted a particular form or rule for the observance of
his successors, who, in the course of time, followed that of
St. Augustin.

A.D. 570. St. Moinem, or Moenn, died on the Ist of March ;
* Act. SS. p. 192, Annal. Munst. War. Mon.

manifold virtues. He founded the See of Clonfert in the year 558, and established
here at the same time the monastery which in aftertimes received the name “ De
Portu puro,” where three thousand religious served God under his rule. He died
at his sister’s monastery in Enaghdune, or Annadown, on the 16th of May, 577, in
the 94th year of his age, and his remains were solemnly transferred to Clonfert.
Lynch records the tradition that so great was the concourse to pay honour to our
saint, that the procession bearing his sacred relics extended the whole way from
Annadown to Clonfert, ‘‘ qui agmen ducebant, Clonfertam ante pervenerint, quam
illud claudentes Enachduna pedem extulerint.” The distance between these
towns is more than 20 miles.

St. Moenu, also called Monennus and Mainennus, was chosen by St. Brendan
to be bishop of the see and abbot of the monastery, as he himself was engaged in
establishing and watching over other religious houses. This holy religious is said
to have for some time governed the famous Abbey of Rosina in Wales, and to
have been spiritual father to the great Saints Finian of Moville, Tighernach of
Clones, Eugene of Ardsrath, Cairpre of Cuil-Raithin, and Enda of Aran. He
died before St. Brendan, on the tst of March, 571. He is styled in the Calendar
of Cashel and other ancient authorities, ‘‘ Moennius, or Mainennius, Bishop of
Cluainferta and Coarb of Brendan.” St. Fintan, surnamed Corach, was next
Bishop and Abbot of Clonfert. He is supposed to have governed for a time the
Monastery of Leamchoill, in the Diocese of Ossory, and also the famous Monastery
of Clonenagh. When taking his departure from Clonenagh, he promised its
religious that he would return to them, but this was fulfilled only after his
death, when his relics were translated thither. His festival is variously celebrated
on 21st February, 27th March, and 16th November. The name Corach is
generally interpreted to ne “chaunter” or “chorister,” and on account of his
love of chaunting the psalms, he is in some Martyrologies styled “os psalmorum.”
He died about the fa 600. cee ts

All the Martyrologies and Annals agree in styling St. Cummian Foda (i.¢., the
tall), Bishop and Abbot of Clonfert. The Annals of Tigernach mark his death, as
assigned by some authorities, to 671, but they again repeat it as follows, at 672,
which is the correct year :—* Cummine Fota, LX XXII. anno aetatis suae mortuus
est.” From this it also follows that St. Cummain Fota was born in 590. He was
son of Fiachna, of the royal race of Oilioll Olum. The AMartyrology of Donegal
styles him “ the vessel of wisdom of his time, the learned preacher of the word of
God.” St. Aingus, in his Feiré, or Metrical Catalogue of Saints, commemora-
ting his feast on the 12th November, says :—

“ Granted with wisdom
Was knowledge with great acuteness,
To my Cumain of noble championship,
The fair, tall son of Fiachna ;”

and the note is added— “ Cumin Fota, the son of Fiachna, comharb of Brendan of
Cluain-Ferta, and he was of the Eoghanact of Loch Lein. id was the rightful
name of Cumain, and Drumdalither was his church, and it was in a commonage

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-227.png ---
County of Galway. 201

he was intended to succeed the founder in the government of
this abbey.‘

576. St. Brendan, having passed a life of exemplary piety,
died at Enachdune, in his 93rd year, and was interred here.®

590. The feast of St. Brendan is observed on the 16th
of May.s

590. Fintan Corach, abbot of Cluain Ednech, was abbot
and bishop here.

620. Died the abbot St. Seanach Garbh.

The same year died St. Colman, son of Comgall, St.
Seanach’s successor ; it is worthy of remark, that these two
saints had originally been of the order of Black monks, or
Benedictines.«

662. The bishop, St. Cumin, died December the 2nd.)

726. Died the abbot Faghtara M‘Folaghtaine.™

744. Clonfert was consumed by fire.®

748. The town and abbey again suffered from a dreadful
conflagration.®

! Act. SS. p. 439. © Id. pp. 385 and 771. 8 Calendar. ™ Act. SS. p. 385.
1 Td. pp. 371 and 385. * /d. p. 385. Ud. p.747. ™ MGeogh. % Tr. Th.
p- 633. ° Td.
he was found in Cill-Ite in Ui-Conaill-Gabhre. Cumin Fota, #., tall he was ; and
he is honoured with Ernin, son of Findchan, abbot of Lethglend, and Metan Cael
of Aird.” For some particulars of his life, see Liber Hymnorum, part i., p. 84,
seg. Though this saint is honoured on the 12th November, the Annals mark his
death on the 2nd of December.

Frequent reference to Clonfert will be found in the Four Masters. They tell us
of its having been three times plundered, and six times burnt. Situated on the
banks of the Shannon, it was subject to the depredations of the Danes and
Northmen. Inthe year 838, Turgesius appeared with his fleet in Lough Ree, and
plundered Clonfert and Clonmacnoise, with all the other churches in the neighbour-

ood of Lough Derg. In the Fragments of Irish Annals, published by the I. A. S.,
we meet, at A.D. 869, the important entry :—‘‘ In this year came Tomrar the Earl
from Limerick to Cluain-ferta-Brenainn. He was a fierce, rough, cruel man of the
Lochlauns, thinking that he would find a great prey in that church, but he did not
find it as he expected, for intelligence had gone a short time before him, and they
fled expertly before him, some in boats, others into the morasses, and others into
the church. Those whom he caught on the floor and in the churchyard he killed.
Cormac, son of Elatach, chief of Erin for wisdom, the successor of old Ciaran of
Saighir, was in the church, and was saved by the protection of God and of Brendan.
And Tomrar died of madness in this year, Brendan having wrought a miracle
upon him.” In the Annals of Lough Cé, there is also the following interesting
entry at the year 1266 :—‘‘ The bishopric of Luighne (z.¢., Achonry) was assumed
by Thomas O’Miadhacain ; and a bishop-elect came from Rome to Cluain-ferta-
Brenainn, and his episcopal decree was conferred on him at Ath-na-righ (i.¢.,
Athenry) the Sunday before Christmas.” This was John, the Papal Nuncio, of
whom Cotton writes :—* He proved to bea great benefactor to his church, and is
believed to have erected the statues and other carvings which decorate the western
end of the cathedral. After governing the Diocese of Clonfert thirty years, the
Pope promoted him to the Archbishopric of Benevento in Italy.”—Fasti, 163.
Ware also was of opinion that this bishop erected ‘‘the fair frontispiece at the
west end of the church, adorned with a variety of statues of excellent workmanship.”
Dr. O’Donovan however, in his notes to the Four Masters, affirms that this beautiful
ornamented doorway, which is the most perfect specimen extant of the Irish
Romanesque style, is at least two centuries earlier than this bishop's time.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-228.png ---
202 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

The same year died the abbot Fiachra O’Macnya.?

758. Died the abbot Swyny.4

778. Died the abbot Seirgal O’Daingne."

780. Died the abbot M‘Flathnya.*

801. Died the abbot Murdach.'

839. About this time the Danes burnt the abbey, and slew
the abbot or bishop."

841. Clonfert was again consumed to ashes by the Danes.”

845. In this year Turgesius, at the head of his Danes, was
guilty of the most horrid depredations. He not only burned
and destroyed the houses, &c., in the town, but consumed to
ashes all the churches, together with the dwellings of the
religious.*

867. Died Cormac, the son of Conmagh; he was surnamed
the Wise, and was ceconomist and writer of Clonfert”

879. Died Cormac, son of Kieran, prior of this abbey, and
abbot of Tuaim-da-valuin.

880. Died Corman, son of Keternac, prior of Clonfert and
Tirdaglass.*

920. Died Cormac, who was said to have been bishop.»

945. Ceallachan, King of Cashel, and Donogh, his son, pre-
sented to this abbey the spoils which they had taken from the
Danes.°

949. This abbey was pillaged.?

1031. In this year, on the day of O’Ruark’s return from
plundering Clonfert, he was met and attacked by Doncha,
the son of Brian, who made a great slaughter amongst his
men.®

1045. Clonfert was destroyed by fire.t

1065. About this time Hugh O’Ruark, King of Conmaicne
Conacht, or Breifne, in company with Thady O'Kelly, King
of Maine, spoiled this abbey, but on the next succeeding day,
these two monarchs were defeated by Hugh O’Conor, King
of Connaught, who totally overthrew their whole army, and
sunk and dispersed their fleet then on the Shannon.®

1164. The abbey was wholly consumed.®

1166. Died Gillameinaiblen O’Hannicada, comorb of
Brendan.

1170. Died Cormac Hua Lomluin, divinity lecturer in this
abbey, and esteemed the most learned Irishman of his time.*

1175. Roderick O’Conor, King of Connaught, appointed his
chancellor, Master Laurence, in conjunction with Catholicus,

P M'Geogh. aid. Tid. "Id. * Annal. Ulton. "Annal. Annon.
* M'Geogh. * Annal. Annon. ¥ Act. SS. p. 360. "Id. “Id. Id. * Annal.
Munst. 4 Tr, Th. p. 633. *Annal. Munst. © Tr. Th. p. 633. & Annal.
Munst. » Tr. Th. p. 633. | Annal Munst. * Tr. Th. p. 360.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-229.png ---
County of Galway. 203

Archbishop of Tuam, and Concord, or Canthred, abbot of
Clonfert, his ambassadors to King Henry II., and accordingly
sent them in this year.!

1179. This abbey was again destroyed by fire.™

1186. Died Malcallan, son of Clericenn; he was called
bishop of this abbey."

1195. Died the abbot Donald O’Fuin.°

1201. The abbey and town were pillaged about this time
by William Burgh and the sons of Conor.P

1204. William Burgh did again plunder this abbey.4

Henry O’Gormacain was abbot at the time of the general
suppression of monasteries; he never surrendered the abbey,
but continued seized of the temporalities of it till his death,

- notwitstanding the King had, on the 24th of November, in
his 35th year, united them for ever to the bishopric. Im-
mediately on the decease of Henry, William O’Gormacain,
supported by the sept of the O’Maddens, procured the abbey
from the Pope, and kept quiet possession thereof, till about
the year 1567, when both spirituals and temporals were divi-
ded between the bishop and abbot, on whose death, in 1571,
the bishop came into quiet possession of the whole, being six
quarters of land, and 6s. 8d. annual rent issuing out of three
quarters, named Down M‘Mearran, with some other parcels,
and a water mill, the whole being valued at £6 yearly?

This abbey paid to the bishop 20s. procurations for the
rectory of Clonfert.*

Clonkeen. About the year 1435, Thomas O'Kelly, Bishop of
Clonfert, and afterwards Archbishop of Tuam, converted the
parish church of Clonkeen, or Clonkeen-kernill, into a monas-
tery for friars of the third order of St. Francis, at the instance
of David and John Mull-kerrill, professors of the said order.
The Pope, Eugene IV., confirmed this donation in the
year 1441.'

This house was under the invocation of the Holy Trinity.

By an Inquisition taken in 1618, Conor Duffe O’Naghten,
priest, and Conor Oge O’Naghten, student, both of the town
of Galway, were found to be in possession of the monastery of
the Holy Trinity of Clounkinkerril, with a cartron of land,
called Ferinewr, in the barony of Tiaquin, belonging to the
said monastery, and a third part of a quarter of land, called
Ferinenvind, together with all the tithes of said lands of Cloun-
kine, Coximore, and Balliclowan, in the parish of Clounkine ;
two chambers, with two gardens containing two acres, valued

| War. Bps. p. 604, and War. Ann. ™ Tr. Th. p. 633. ® Act. SS. p. 153.

° Ann. Munst. ° M'Geogh. “ld. * Aud. General. * King, pp. 206 and 207.
War. Bps. p. 642. + War. Mon.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-230.png ---
204 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.
at 6d. sterling annually, and fourteen acres of land belonging
to the said monastery, in the town of Clounkine, viz. :—

Taghfaddah, valued at 3d. Crosscolline, valued at 3d.
Gortana Tample, 5 3d. Gortatagardbeg, ,, 2d,

Gortaflagh, » 3d. Mackiloghie, » 3d.
Knocknamagrosse, __,, 3a. Gortatagardmore, ,, 2d,
Chappaghnegon, ” 2d, Gortinamorra, » 2d.
Gortaluig, a 2d. Meilickmahowna, ,, 3d.

and of all the tithes, great and small, belonging to the said
monastery ; six acres of land in Killowan, called Ballimor-
Gerter and Gortavonyn, value 8d, and the vicarage of S. >
impropriated to Clonkeen, with all the tithes, &c., belonging
to the said monastery, and which tithes extend into eight
quarters of the lands of Killaboggy and Clonkeen aforesaid,
and are valued at 4s. ; twoacres of glebe land in Killaboggy,
called Gartelagevit, value 4d.; and a garden called the vicar’s
garden, in the town of Clonkeenkerrill, value 2d."

Clonthuskert, or Clontuoskirt O’Maney, near the river Shan-
non, in the barony of Clonmacowen, and six miles north-west
of Clonfert.

Boadan, or Broadan, founded this monastery for Augustine
canons, and was himself the first abbot; he died about the
year 809.”

1444. Bishop M‘Coughlan, and Breagal Fitz-Brien Eogan
O’Kelly, the prior of Clonthuskert,* and James, the bishop’s
son, who was Archdeacon of Clonmacnois, were slain in a bat-
tle fought with another sept of the M‘Coughlans, on the Mon-
day next before the feast of St. John the Baptist

This abbey paid 20s. proxies to the Bishop of Clonfert, and
was granted to Richard Earl of Clanricarde. See Aghrim.

Cloonyvornoge ;* Is called in the records a chapel, or cell,
of the third order of St. Francis, and was built some time after
the year 1441.*

By an Inquisition held in the 28th year of Queen Elizabeth,
this chapel was found in possession of half a quarter of land,
arable, pasture, &c., and the tithes of the same, all of the
yearly value of 6s. 8a.”

Cluainfois ; an abbey of this name was founded by St.
Jarlath, Bishop of Tuam, in which there was a celebrated
school about the year 540.

Cluainfois is now a chapel not far from the town of Tuam,°
and, according to Allemande, is at present called the High
Temple.4

* King, p.131. ~ War. Mon. * Ann. Dub. Firbisse. 4% War. Bps. p. 173-

Or frulevernoge. * War. Mon. » King, ~.132. ° Act, SS. p. 310. 4 Alle.
mands.


--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-231.png ---
County of Galway. 205

Crevaghbane ; Here was a friary of Carmelites,* which, if
we mistake not, owes its erection to an Earl of Clanricarde, in
the 14th century!

This monastery, with a quarter of land—sixteen acres of
arable and twelve of pasture—in the town and lands of Cre-
vaghbane, together with the Abbey of Mayo, was granted to
the burgesses and commonalty of the town of Athenry—See
Mayo’

Dundrynan > Thomas was abbot of the Monastery of the
Blessed Virgin Mary of Dundrynan in the year 1374, and
2gth of the reign of King Edward III." Wecan find no other
account of this abbey.

Dunmore ; Gives name to the barony, and is situated six
miles north of Tuam.

St. Patrick built here the Monastery of Domnagh-padraig,
and appointed St. Fulartach bishop of it! A friary for
Augustine Eremites was afterwards founded on the site of the
old abbey, by Walter de Bermingham, Lord Athenry, in the
year 1425! :

The whole of this edifice cannot now be_ traced;
part of it was converted into a parish church; the
remaining part was levelled, and now forms the market-
place.

Henry Mossop, the celebrated actor, was born in this town ;
his father was rector of Dunmore, and an eminent mathema-
tician.

* War. Mon. * Allemande. * Auditor-General. ™ King, p.140. ' Act. SS. p.
788. * War. Mon. Allemande, and Lodge, vol. iv. p. 11. Calendar.

ut The Patent Rolls make frequent mention of the Abbey “de Dundrequan in
Galwey,” but this is probably the famous Abbey of Dundraquan in Galloway in
Scotland. It was the last place in her kingdom in which Mary Queen of Scots
found shelter. In the Patent Rolls of 12th of Richard II., Thomas Gower, clerk,
received the care of the Jands in the County Meath that belonged to the Abbot of
“ Dundrequan in Brittounstowngalwey.” In the following year, Thomas Gower
was removed, and Robert Sutton succeeded to the custody of those lands. By
Patent of 6th of Henry IV., reversion of these lands after Robert Sutton was

nted to R. Sydgrave; and in the Trim Inquisition, 20th March, 1621, Walter
Sedgrave, of Dublin, alderman, was found ‘‘seized of Bartanstowngalwey, in County
Meath, containing 90 acres arable.”

18 Dunmcre, which means the great fort, derives its name from the great fortress
of the Kings of Connaught which was situated here. There still remain the ruins
of a Jater castle built by Mebric, one of the early Welsh adventurers, and subse-
quently held by the Berminghams, barons of Athenry. In the reign of Elizabeth,

e Berminghams rose in arms against the queen, but their castle was besieged and
taken in 1569. It was finally “Fismantled in Cromwell's time. As regards the
Augustinian friary, there is a curious Memorandum in a Patent Roll, 33rd of
Henry VIIL, ‘‘that whereas the Lord Bermyngham of Athenry, in Conacde, hath
under him a poor monastery of Augustine friars in the town of Downemore, it is
considered (by the council) that the said monastery shall stand, and that three or
four of the co-brethren, changing their habit toa secular habit, shall have said
house, &c., during the king’s pleasure.” Signed, 7th July, an. 33.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-232.png ---
206 Ancient Monasterics of Ireland.

Enagh Dune ;®™ On Lough Corrib, in the barony of Clare.

Abbey ; An abbey was founded here in a remote age ; for

so early as the 7th century, we find that St. Meldon was Abbot

or Bishop of Lough-Orbsen, called also Lough-Corrib; his
Sue is observed on the 7th February.”

Nunnery ; St. Brendan of Clonfert built a nunnery here,
under the invocation of the Virgin Mary, for his sister Briga.°

Pope Celestine III. by a Bull dated February the 26th,
A.D. 1195, did confirm this church, together with the town of
Kelgel, to the nuns of the order of Aroacia.P

The steeple of this nunnery was erected in the year 1238.9

On the suppression, it was granted to Richard Earl of
Clanricarde. See Aghrim.

St. Mary's Abbey ; Called also the Abbey of St. Mary de
Portu Patrum, was founded for White Canons of the Order of
Premonstre."

Nicholas was abbot in the year 1311; for we find on record,
that Gilbert, Bishop of Enaghdune, recovered agairist him, in
right of his church, a messuage, twenty acres of arable land,
six of meadow, forty of wood, twenty of moor, and sixty of
pasture, all in Shanthill.*

Franciscan Friary ; This house was considerable, being the
head of a custody to which were subordinate the monasteries
of Connaught and Ulster.‘

College of St. Brendan ; A religious house so named in this
town, in which four priests or vicars were supported. This

™ Tt was called also Annadown, or Enagh-coin, and is a bishopric united to

Clonfert. "Calendar. ° Usher. » War. Mon. %Annal. Annon. * War. Mon.
* King, p.257. * Allemande.

13 Enaghdune, now Annadown, was anciently an Episcopal See, but was finally
united with Tuam in the sixteenth century. An official report forwarded to Rome
in 1555, describes Enaghdune as “a small unfortified city, about four or five miles
distant from Tuam : it has a small cathedral under the invocation of St. Brendan,
with its dean and archdeacon and some canons, who, however, do not reside
there : the cathedral itself is quite abandoned (penitus desolata), and only one
Mass is offered there on festival days ; there is also a tower with a cemetery : one
chalice and vestment. The diocese is very small, and situate among wild and evil
men.”—See Archbishops of Dublin, by Rev. P. F. Moran, Appendix, page 415.
St. Brendan died in the year 577, in the 93rd_year of his age, at the monastery
which he had erected for his sister, St.Briga, at Enaghdune. St. Columba being then
in Iona, “ vidit subito apertum coelum, Angelorumque choros ejus animae obvies
descendere, quorum luminosa et incomparabili charitudine totus eadem hora illus-
tratus mundi orbis fuit.” From Zhe Book of Ballymote we learn that it was Aodha,
the son of Eochy Tirmcharna, King of Connaught, who bestowed Enaghdun on
God and St. Brendan. Ware also tells us that St. Briga’s Monastery was the first
ecclesiastical foundation there, and that it was dedicated to the Blessed Virgin
Mary. For many documents connected with Enaghdune, see West Connaught,
published by I.A.S., page 154. Besides the ruins of the bishop’s house, and the
extensive remains of the abbey church and monastery and convent, the holy
wells of St. Brendan, and St. Cormack, and St. Columbkille’s tree, mark the site
of Enaghdune, the most interesting spot on the eastern shore of Lough Corrib.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-233.png ---
County of Galway. 207

foundation was long concealed from the Queen, during which
time it was in the hands of Clement Skerryt and Thady
M'‘Inyllis, priests ; its possessions were a church in ruins, a
small cemetery, a garden, and the moiety of an acre of ground,
on which had been erected several cottages, with their yards,
now waste, and therefore of no value, together with a common
of about twenty acres of wet pasture near to the town; the
principal tenants of the college generally grazed their cattle
with the rest of the townsmen ; and twenty-three quarters of
tithes belonging to the said college, viz. :—
QUARTERS.
In the town and chapels of Annagh - -
Cahirnourish =~ - - - -
Bally-Robug = - - - - -
Kyllkoyle - - - - -
Ballynecowley
Drumgriff - - - fa -
Clonlow - - - - - -

Pop AD

The said tithes were valued at £3 6s. Irish.—Inquisition,
28th Queen Elizabeth.

Fallig ; A house was erected here for Grey Friars in the
year 1390, by one Fallig, who, according to Wadding, was an
Trishman.”

Probably Fallig may be erroneously written for Faghy,
which is now a vicarage situated a mile south of Eyrecourt,
in the barony of Longford.

Fidhard ;* St. Patrick built an abbey here, and placed over
it St. Justus.

Colgan informs us, that Fidhard was a parish church in the
diocese of Elphin

Galway ; This town is a remarkable seaport, and sends
representatives to parliament. .

™ King, p. 142, ~ Allemande. * In the territory of Hua Mainech, containing
tart of the County of Galway, and part of the County of Roscommon. ¥ Tr. Th.
Op. 136 and 177.

14 O'Flaherty, writing towards the close of the 17th century (in West Connaught,
age 30), describes Galway as ‘‘the chief town of the province of Connaught,
famous for its handsome contrivement and fortification, its ancient great traffick

and dealings with foreigners, and the worthy parts and qualities of its citizens.”
From a very early period Galway was remarkable as being one of the strongest
fortresses in Ireland, and though Ware affirms that, like most of the other towns,
it was inhabited by the Ostmen, later research has proved that it was one of the
few strong seaports which never fell into their hands. It was not so, however,
with the Anglo-Normans : they not only occupied this town, but made it the
centre of their military operations in the province of Connaught, and obliterated
everything that could recall its being an Irish town. They even passed a bye-law
in 1518 prohibiting the inhabitants from admitting into their houses anyone of the
surrounding Irish septs, “ that neither O nor Mac should strut or swagger through

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-234.png ---
208 Ancicnt Monasteries of Ireland.

the streets of Galway.” One of the few old Irish vestiges that all their efforts
could not efface is the well dedicated to St. Brendan, near the Quay; and O'Flaherty
writes that in his time St. Brendan's feast, on the 16th May, was, by those living
on the Quay, observed as a strict holiday.

A noble residence or college having been built for the clergy by the citizens,
and especially through the munificence of Dominick Lynch, surnamed Dudh, who
died in 1502, the sanction of the Cistercian Order was duly obtained, and the
Church of St. Nicholas, hitherto subject to Knockmoy Abbey, was, about the year
1480, erected into a collegiate church by Donat O’Murry, Archbishop of Tuam,
and in the terms of his erection a Guardian or Warden and eight choral Vicars
were attached to it. He at the same time granted to it the Church of Ballyclare,
and other endowments. These acts of the Archbishop were approved and confirmed
by Pope Innocent VIII., by Brief dated 6th of the Faes of February, 1484. Arch-
bishop O’Murry passed to a better life early in 1484, but his successor, Ullic Joy,
or Joyce, on the 7th August, faithfully carried out the arrangements approved by
the Sovereign Pontiff, and added other considerable endowments. The Warden
was elected each year by the Mayor and citizens of Galway, and his election was
ratified by the Vicars-Choral. These, too, were elected by the Mayor and citizens,
and received their confirmation from the Warden.

Galway, from the year 1600 to 1650, was reckoned the most important city of
the kingdom after Dublin. It was particularly remarkable for its school, and the
old Annals of the city under the year 1608, relate that “at this period there was
a famous school, containing twelve hundred scholars, kept in Galway by Alexander
Lynch.” The office of schoolmaster was a perilous one in those times, and we
learn from the Patent Rolls of the 16th James I., that the commissioners ap-
pointed to inquire into the state of the kingdom recommended that ‘‘a constant
course be held in execution of the laws for compelling His Majesty's subjects to
attend the preaching of the word and hearing of divine service, for suppressing of
Popish schools, establishment of schoolmasters, weeding out Popish priests,” &c.
(A.D. 1613. Rot. Pat. 16 Jac. I., p. 3, No.6). Notwithstanding the severe laws
against the Catholic schoolmasters, Galway or its neighbourhood continued to be
a favorite resort for Irish scholars, and Dr. John Lynch, Archdeacon of Tuam,
and Dr. James Lynch, subsequently Archbishop of Tuam, maintained the fame
of the courage and ability of the Galway schoolmasters. .

In the Library of Trinity College, Dublin, there is a valuable MS., written in
the reign of Charles the First, containing the Annals of Galway, from which
we take the following extracts: —

A.D. 1513. “Stephen Lynch Fitzdominick, being on a voyage, the Convent
of the Hill, dedicated to St. Augustine, was built by one Margaret Athey, his wife.
The said Stephen, on landing, finding this work in a manner perfected, questioned
who built this work? It was replied that it was his wife, and he commended the
work. It is added that this lady was remarkable for her piety, and made a
pilgrimage to St. Iago in Galicia, and that she was only prevented by her infirmi-
ties from proceeding to the Holy Land. ‘The above-named Stephen founded
the hospital, or poor men’s house, in High-stréet ; and he also removed the ditch
from Leam Teig, near the town walls, and the Corporation gave him the lands near
the same.’

A.D. 1522. “ This year it was enacted that no man should be made a freeman
of the city, unless he spoke English, and agreed to have his upper lip weekly
shaved, under penalty of £20.

A.D. 1539. “John French, alias Skane-i-Tallen, so called from the abundance
of salt which he brought to the country, built the north side of the body of St.
‘Nicholas’s Church, from the north pinnacle to the chapel of the sacrament ; he also
built the great.chapel which lieth in the south side of St. Francis’s Abbey, in the
north of Galway, together with the stone house that stands over the river annexed
to the west pinnacle of the said abbey, called ‘ John French’s Chamber.’

A.D. 1563. ‘On Saturday, the 15th of January, Theobald, Lord Viscount Mayo,
was shot to death at Galway.

A.D. 1643. “On Sunday, the 18th of June, Mass was solemnly sung in St.
Nicholas'’s Church of Galway. On Sunday, the 25th of June, Mass was first
solemnly sung in St. Francis’s Abbey; and upon the same day the fort of St. Austin,

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-235.png ---
County of Galway. 209

near Galway, surrendered to the Catholics, and was, by the order of the Supreme
Council, razed to the ground.

A.D. 1649. “In this year a grant was passed by the Corporation to the Nuns of
St. Clare, of //lane-Altanagh, that they might build a convent there; also,
Thomas Lynch Fitzmark left £250 to the Dominicans, to support two of his own
Kindred of the same Order at their studies in Paris.

A.D. 1650. ‘* The plague continued from the beginning of August, 1649, till
the last of April, 1650. There died about three thousand seven hundred and odd
Persons, whereof there were of the freemen and their families about two hundred
and ten.

A.D. 1651-1652. ‘* In the month of May, 1651, Sir Charles Coot, Commander-
in-Chief of the Parliamentary troops, invaded this province : after taking Athlone,
Sligo, Loughrea, and all the strongest holds of the province, he besieged this
town on the east part thereof, and having taken Tyrilan, Oranmore, and Clare, he
pitched his camp between the great and little lanes, the 12th of August, 1651,
and there continued till the 12th of April, 1652; when this town, despairing of
any relief by sea or land, and most exhausted in paying £400 per week to the
soldiers, surrendered itself upon very good and honorable conditions. One of
these conditions was that the Mayoralty of Galway should continue in the old
Catholic families; but this condition was soon violated.

“Upon the surrender of Galway there was such a dearth in the county, that
many thousands died by the second plague. and three scourges of God were
then reigning, viz.: dearth, plague, and sword; and many to whom life was spared,
had _no great means left to maintain themselves. Upon an information of Colonel
Stubbers, Governor of Galway, of the multitude of vagabonds and idlers in the
country, he obtained an order to ship them for Barbadoes ; and this order was so
carried out, that many housekeepers, going to see their cattle, and their children
were pressed on board, and all others that were registered in the contribution-
book. so that there were 2,000 persons sent off, and were sold there as slaves.

“The unruly crew of soldiers broke down the monuments and coffins of the
dead, and taking from them the winding sheets, as though some treasure had been
within the said coffins, nay, breaking down crucifixes and such spiritual costly
works engraven on fine marble. Sir Peter Tench's tomb, gilt with gold and all
made of fine marble, being in St. Francis's Abbey, the building of which outcost
4500, was along with the rest demolished and converted by the governor of the
said town into a chimney, and the rest of the said grand stones or marbles of the
said abbey. were sold and sent beyond sea, and the monuments left wide open
for the dogs to drag out and eat the corpses interred there ; and likewise they
erased the King's arms, and converted the church and abbeys to stables ; and they
were for the most part illiterate and covetous to hoard up money by the ruin of
the poor inhabitants, without any regard to conscience or public faith, the sword
then being in lieu of the law—our unhappy iron age. The mayor, sheriffs, and
the English, made freemen of their own, to wit, cobblers, butchers, tinkers, and all
sorts of artificers. About June. the Lord-Deputy, Charles Fleetwood, took his
circuit and came to Galway, where he gave a definitive sentence for the removal
of the old inhabitants of Galway, which order was immediately issued from
Dublin contrary to their conditions and articles.

A.D. 1655. ‘‘ Lieutenant Colonel Humfrey Hurd was elected mayor; John
Commell and John Mathews, sheriffs; the mayor by his former calling was a
joiner, and the sheriffs were weavers. This year the Archbishop of Tuam, the Bishop
of Killala, and many more of the clergy, were sent over the seas. New wars broke
out between England and Spain, and a court of claims was erected in Athlone, to
try the qualification of the Irish.

A.D. 1656. ‘The transplantation was put forward, and land accordingly assigned
to the Irish in Connaught and County Clare by the commissioners sitting at
Loughrea, which was carried on with such partiality, that those who had but
coarse lands, or none at all, were best served, and others that had most money and
best friends in court carried the game, and the poor Irish, being utterly beggared,
attending to no purpose, sold their decrees to the English for half-a-crown an
acre, who had land left them for that yearly value, by which means, and other
like courses and debentures of soldiers, the English invested themselves with all

VoL. Il. P

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-236.png ---
210 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland,

Franciscan Friary }© A.D. 1296. Sir William de Burgh,
surnamed Leigh, or the Grey, founded a monastery for Fran-
ciscan friars in St. Stephen’s Island, situated without the north
gate of the town, as it is particularly mentioned in the obi-
tuary of the said friary,* and the dedication of it was on the
16th of May.* Sir William died the 12th of February, A.D.
1324, and was interred here.>

* War. Ms. vol. 34; Lodge, vol.ii., Append. * King, p. 313. > Lodge, Lib. Obit,

the estates in the country. In this year the expedition of Jamaica was set on
foot. Ten thousand went thither under the command of Colonel Venables.

“ The Protector Oliver, after his great and fortunate victory, allowed the whole
town, for the most part, to fall into decay. About this time you might see whole
families destroyed, and streets not having six families ; and soldiers or poor
bakers, that ought to content themselves with one cellar, had great houses to live
in till they burned all the lofts, and wainscots, and partitions thereof, and then
removed to another house till they made an end of all the town, and left them full
of excrement and filth ; so that it was poison to enter into any of the said houses,
formerly fit to lodge kings or princes, being the completest and best fittedin all Ire-
land. e inhabitants thereof, being the best and greatest merchants in the
kingdom, for hospitality, liberality, and charity, both at home and abroad,
accompanied with good education, were now in the midst of frost and snow,
lying in hedges, in smoky and miserable huts, and barracks in the country, being
all removed except six families, who were forced to quarter the most of the
soldiers of the town, and to excessive tributes and bribes, but were at turned
out with the rest. The clergy, being about fifty in number, were sent to Arran
and Boffin, where they were almost starved, being allowed but 2d. per diem, and
even that not paid, and strict proclamation was made against the lives and goods
of such as would entertain any cle! . The images of our Blessed ly
and of other saints were burned, chalices were made common cups to drink out
of, priests’ vestments were made secular clothes of.

A.D. 1657. ‘‘In this year the abbey of Galway, belonging to St. Francis’s
Order, was demolished : best built by Sir William Burke.”

18 The following interesting account of this friary was written by F. Mooney,
O.S.F., in 1616. Having referred to its foundation by William de Burgh, sur-
named Liagh, #.¢., the Grey, he thus continues :—‘‘ The illustrious founder spared
no expense to render this monastery one of the finest in Ireland ; and, indeed, the
spacious dimensions of its church, the rich marble of which it was con-
structed, and the splendour of its altars, are so many irrefragable evidences of the
piety and taste of the noble De Burgh. He lived to see it solemnly consecrated,
and when dying ordered that his remains should be laid in the gorgeous monu-
ment which he caused to be built for himself and his posterity, right under the
shadow of the grand altar. When I visited Galway, the tomb of the founder, like
those of most of the chief families of the neighbourhood, was in good preservation,
but particularly that of De Burgh, round whose recumbent effigy I read the follow-
ing inscription : ‘AMemoriae Illmi. Domini Gul. de Burgo, Suae Nationis principis
et hujus monasterii fundatoris gus obit 1324. The endowments which De Burgh
made to this monastery were very numerous, and consisted of water-mills upon
the river, and the tithes of some acres of arable land near the city ; and that our
friars should never lack fish, he ordained that on every Wednesday they should be
supplied with one salmon out of the great weir, on every Saturday with three out
of the Aigh weir, and on the same day with one out of the haul-net, and with all
na eels that might be taken one day in each week out of the many eel weirs on
the river.

“I may say, unhesitatingly, that the Galway monastery had as many bene-
factors as any other house of our order in Ireland ; for, indeed, the inhabitants of that
ancient city loved our habit, and never tired of contributing to the maintenance of
our brethren. The largesses of the rich and noble helped to keep the buildings in
good repair, and the poor man was ever ready with his mite to promote the same

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-237.png ---
County of Galway. 211

1381. In this year Pope Urban empowered the guardian of
this friary to excommunicate every person within the province
of Connaught who should adhere to the anti-pope, Clement
VIL

1460. On the 26th of January died William, son of Meyler
the Great, who bequeathed to this convent half a marc yearly,
to be paid on the feast of St. Brigid.4

° Allemande. 4 Lib. Obit., King, p. 312.

object. Indeed, the register which records the multitudinous bequests and legacies
of the townspeople to that monastery, is still in the possession of one of our breth-
ren in Galway ; and on turing over its pages, I found ample evidence of the love
and veneration which the citizens of every grade always cherished for our institute.
Thus, for example, as I learnt from the register, Edward Phillibyn, a wealthy
merchant, rebuilt the dormitory for our friars in 1493; and in 1538, John French,
then chief magistrate of the city, erected the beautiful chapel on the south side of
the monastery, in honour of God and St. Francis, and for the good estate of his
own soul and the souls of his posterity. As for the tombs of the distinguished
denizens of Galway and its neighbourhood who selected our church for their last
resting-place, let it suffice to say, that they are yey numerous and splendid pro-
ductions of the sculptor’s chisel. De Burghs, Lynches, Fitz-Stephens, and
O’Flaherties, moulder there beneath marble monuments, exquisitely wrought,
rich in heraldry and pompous epitaphs, recording many a high achievement on the
battle-field, in the senate, and in the mart. Apart from those gorgeous monu-
ments—last efforts of human vanity, if you will—there is, in the south side of the
choir, an humble cenotaph, sacred to the memory of a truly great man, whose
extensive and profound erudition reflects honour on the Franciscan order, of which
he was, in sooth, a most distinguished ornament ; I speak of Maurice O'Fihiley, or
Maurice de Portu, whom Julius II. advanced to the archiepiscopal see of Tuam,
in 1506. Having completed his studies in Padua, he for a long time taught phil-
osophy in that learned city, and earned a world-wide reputation by the variety of
his writings. some of which were not published till after his death. His principal
works are ‘Commentaries on Scotus,’ a ‘ Dictionary of the Scriptures,’ the ‘ En-
chiridion Fidei, or a Manual of the Faith,’ which he dedicated to the Earl of
Kildare ; ‘The Compendium of Truths,’ in Leonine metre, and many others
which it would be superfluous to enumerate. This truly learned man was corrector
of the press for that far-famed printer, Benedict Locatelli, and filled the same
place in the printing establishment of Octavian Schott, at Venice. Having assisted
at the early sessions of the Council of Lateran, 1512, and returned to Ireland in
the following year, he landed at Galway, where he fell sick, and died in our con-
vent there. Few, indeed, have won greater renown in the republic of letters, and
well did he deserve the epithet bestowed upon him by the learned men ot his day,
who justly styled him ‘Flos Mundi.’ Two of his successors in the see of Tuam,
Thomas O’Mullaly and Christopher Bodkin, await the resurrection in the same
humble tomb.

“ This venerable monastery, however, was doomed to share the fate of most of
our other houses in Connaught ; and, accordingly, in the year 1570, the greater
part of its possessions was wrested from the friars, and granted to the Corporation
of Galway and their successors. As for the convent and church, they were both
assigned to an individual, who, pretending to have adopted the doctrines of the An-
glican religion, in order to accommodate himself to the times, contrived withal to do
great service to our brotherhood when they were banished from their ancient pre-
cincts. Nothing, indeed, could have been more strange than the conduct of this
anonymous grantee ; for he essed himself of the old conventual register, in
which all legacies bequeathed to our friars were entered; and not only did he
vigorously enforce payment of the amounts, but he actually handed them over to
the community, then residing in a house which they rented in the city, in order
that all such pious donations might be expended on the repairs and preservation of
the ancient edifice. Furthermore, as the island on which the monastery stands

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-238.png ---
212 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1494. The friars of this house obtained a licence from Pope
Alexander VI. to annex to the friary the chapel of our Lady,
then adjoining one of the gates of the town.

1494. April the 20th, died Edward Philibyn, who built the
dormitory of this monastery.‘

* Allemande. * War. Ms. vol. 34.

belonged to him, he could not be induced to part with a single perch of it at any
price, no matter how tempting ; and instead of letting it to others, he built there
sundry handsome houses. which accommodate upwards of fifty persons, together with
three water-mills for grinding corn. It was during the construction of the latter
that the weir which formerly belonged to the Franciscans was demolished. From
the earliest times, too, it was customary for all vessels coming up the river with
wood and other sorts of fuel, to give a little of it by way of alms to our friars ; and,
strange as it may seem, this anonymous benefactor still insists on the observance
of the usage, and thus supplies our brotherhood in the city with coal and firewood.
He also maintains the ancient immunities of St. Stephen’s island; so much so,
that he will not allow the mayor to carry his insignia beyond the middle of the
bridge leading to the island, which, in the olden time, marked the limit of munici-
pal jurisdiction in that quarter. Two customs which struck me as very peculiar
ate still observed in the city of Galway, and so remarkable are they that I think
them worth recording. First, almost every one who has anything to leave when
dying, bequeaths a proportionate sum for the preservation and repairs of the mon-
astery ; and secondly, vast numbers of the citizens, ofevery age, sex, and condition,
go each evening at sunset to that venerable old church to pray to God, who, I
doubt not, will one day reward their most edifying piety. 1 have already told you
that, at the time of my visit to Galway, the monastery and church were in excellent
preservation ; but I should not forget to mention, that in 1603, James the First of
England granted both to Sir George Carew and his heirs for ever. Thenceforth
our venerable church was turned into a profane courthouse, where judges, ap-
pointed by Chichester, the Lord Deputy, held assizes for the town and county.
Alas, it was heartrending to witness such desecration ; and the tears fell fast and
hot from my eyes when, on entering the holy edifice, I found it crowded with liti-
gants, the pulpit turned into a witness-box, the choir and chancel adapted to
accommodate a multitude of noisy lawyers, and worst of all, the grand altar trans-
formed into a bench for a bloated judge, who was entirely ignorant of the language
and customs of the people. I have nothing further to add to this meagre account
. of our once splendid monastery of Galway, except that I was not able to ascertain
what became of its altar-plate and rich vestments, all of which had fallen into the
hands of our implacable enemies. A few Franciscans still continue to live in the
house which father Maurice Ultan hired for them in the city, and their zeal is of
the greatest benefit to the townspeoole as well as to those of the suburbs.”

Much controversy has arisen as to the birth-place of the illustrious Archbishop of
Tuam, Dr. Fihely, referred to in these extracts. Cotton writes, that ‘‘ three of the
provinces of Ireland contended for the honour of his birth.”"—Fast#, page 1!._ The
generally received opinion is that of Ware, that he was born in Baltimore, in the
County of Cork, and from that small port-town derived the surname a Portu, by
which he is generally designated in the Annals of the Franciscan order. It is to
be remarked, however, that Ware, in the first edition of his work, wrote that the
Archbishop was said to have been born in the province of Connaught. * Lynch’s
MS., which has only of late come to light, seems to settle the controversy, for it
expressly states that Dr. O’Fihely was born at Clonfert, in the province of Con-
naught. The MS. adds, that the convent of Conventual Franciscans, Kenalthehin,
near Clonfert, was styled for the same reason Conventus de Poriu puro; and thus
the Archbishop derived from that town the surname by which he was known in
his order. Dr. Lynch further writes, that Dr. John de Burgo, who had been
Bishop of Clonfert, and was raised to the Sce of St. Jarlath during the eventful

riod of the Irish Confederation, communicated to him this fact regarding the

irth-place of his illustrious predecessor.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-239.png ---
County of Galway. 213

1502. March the 13th, died Thady Walter de Burgh, head
of his sept&

1503. September the 30th, died Walter de Burgh, the son
of John.® ,

1509. July the 7th, died Rickard Walter de Burgh.

1513. February the 23rd, Edmund de Burgh, the son of
Rickard, and head of his sept, was treacherously murdered by
his nephews.*

In the month of May this year, Maurice de Portu, alias
O’Fehealy, Archbishop of Tuam, was interred in this friary,
on the south side of the choir ; the humble monument under
which he lies is yet shown here!

1520. William de Burgh granted to this house the fishery
of the river of Galway.

1521. September 29th, died the Lord Edmund de Burgh,
son of William, and grandson of Edmund; the friars of this
house received great emoluments by his funeral obsequies."

1523. Died, on the 25th March, Andrew Lynche Fitz-
Stephen, who bequeathed a perpetual anniversary to this
monastery.®

1534. October the 27th, died Ulick Burgh, the son of
Edmund, and grandson of Rickard?

1536. April the 28th, died Thomas O’Mullaghy, Archbishop
of Tuam ; he was interred in the same sepulchre with his pre-
decessor Maurice.4

Provincial chapters of the Franciscan order were held here
in the years 1470, 1522, and 1562."

The tomb of the founder, Sir William de Burgh, was dis-
covered in June, 1779, upwards of 4 feet under ground,
with his family arms, and a very long broad-sword elegantly
carved thereon.

Some remains of this friary are still to be seen.

Dominican Friary ; Near the west gate of the town, with-

© King, p. 312. %Jd. ‘Id. * Td. | Jd. and Lib. Obit. ™ King, p. 312.
2 Lib. Obit. Id. YId. % King, p.312, and War. Bps. * War. Ms. vol. 34.

6 In the Appendix to West Connaught, page 274, is inserted the indenture
between the Mayor and Burgesses of Galway and the Prior and Religious of the
Order of St. Dominick, for taking down’ St. Dominick’s Abbey, commonly
called ‘‘Our Lady's Church.” It thus begins: “ Whereas St. Dominick's Abbey,
near Galway, in the West Franchises of the same, commonly called Our Lady’s
Church, in these combustious and warlike times. is found noisome and of dan-
gerous consequence to the safety and preservation of this town of Galway, if
possessed by the enemy, as late experience declared when the same was possessed
by Lord Forbes and the Parliament party conducted by him,” &c. They then
agree to rebuild the same when peace would be restored, either on the same site
or on an equivalent site to be selected by the Dominicans themselves. This is
followed by a detailed account of the buildings which were pulled down, the
occasion being a pressing one, ‘‘ in order to the preservation of this town against

the Parliament forces, under the command of Sir Charles Coote, now encamped
around this town, roth August, 1651.”

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-240.png ---
214 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

out the walls, was the Monastery of St. Mary of the Hill, a
daughter to that of the Holy Trinity of the Premonstratenses
of Tuam. On the nuns forsaking it, the secular clergy entered
into and kept possession for a considerable time ; but on the
petition of the inhabitants of the town to Pope Innocent VIII.,
it was granted to the Dominican friars, by a Bull dated 4th
of December, 1488. There are no remains of this foundation,
save the cemetery, the whole building having been demolished
by the townsmen, in the year 1652, in order to prevent Oliver
Cromwell from turning it into a fortification against them-
selves."

Augustinian Friary: Was founded on ahill near this town,
by Stephen Lynch, son of Dominick Duff (who was many
times Mayor of Galway), and Margaret, his wife, in the year
1508, at the earnest solicitation of Richard Nangle, a friar of the
same order, who afterwards became Archbishop of Tuam.!

A Carmelite Friary ; 1s said to have been founded here by
one of the Burghs."

N We cannot learn any other account of it.

Nunnery ; Was situated in an island in Lough-Corrib, to
the west of the town.”

‘We are as much in the dark with respect to this nunnery as
to the friary.

Immagh ;" An island on the coast of the county, which

annie Pp» 323 and 325: * Registr. Loct., King, p. 423. "Burke. © Pococke’s

7 The island Zmay, called in Irish ‘‘ Iomaidh,” or ‘‘ Iomaidh Feichin,” is now
Anglicized Omay. St. Fechin, patron of Fore, in Westmeath, founded a
monastery here in the seventh century. It is recorded that the last of the pegans
of Ireland were converted here by St. Fechin. They are described by Dr. Lynch
as “homines nudi, qui non sciverunt nisi carnes et pisces; qui non fuerunt
Christiani nec audiverunt unquam de Christo.” Near it on the mainland are the
ruins of the church of Athdearg, in Irish ‘‘Teampull Athadeirg,” i. ‘the
Church of the Red Ford,” so called from a mountain stream of a reddish colour
which flows into that inlet of the ocean now called Streamstown Bay, north-east of
Ballymac-Conry. O’Flaherty, in ‘‘ West Connaught,” page 113, gives the fol-
lowing account of Imagh:—‘ The island of Imay lies in the sea, so as at low water
it can be entered dry foot. Within it there is a pool of standing water, and the
soil is plain and champaign. St. Fechin erected” an abbey therein, but now the

arish church alone is extant, whereof St. Fechin is patron, honored on the 20th

anuary, whose well is here visited, which of late proves very miraculous for
restoring of health. St. Fechin, abbot, native of Luguy (Luquy), in the County
of Sligo, and of the same monastery of Fothart with St. Bridget of Kildare, was
founder of several abbeys; the chiefest of which are Fore, in Westmeath, Easdara
(now Ballysadare), in Sligo, and Cong. From Easdara he came to Imay, and his
memory is kept in several places of this country. He died of the plague which in
the year 664 began in Ireland after the 20th of, anuary.” This pestilence, called
the ‘‘ Buidhe Connaill,” is famous in the Irish Annals. See Four Masters, A.D.
664. Usher (Primordia, page 966), by a singular mistake, confounds “‘ Fabhar,”
the ancient name of Fore, mW, ‘estmeath, with “ Leabhar,” the Irish for ‘‘ a book,”
and hence writes: “Eum Vulgo Feichin Fabhair, ab habitationis loco quem latine
Favoriam, Hibernice Belle-Cathair, quasi Kiriath-Sepher in Josue xv., 15, aut
‘urbem librorum’ dixeris appellatum invenio.” Drs. Lanigan and Archdall

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-241.png ---
County of Galway. 215

Guaire, King of Connaught, presented to St. Fechin (who had
quitted the Monastery of Fore, in the County of Westmeath) ;
he founded an abbey thereon, which is now a parish church.
St. Fechin died A.D. 664, and is still venerated here as patron
of the church and island

dnisquin ;* an island in Lough Corrib, on the borders of

the barony of Clare.
» Act. SS. pp. 140 and 14t.

(Westmeath, Fore) have been betrayed by Usher into a like error. The following
account of the erection of the church and monastery here by St. Fechin, is given
in the life of the saint, published by Colgan :—“ On a certain night the holy man,
being in the monastery of Easdara, was by an angel admonished in his sleep, that
it was the divine will that he should go to a certain island of the ocean, which is
called Imaidh, in the western district of Connaught. St. Fechin obeyed the com-
mand of the angel, and hopin to gain many souls to Christ, accompanied by
some disciples, sought the is! just mentioned, where he proposed to dwell and
to build a church. But the inhabitants, at the suggestion of Satan, endeavoured
by all means to exclude him ; wherefore at night they several times cast into the
sea the spades, axes, iron tools, and other instruments which his religious used in
the work of building; but as often as they were thus cast, so often, being cast
back on shore, they were found by the monks in the morning. But when the
man of God and his brethren, notwithstanding this opposition, persisted in con-
tinual labours, watchings, and fasts, and the people, hardened in malice, denied
them all nourishment, at length two of the religious perished, being exhausted
through want. But St. Fechin having poured forth to the Lord a prayer for His
servants, for in complying with His will they had thus perished, merited that they
should be restored to life And when the rumours of the occurrence reached the
ears of King Guaire, the son of Colman, he took care that sufficient food in meat and
drink should be brought to St. Fechin. He added also his royal phial, which
even to this day is called Cruich Fechin. Afterwards, all the islanders, being con-
verted to Christ, were baptized by St. Fechin, and they consigned themselves and
their island to the use and service of the saint and his successors.” Colgan adds
that in his own time St. Fechin was still held in great veneration in the island,
and that an old Irish life of the saint was preserved there. The Four Aasters,
at A.D. 1017, record the death of Fergus, vicar of Iomaith.

18 Insequin, also called Inis-ui-Chuiun, is one of the most remarkable islands
in Lough Corrib, and has sometimes given its name to the whole lake.
O'Flaherty writes in West Connaught, page 22 :—‘‘ On that island of Insequin, St.
Brendan built a chapel and worked divers miracles. In the same island St.
Meldan, whose festival day is on the 7th of February, was abbot of a famous
abbey, about the year 580. He was spiritual Father to the great St. Furs6, of
Peronne, in France, who carried the relics of this saint along with him and en-
shrined them in France.” St. Meldan was descended from Con Cedchathach
Gz., of the hundred battles), whose descendants were called Hui-Cuinn, and from
the saint the island derived its original name, Inis-mac-Hua-Chuinn, i. the
island of the descendant of Con. St. Furs6, who died in 653, was the patron saint
of the O’Flaherties, On the margin of Lough Corrib is Killursa, properly “ Kill-
Fursa,” a parish which honours St. Fursé as its chief patron. It is recorded in the
life of the saint that Fintan, King of Munster, with his wife, Gelgis, daughter of
the King of Connaught, in consequence of troubles in his province, sought a refuge
in Lough Orbsen (now Lough Corrib), and was hospitably entertained by his
relative, St. Brendan, at Rathmath, in Inisuichuinn; and, while residing in the
cella hospitum, had a son who was christened Fursa. He is said to have been a
brother of St. Coona, who gives name to the adjoini parish of Kilcoona.

There is another island in this lake which Should not be passed by without
notice. It is called Inchaguile, and in early times was known by the name ‘‘Inis-
an-ghoil Chraibhthigh,” é.¢., ‘‘ the island of the devout foreigner.” There are two
chapels on this island—one dedicated to St. Patrick, and the other to “ the devout

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-242.png ---
216 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

St. Brendan erected an abbey on Inis-mac-hua-cuinn, or the
island of Hua-Cuinn, in Lough Corrib ; and made St. Meldan,
one of his disciples, abbot. St. Meldan died some time before
the year 626 ; his festival is held on the 7th of February.”

Kilbought ; four miles east of Loughrea, in the barony of
Athenry.

We are told that a monastery was founded here by the
family of Waley ;t and the Inquisition of the 6th of Queen
Elizabeth expressly mentions, that the friars of the third order
of St. Francis were possessed of this friary.*

1507. Mathew, Bishop of Clonfert, died here.»

Kilbrenan ; we have no account whatsoever of the founda-
tion, but we find in the records, that this monastery, and its
appurtenances, containing one acre, with six small cottages in
the town of Kilbrenan, thirty acres of arable land, and fifteen
of pasture in the said town, were granted, together with the
Abbey of Mayo, to the burgesses and commonalty of Athenry.
See Mayo. .

Y Act. SS, p.271. * War. Mon, * King, p.99.  » War. Bps. p. 641.

foreigner,” and now called Teampull-na-Naomh, i.c., ‘the church of the saint.”
The latter church lies a short distance to the south-east of the church of St.
Patrick, and an old winding path, which led from one to the other, may still be
traced. Of the ‘‘Templepatrick,” or St. Patrick’s Church, Dr. Petrie gives
various drawings, and adds :—" That this church is of the age of St. Patrick, as is
believed in the traditions of the country, and as its name would indicate, can, I
think, scarcely admit of doubt ; for, though there is another church on the island
of beautiful architecture, and of similar form and nearly equal dimensions, and
undoubtedly of an age considerably anterior to the arrival of the English, it
appears, nevertheless, a modern structure as compared with this.” It has a nave,
triumphal arch, and chancel, and is in its greatest external length 35 feet 6 inches.
The interior of the nave is 17 feet 8 inches in length, and 13 feet 6 inches in
breadth, and the chancel is a square of 9 feet. The island is also remarkable for
its famous monument of St. Lugaedh, which presents one of the most ancient
religious inscriptions preserved in Ireland. The monument consists of an
upright pillar of dark limestone, about 4 feet high, and stands at a little distance
in front of Templepatrick. Petrie, O’Donovan, and Todd, regarded the inscrip-
tion as commemorating St. Lugna, the son of Liemania, and nephew of our
Apostle St. Patrick. However, the later researches of Irish antiquaries, and the

hotographs and accurate drawings of our ancient monuments, published by Miss

tokes (Christian Inscriptions, vol ii., page 9), prove its true reading to be “Lie
Luguaedon Macci Menueh,” i.¢., “The Stone of Lughaedh, son of Menu, or
Moenain.” We may add the remark of Dr. Todd, that ‘‘the characters of this
inscription are such as may with almost certainty be regarded as not later than the
beginning of the sixth century.”—(S¢. Patrick,. page 365.) Dr. O'Conor, in
Rerum Hib. Scriptores, in note to the Four Masters, at A.D. 726, writes of this
island :—“ In qua sunt duae Capellae et multa sanctorum sepulchra.” The only
tomb, however, that can now be distinguished, besides that of St. Lugaedh,
is the monument of Muirgheas O’Nioc, Archbishop of Tuam, who died here in
the year 1128. It is a piece of square masonry, i long by 7 feet 8 inches
broad, and_about 4 feet high. The Annals of Ulster and the Four Masters
give at A.D, 1128, ‘‘Muirgheas O'Nioc, Comharb of Jarlath of Tuam-da-
ghualann for a time, died on Inisaughoill.” From this entry it would appear
latte that he resigned the see, and retired to lead an eremitical life on this
island.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-243.png ---
County of Galway. ; 217

Kilcorban ; a small village, consisting of a cabin or two,
with the ruins of a chapel, now under the invocation of the
Virgin Mary, but originally dedicated to St. Corban, who died
in the year 732.°

A.D. 1446. Thomas Burgh, Bishop of Clonfert, by and with
the consent of his chapter, granted this chapel, with some land
adjoining thereto, to the friars of the third order of St.
Dominick, at the earnest entreaty of John Fitz-Rery, Vicar-
General of that order, and his brethren. This donation was
confirmed by the Bull of Pope Eugene IV., dated March 15th,
1446, and directed to the abbot of Via Nova, or Abbey Gor-
mogan, in the diocese of Clonfert ; the bishop died that same
year.

The statue of the Virgin Mary, which was worshipped in
the chapel of Kilcorban, called the chapel of the Blessed
Virgin of the Rosary, is still preserved by the family of the
Burghs of Pallais; and Burke, in his history of the Domini-
cans, gives us the following citation from John Heyn respect-
ing this statue :—“ The frequent miracles,” says Heyn, “ which
God performs through that statue, daily confirm the Catholics
in the true faith, and in the worship of the Queen of Heaven.”*

Kilcolgan ; St. Colgan was abbot here about the year 580 ;
and is patron saint of the abbey.! Kilcolgan is now a parish
church, in the barony of Doonkillen, and diocese of Kill-
macduagh.

We find another monastery of the same name in the diocese
of Clonfert, which was founded by St. Columbkill, who ap-
pointed St. Colgan, one of his disciples, abbot of it.¢

Kilconnell ;© Gives name to a barony, and is seven miles
west of Ballinasloe.

* Act. SS. p. 449. * War. Mon. Burke, p. 342. ° As quoted by Burke,
P. 344 “id SS. p. 381. 8 Tr. Th. p. 495-

.® Father Mooney, the Franciscan chronicler, visited this convent in the begin-
ning of the 17th century, and has left the following account of it: “It was founded
for conventual Franciscans in 1353, by William O'Kelly, presumptive heir to the
lordship of Hy-Many. It was, indeed. an edifice second to none of its class in
Ireland, admirably constructed, spacious in all its departments, and most eligibly
situated on the great thoroughfare leading from Athlone to Galway. In 1460,
however, the original building was considerably modified and enlarged, when, at
the instance of Malachy O'Kelly, the convent was reformed, and its inmates
adopted the strict observance. Malachy O’Kelly died in 1464, and was buried in
the sumptuous sepulchre which was erected within the walls of the church by
William, the original founder, for himself and his posterity. Indeed, I have seen
in that church numerous monuments erected by the chief families of the bordering
districts, which, as regards the marble of which they were wrought, and the ex-
quisite Gnish of their elaborate sculpture, might challenge comparison with some
of the most artistic developments of the same character in the cathedral of St.
Gudule at Brussels, I found the church in good preservation, owing in great
measure to a singular circumstance, which I will mention by-and-by. It may not
be out of place, however, to premise that the church and monastery were built of

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-244.png ---
218 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

St. Conall was Abbot of Kilchonail, in the territory of
Mainech, or Hy-Maine,* in the time of St. Patrick. The
existence of this abbey was but short, which the vulgar impute
to a denunciation pronounced by that saint ;! it is now a vicar-
age, in the diocese of Clonfert. A monastery for Franciscan

» The north part of the County of Galway, and the fourth part of the County 9
Roscommon — The Siete were Kings of the tke i Meh SS: p. 632. mad

finely-cut stone, and that both were covered with a roof of wood made to resemble
tiles. Within the church are seven altars; and all the internal decorations,
whether in stone or wood, are admirably wrought. The sacred edifice is sur-
mounted by a lofty tower, and, strange to say, its sweet-toned bell is still there,
notwithstanding the rapacity of the lish Protestants, who seldom spare such
things. In a word, I Pond, the church in excellent condition ; the stained glass
of the windows unbroken, the pictures uhdefaced, and the sculptured work unmu-
tilated. With the six poor friars who still clung to the place, I sang the office in
choir—nay, and preached to vast crowds, so vast that the church could not contain
them all. It would seem that a special Providence watched over Kilconnell, to
save it from the destruction which had fallen on nearly all our other houses,
although it stood in a most Spee position, and was frequently head-quarters of
English regiments during the Elizabethan war. Indeed, from time to time it was
garrisoned by whole companies, who messed and lit fires within the very church ;
and yet, strange to say, it sustained little or no injury from such guests. Among
those who were quartered there was Sir Richard Bingham, the Governor of Con-
naught, whose inhuman treatment of the native Irish so shocked even Queen
Elizabeth herself, that she was obliged to dismiss him from that high office in
1595, and summon him to London to answer the charges of cold-blooded murders
which were preferred against him by the Burkes and others. That heartless
miscreant sailed round Tirconnell, and with his ship’s crew plundered the defence-
Neless nuns of the Carmelite Convent of Rathmullen, of vestments, chalices, and all
their other valuables. Another time he and his brother George, subsequently
slain by Ulick Burke, swept with fire and sword the island of Tory, demolishing
its crosses and oratories, which stood there since the days of Columb Kill. Never-
theless, incredible as it may seem, this very Bingham behaved kindly to the friars
of Kilconnell, where he used to keep his head-quarters. In fact, he gave strict
orders to his officers and men to see that the church and the monastery should
sustain no injury at their hands—nay, he summoned some of the friars to his
Presence, and exhorted them to do all in their power to keep the buildings in good
Te]

“In the year 1596, too, during the Presidency of Sir Conyers Clifford, Kil-
connell was once more turned into a barrack for English soldiers, after they had
been signally defeated by O’Donnell and O’Neill in various engagements. On
this latter occasion the English garrisoned the monastery with not less than fifteen
companies. Now, it so happened that one of the English officers then stationed
there had a horse of which fe was very fond, and he determined to stable it within
the very chancel, hard by the steps of St. Francis’s altar, where he caused hay and
straw to be laid for the brute. Heaven, however, it would seem, resented this
outrage; for on the next morning the valuable charger was found stark dead,
though sound and strong the night before. Even the very companions of this
Captain Rynck, for such was his name, admitted that this was a just judgment on
his impiety. Nevertheless, the English soldiers forced open the tombs of the
princes and ‘chieftains buried in the church, thinking that they would light on
concealed treasure ; nor did they desist from these outrages till one of them had
his legs fractured by the falling of a huge mass of stone.

‘‘Thave nothing more to add to this narrative, except that the monastery of
Kilconnell has been granted to one Callthorp and other English settlers, and that the
cruel ordinance of Queen Elizabeth, commanding ‘houses freight with friars’ to be
suppressed, and ‘made fit habitations for Englishmen,’ is now being carried out
to the letter.” See Father Mechan’s *‘ Franciscan Monasteries.”

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-245.png ---
County of Galway. 219

friars was afterwards founded here about the year 1400, by
William O'Kelly, whose death is thus mentioned in the obitu-
ary of this friary :—‘“ 1420, 3 cal. Nov. obitus Will. magni
O’Kelly omnium Hibern. suo tempore nominatissimi ac prin-
cipalis istius conventus fundatoris ; reformatum anno 1460,
per Malachiam filium Will. O’Kelly, qui obiit 13 cal. May,

1464."* :

At the dissolution it was granted to Charles Calthorpe!

The Roman Catholics repaired the friary in 1604."

Kilcoonagh ;® Situated in the barony of Clare, not far
from Enaghdune.

Tipraid, Prince of Hy-fiachria, granted the Abbey of Kill-
chuanna to St. Columb, who placed St. Cuannan over it; he
was maternal brother to St. Carthag, and was afterwards re-
moved to the Abbey of Lismore." This is now a parish church.®

There is another Killcoonagh in the territory of Tirbhriuin ;P4
and we are told that the abbey of Kilconan, founded by
Fergal Muiner Y Induibidan in 1339, was destroyed by fire
the following year, but was rebuilt in 1343.7

Kilcreunata ;* Called also the Nunnery of the Chastewood,

& War. Ms. vol. 34. 1 Harris's Tab. ™ Cox, vol. ii. p.10. ™ Tr. Th. . 494-
Act. SS. p. 252. ° Id. Lib. Visit. ? Act. SS. p. 340. % On the borders of the
Shannon, in the county of Roscommon. * Annals Loughkee.

20 St. Cuana, or Coona, the son of Midam, of the race of Niall of the Nine Hostages,
was born towards the close of the ninth century. His mother, whose name is
variously written Meda and Finneda, was daughter of Fringen, of Corca-duibhne.
St. Cuana was brother of St. Carthage, founder of the great monastery of Rahin,
and also founder of the Monastery and See of Lismore. St. Cuana was himself a
religious of the Monastery of Lismore, under the holy rule of his brother, and sub-
sequently ‘‘ became Abbot of the Monastery of Kilchuanna, in the western district
of Connaught.” He died about the year 650, and is supposed by Ware to be the
author of a chronicle, which is often cited in the Annals PP Ulster under the name
of the Book of Cuan, or Cuanach, but only down to the year 628. Colgan, at the
4th of Feb , has gathered together the fragments of St Cuana’s life, and in-
forms us that the saint assembled around him a number of holy and learned men,
and that Kileoonagh was famed for its schools when the whole of this region from
Clare-Galway to Cong was fertile with learning and piety. Local tradition says,
that St. Fursé was another brother of Cuana. A portion of the round tower
still stands almost in the centre of the enclosure of the little church and burial
ground of St. Cuana. His holy well called Dadbhach Cuana, formerly much fre-
quented by pilgrims, lies in the adjacent townland of Knockreen.

™ Known in the medizval records as the Monastery ‘‘de casta silva.” Patent
Roll of the 18th of Edward the Second, gives us the name of Mora, Abbess de
Casta Silva. By patent of 7th July, 34th year of Henry the Eighth, a Commission
of Inquiry was directed to Christopher, Archbishop of Tuam, Roland, Bishop of
Clonfert, and Patrick Felde, of Paynestown, gent., “to ascertain the possessions
of the late monastery or House of Nuns of Kylcrevet, with power to receive a sur-
render of, and to survey and value the same, and, if necessary, to suppress the
monastery.” By an Inquisition at Parsonstown, 25th March, 1534, Richard, Earl
of Clanrickard and St. Alban’s, was found seized of various lands in Magely,
Killinowen, Ballycore, Fierboy, Monyfadda, alias Tullaghanroe, and Clowne, in
the King’s County, part of the lands of the Rectory of Killcrivagh, in the County
of Galway.

\

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-246.png ---
220 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

which was founded for nuns of the order of St. Benedict
about the year 1200, by Cathald O’Conor Crovderg. The
cells of Inchmean and Ardcarn, in the County of Roscommon,
were afterwards annexed to this house."

The Lady Fynola, daughter of Felym O’Conor, was abbess
here, and died in 1301.'

At the suppression, this nunnery was granted to Richard,
Earl of Clanricarde.*| See Aghrim.

Killine Bonaina ; A friary for Franciscans of the third
order was built here in the year 1428, which afterwards be-
came one of the most considerable houses of that order.”

Killoebhain ; A parish church in the diocese of Clonfert ;
it seems, says Colgan, to be the same with that which was
called Domnach-loebhain. We are told that St. Maccectus
of Domnach-loebhain was smith to St. Patrick, and made the
famous relique called Finnfaidheach.*

Kilmacduach ;* In the barony of Kiltarton. St. Colman,
the son of Duach, founded an abbey here about the year 620 ;7
and Maurice, Bishop of this see, who died in 1283, erected, on
the ancient site, a monastery for regular canons of the order
of St. Augustine.

* War. Mon. + Ann. Loughkee, and M‘Geogh. ™* Auditor-General. “~ Wad~
ding in Allemande. * Tr. Th. p. 167 and 188. 7 Act. SS. p. 219 and 247.

*3 Kilmacduagh derives its name from its patron saint, who, to distinguish him
from the many other saints of the name of Colman, was commonly styled MacDuach.
The Martyrology of Donegal marks his festival on the 3rd February. “Colman,
Bishop, #.¢,, Mac Duach, of Cill-mic-Duach, in Connact. He was of the race of
Fiachra, son of Eochaidh Muidhmheadhoin. Great were his virtues and miracles.”
He was patron of the O’Shaughnessys, and for more than a thousand years the
girdle of the saint was handed down as a precious heirloom in the chief family of
that sept. They, however, were accustomed to celebrate his feast on the 27th of
October. St. Colman spent seven years in a wild forest in the district of Burren,
on the borders of Clare and Galway, practising all the austerities of the eremitical
life. The fame of his sanctity attracted the attention of Guaire, King of Connaught,
who offered him a tract of territory for a religious establishment. St. Colman
erected there the church which now bears his name, and which soon rivalled in
the extent of its attendant religious establishments the greatest foundation in
Ireland. The round tower and the seven churches still exist. A little more than
a hundred years ago, Bishop Pococke found a great part of the old cathedral in
good repair: ‘‘ On the south side,” he writes, ‘‘of the cathedral is an ancient altar
in good taste ; under a relief of a bishop is this inscription: ‘Sanctus Colman
patronus totius Dioecesis Duacencis.’ In the middle is a crucifix, and a person
on each side, with Ave Maria, and some devotions around it. To the west of
the cathedral, in the church-yard, is a small cell, where, they say, the patron saint
was buried, and that the body was aftzrwards carried to Aghrim. Between this
and the church is MacDuagh’s chapel, in which is standing a large tree, of which
they take pieces by way of relics; and to the south of this is a raised work of
stone, which they call the bishop's bed.”— Corton “ Fasti,” 199. In an adjoining
lake called Lough Deehan, the waters having sunk very low in 1785, a wooden house
was discovered in the mud at the bottom: it was formed of oak timber of great
thickness, the sides and roof of which were formed of wattlework of the same
materials, It was fully a thousand years old, and may have belonged to one of the
early religious establishments of St. Colman,

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-247.png ---
as es

County of Galway. 221

John was abbot in the year 1289, when he was sued by
William, son of John de Burgh, and Mora, his wife (daughter
and heir to Odo M‘Lyn), for the townlands of Killyn,
Shagnessy, and Faghmoyle, in right of his said wife.*

This abbey is situated to the north-west of the cathedral,
on a neck of land between two loughs, which, according to
some authors, evacute themselves in summer into whirlpools ;
however, this rarely happens, as the water never goes off but
in a very dry season. .

The church, though small, is a very neat building; the
pillars and arches, from the entrance to the altar part, and
those of the east window, are finished in an elegant style, and
the angles at the east end are worked in pillars. To the
south of the Church is a sacristy, and adjoining to that a
room, where was probably deposited the valuable effects
belonging to the church, and which, being arched, they call
the jail; on the south of these is a chapel and the refectory ;
from the whole of this we may infer, that the canons of the
monastery dwelt in separate houses. To the north, about
two feet from the church, is an old wall; an ancient tradition
still exists at Kilmacduach, of its being once a place of
penance. There is also a holy well here with a circular
inclosure.* .

Here is an ancient round tower, which leans 17} feet
from its perpendicular. It may not be improper to remark,
that the tower at Pisa, so universally celebrated, leans but
13 feet.

At the general suppression, this monastery was granted to
Richard, Earl of Clanricarde.”

Kilrickill ; In the barony of Leitrim, near Loughteagh.

St. Patrick built Kilrichelle for his sister, St. Richellec

We know no more of it as a monastery; but Kilrickill is
now a parish church in the diocese of Clonfert.¢

Kiltullagh ; A cell of the third order of St. Francis was
built here some time before the year 1441.°

Kinalekin ; Commandery ; A commandery for Knights
Hospitallers was founded here in the 13th century, under the
invocation of St. John the Baptist,‘ by O'Flaherty ;§ Kina-
lekin is probably in Iar-Connaught, of which O'Flaherty was
dynast.

We find that John was prior in the year 1310; when Joan,
the widow of John de Burgh, sued him, as custos of his lands,
&c., for her dower thereout.®

John de Blohely was prior; he was succeeded by a third

* King, p.199. * Bp. Pococke, Harris's Tab. © Tr. Th. p.229. 4 Harris's
Tab. * War. Mon. * War. Mon. © Allemande. ” King, p. 66.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-248.png ---
222 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

John, who sued John de Burgh for a townland in Tullagh
M‘Ruskyn, of which John O'Lean, who was consecrated
Bishop of Clonfert in the year 1322, and died A.D. 1336, had
unlawfully disseized John de Blohely, predecessor of John, the
present prior.

Franciscan Friary ; A Franciscan friary was founded here
before the year 1325.*

A.D. 1359. Hugh Bernard was provincial of the Fran-
ciscans in Ireland.

1438. John Heyn, the provincial, was made Bishop of Clon-
fert.

1447. John With, formerly minister of this order in Ireland,
was elected bishop of Clonfert, but was not consecrated.

Loughbreagh ;=* A market-town inthe barony of Doonkillen.

Carmelite Friary; Richard de Burgh, Earl of Ulster,
founded a monastery here about the year 1300 for Carmelites,
or White friars, under the invocation of the Virgin Mary."
This was granted to Richard, Earl of Clanricarde. See
Aghrim.

Leper-house ; There was also a chapel, or house of Lepers,
at Lough Reagh.®

Maghce ; Also called Maghele, or Maghelle; St. Alban,
after having built three monasteries on this plain, died in the
year 650?

Milick A“ On the river Shannon, about four miles south-
east of Clonfert, in the barony of Longford.

O’Madden, dynast of Silamchia,' founded a monastery here
for conventual Franciscan friars." The situation was delight-
ful, and the building itself spacious and beautiful. During

1 King, p. 66. * War. Ms. vol. 34,and War. Mon. ‘ King, p. 323. ™ Called
also Ballelougheragh. ™ War. Mon. © Harris's Collect. vol. iii., p. 202. © Act.

SS. p. 622. % Wadding calls the place Mulescin. * The barony of Longford.
* War. Mon. ‘* King, p. 323.

% By an Inquisition, held in Dublin, the 43rd of Edward the III., it was
found that Lionel, Duke of Clarence, at the time of his death, was, by right of his
wife, Elizabeth, daughter of the Earl of Ulster, possessed of “‘ manneria de Logh-
reagh, Tobarbride, Toyloghoban (now Tuluban), Loghmesc, Sligo, Galway, et
Portdempore (Portumna), quae valuerunt ei £200 per annum.” Some ruins of the
Old Carmelite Monastery still remain; they are far eclipsed, however, by the
more modern conventual buildings erected by the religious of that order in 1829.
A convent for Carmelite Nuns was established here in 1680, and is stilla flourishing
community: the present beautiful convent was completed in 1829.

™ The Franciscan Monastery of Meelick, sometimes written Milick, was
founded by O’Madden, one of the dynasts of Silanchia, in 1474. It was suppressed
and almost entirely destroyed in Elizabeth’s reign. On the 4th of June, 1643, the
feast of Corpus Christi, Father John O'Madden, O.S.F., once more entered into
possession of the old convent, and the religious of the order have, with varying
fortunes, clung to it ever since. There is a hexagonal stone still preserved there,
evidently the pedestal of a large cross, with the inscription ‘‘ A.D. 1645, orate pro
anima preclari Domini Malachi O’Madden et Margaritae Crompton, conjugis ejus,
qui me erexerunt.”

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-249.png ---
County of Galway. 223

the winter months the friary was surrounded by the inun-
dations of the river."

In the year 1203, we are told that William de Burgh
marched at the head of a great army into Connaught, and so
to Milick, and there profanely converted the church into a
stable, round which he erected a castle of a circular form,
wherein he was seen to eat flesh meat during the whole time
of Lent.”

The monastery of Milick was afterwards granted to Sir
John King, who assigned it to the Earl of Clanricarde.*

Mucinis >> Regulus, who was living in the time of the
great St. Columb, was abbot of Mucinis, in Lough-Derg,
bordering the County of Galway ; his festival is held here on
16th of October.”

Oran ; See County of Roscommon.

Pallice ; Situated about eleven miles north-west of Por-
tumny.

At Kaltragh-ne-Pallice was a friary dedicated to the Virgin
Mary, for friars of the Order of Mount Carmel, or White
Friars.* It was founded by Birmingham, Baron of Athenry,
in the 14th century.*

August 27th, 31st Queen Elizabeth, a grant was made to
John Rawson of this priory, with a church and a ruinous
chapel, called Graige-I-Corrie ; a quarter of land, and sixty
acres of arable, together with sundry other lands in this
county, to hold the same for ever, in free soccage, at the
annual rent of £81 12s. 7d. Irish money.”

Portumna ; a town on the river Shannon, where it falls into
Loughderg, in the barony of Longford.

The monks of the Cistercian Abbey of Donbrody, in the
county of Wexford, had for a long time a chapel here, which
was dedicated to St. Peter and St. Paul; but being at length
forsaken by them, O’Madden, dynast of the country, gave it
to the Dominican Friars, who, with the approbation of the
monks of Donbrody, erected a friary here and also a church,
which they dedicated to the Blessed Virgin and the original
patron saints; at the same time they built a steeple, cemetery,
and all other necessary offices. Pope Martin V. granted a
Bull to confirm their possessions, dated 8th October, 1426;

° War. Mon, ~ Ann. Munst. Contr. * Harris's Tab. 7 Act. SS. p. 339-
Tr. Th. Index, * War. Mon. * Allemande. » Aud. General.

% The name of St. Regulus, in Irish Riaghail, is entered in the Martyrology or
Donegal, on the 16th of October :—‘‘ Riaghail, Abbot of Muicinis, in Loch
Deirgdheire.” He isalso commemorated in the Feliré of dingus with the strophe -—
“Riaghail, gifted was his career.” His Acts are inserted in the Breviary 9
Aberdeen, and he is especially honoured in St. Andrew’s, in Scotland, on M
30th and October the 17th.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-250.png ---
224 Anctent Monasteries of Ireland.

and on the 23rd of November following, he granted indulgen-
ces to all who had contributed to the building. The walls
are still nearly entire, and plainly show that the monastery of
Portumna was by no means an ignoble structure ; the ancient
choir is now the parish church.°

Rathmhath ;*® An island in Lough-Corrib,! where, it is said,
St. Fursey, the son of Fintan, of the blood royal of South
Munster, built an abbey ; he died about the year 653, and his
festival is celebrated in France on the 16th of February.®

There are no traces of this house, but Colgan supposes it
to be a parish church near Lough Corrib, which is now called
Kilfursa! ;

Ross; A monastery for conventual Franciscans was founded
at Rosstraily, in the diocese of Tuam, A.D. 1431, which was
reformed by the Observantines, in the year 1470. It is avery
solitary place, being on all sides surrounded by water.

Rosstraily must either be the present town of Ross, which
gives name to the half-barony, or another town of the same
name, situated between Lough Corrib and a lesser lough in
the barony of Moycullen.¢

Rosserelly ;*" Situated on the river of Ross, near Lough
Corrib, in the barony of Clare.

The Lord Granard founded a monastery here for Francis-
cans of the strict observance, in the year 1498.5

A chapter of the Franciscan Order was held here in 1509.!

At the suppression of religious houses, this friary was
granted to the Earl of Clanricarde.—See Aghrim.

The Roman Catholics repaired the Monastery of Rosser-
elly in the year 1604." And the ruins, which yet remain, show
it to have been a very extensive building!

Sleushancogh ; there was a friary of conventual Franciscans

© Burke, pp. 303 and 307. * Called anciently Lough-Orbsen. ° Act. SS. fp. 89
and 90. War. Writers, pp. 34 and 304. * Act. SS. p. 89 and go. * Wadding in
Allemande. ™ War. Ms. vol. 34 and War. Mon. ' King, p. 319.  * Coa,
vol. ii, p. 10. } Pococke’s Fournal.

3% See above note 1 at Inisquin.

% Rosserilly, in Irish Ros-na-Threallagh, situate about eight miles from Tuam, is
stated, by the Franciscan chronicler, to have been founded for their order in 1351.
It is surrounded by marshes and bogs, and can be approached only by a causeway
paved with large stones, which is fully two hundred paces in length. In the 26th
year of Elizabeth the religious were expelled, and the vestments, altar-plate,
books, and records, were all destroyed: nothing remained but the bare walls
and the rifled tombs. It subsequently, by grant of the Queen, passed into the
hands of the Earl of Clanrickard, who permitted the Franciscans to repair the
church and monastery, and they continued to reside there till Daniel, Protestant
Archbishop of Tuam, at the instance of Sir Arthur Chichester, then Lord- Deputy,
drove them out once more, and caused the altars to be demolished. See a paper
on “ oe Abbey of Ross-Errily,” in Jrish Ecclesiastical Record, vol. Sth,
page 39.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-251.png ---
County of Galway. 225

here,™ which, on the suppression of monasteries, was granted
to Sir Francis Sammes."

Templegaile, or Teach Saxon ; Situated two miles west of
Athenry.

We are told that the ancient church of Tigh Sasson was
burned by lightning in the year 1177.°

A friary of small extent was founded here in the reign of
King Henry VII. by one of the family of Burgh,? for Fran-
ciscans of the third order ; which friary and its appurtenances,
together with the Abbey of Mayo, was afterwards granted to
the burgesses and commonalty of Athenry.4

Temple Moyle; Another friary was erected here sometime
after the year 1441, for friars of the third Order of St. Francis,"
which was granted to Edmund Barret.*

Tombeola ; Situated at the head of Roundstowne Bay, in
the barony of Ballynahinch.

A monastery for Dominican Friars was founded here about
the year 1427, by the O’Flahertys, dynasts of Eir Connaught,
in which elevated station they continued till the arrival of
Oliver Cromwell.

In the beginning of Queen Elizabeth’s reign this building
was wholly demolished, and even the stones, those of the
church walls not excepted, were made use of to build a castle
in the neighbourhood. The few ruinous remains are scarcely
visible, and very imperfectly mark the traces of this ancient
village.t

Tuam ;%* In the barony of Dunmore, is the seat of an arch-

™ War. Mon. » Harris's Tab. ° Annal. Lagenia. ® War. Mon. and Harris’s
Tab. % Aud. General. * War. Mon. * Harris's Tab. * Burke, p.308. ° Called
anciently Tuaim da Valain,

%8 The festival of St. Jarlathe, now kept on the 6th of June, is marked in our
calendars on the 26th of December, on which day he is commemorated in the
Martyrology of Donegal. He was born in the $th century, and is said to have
received in his childhood the blessing of St. Benignus, of Armagh. He established
a religious house at Cluainfos, #.¢., ‘‘the valley of retreat,” about a mile from the

resent town of Tuam, and subsequently erected the church and monastery of

‘uam. St. Jarlathe was remarkable for his austerities, and in the poem of St.
Cuimin of Connor, on the characteristic virtues of the Irish saints, he is styled
“one who practised not penury,” and who made three hundred genuflections each
day, and the same each night. He died about the year 540. His relics were
preserved in a rich shrine in a separate church, thence called Skreen, in the town
of Tuam. Dr. John Lynch, writing in 1672, describes a portion of the old walls of
this Skreen as still standing, though the place was then used as a barn. He adds
that in the beginning of the century, while some men were engaged in threshing
corn, they remarked something shining in the floor ; removing the clay, they found.
a rich ornamental case enclosing the relics of St. Jarlathe—“ Cupream thecam
quinquangularem S. Hierathii Reliquias includentem :” this was brought to Dr.
Daniel, the Protestant Archbishop, who privately handed it over to the Roman
Catholic Vicar-General, Francis Kerevan, hy whom it was consigned to a good
Catholic family for safe keeping. Colgan speaks of these relics as still preserved

VOL. Il. Q

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-252.png ---
226 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

bishop, and a market and borough town, sending burgesses to
Parliament.

We are told that an abbey was founded here so
early as the year 487,” under the invocation of the Virgin
Mary.

St. Jarlath is said to have made it a cathedral in the begin-
ning of the sixth century ;* and it is also said that a city was
built here in honour of this exemplary bishop’ His remains
were preserved at Tuam, in a chapel called Temple-na-scrin,
t.e., the church of the shrine. After the death of this saint,
we meet with three persons who are expressly said to have
been abbots of Tuam, viz.: Cellach, son of Eochad, who died
in the year 808 ;* Nuadat Hua Bolchain, abbot and aachorite,
who died 3rd October, 877 ;* and Cornac, son of Kieran, abbot
of Tuam and prior of Clonfert, who died in 879.”

Priory of St. Fohn the Baptist; Was founded about the
year 1140, by Tirdelvac O'Connor, King of Ireland. We
cannot say to what order this house did belong,* but find
that it was granted to Richard, Earl of Clanrickard.—See
Aghrim.

Abbey of the Holy Trinity; Was founded by one of
the family of Burgh, either in the reign of King John
or in the beginning of King Henry IIL, for Premonstre
Canons.4

Tuam and all its churches were destroyed by fire A.D.
1244°

 Conry. * Calendar. Y Usher, p. * Act. SS. p. Id.
P- 373. a dd. yon 0 War. Mon a &% ° Annal. ‘hunse®

in his time. During the episcopate of Aed O’Hoisin, the cathedral was built
through the munificence of Turlogh O'Connor, Monarch of Ireland. “ Of the
ancient church of Tuam the chancel only remains; but, fortunately, this is
sufficient to make us acquainted with its general style of architecture, and to show
that it was not only a larger, but a more splendid structure than Cormac’s church
at Cashel, and not unworthy of the powerful monarch to whom it chiefly owed
its erection. The chancel is a square of 26 feet in external measurement,
and the walls are 4 feet in thickness. Its east end is pene by three cir-
cular-headed windows, each 5 feet in height and 18 inches in width externally,
but splaying on the inside to the width of 5 feet. . . . . But the great
feature of this chancel is its triumphal arch, now erroneously supposed to have
been a doorway, which is, perhaps, the most magnificent specimen of its kind
remaining in Ireland.”—Zhe Round Towers, page 217. The famous cross of
Tuam dates from tbe same period, and, as its inscriptions prove, was intended as
a memorial of Archbishop O’Hoisin and the Monarch Turlogh O'Connor.
Petrie says of it that “it may justly rank as the finest monument of its class and
age remaining in Ireland.”—J/éid. See also Christian Inscriptions in the Irish
Stokes, by Miss Stokes, vol. ii., page 75. As regards the priory of St. John the
Baptist, we learn from Lynch that it was held till the Reformation by the Canons
Regular of St. Augustine. The Abbey of the Holy Trinity is said by Le Page
to have been a foundation from Premonstre, in France. Miraeus, however, -
affirms that it was a branch from the Abbey of Steinfield, in Podolia, in the
Kingdom of Poland. 3

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-255.png ---
County of Kerry. 227

Gillechrist O’Laghtnan, abbot of this house, was drowned
in the Irish Sea about the year 1251.

August 2oth, and 2oth of Queen Elizabeth, this monastery
and its possessions, containing half an acre of land, and two
quarters, containing eighty acres of arable and twenty of
pasture, with the tithes of corn, were granted, together with
the Abbey of Mayo, &c., to the burgesses and commonalty of
the town of Athenry.— See Mayo!

 Annal. Loughkee, ® Aud. General.

COUNTY OF KERRY.

Aghadoe ;4€ Aodh, son of Conor, son of Auliff Mor
O'Donoghue, King of Eoganacht Lochalein, died in the year
1231, and was buried in his old abbey at Aghadoe,® of which
we can learn no other particulars.

© Called anciently Aithedea. » Annal Munst.

1 Aghadoe, é.¢., ‘‘ the field of the two yew trees,” still gives name to a parish
tly situate in the barony of Magonihy, and partly in the barony of Dun-
erron, and comprises within its limits the famous Island of Inisfallen and part of
the Lakes of Killarney. In the early Irish Church it gave name to an Episcopal
See. The mins of the old cathedral still remain situated on the summit of
range of low hills, which gradually slope towards the northern shore of the great
Lower Lake. Fifty years ago the following account of these ruins was given in
Wrights Guide to Killarney :—“ The Church of Aghadoe is a vaulted, ancient
building, originally of but rude workmanship, measuring, probably, between
80 and go feet in length, and about 30 in breadth. The whole length is
separated by a thick wall, in which traces of a doorway are discoverable. The
chancel was lighted from the east by two long lancet loopholes. The doorway is
a very masterly specimen of the excellence of the art of sculpture in those days:
six successive mouldings of different patterns ornament its architrave, and,
though carved in an exceedingly soft species of stone, are all perfect and beauti-
ful specimens of a master hand.” 60 feet from the north-west angle of the
church stood the round tower, of which only the stump now remains. On the
hill-side are the ruins of an old castle, which was defended by a fosse and earthen
ramparts.

In the Annals of Jnisfallen, at the year 1158 is recorded, that ‘‘the great
Church of Aghadoe was finished by Auliff-mor-na-Cuimmsionach, son of Aongus
O'Donoghue, having obtained the supreme government of Eoganacht Loca Lein
for his posterity.” This Auliff was killed in 1166, and, as appears by another
entry, fs body was solemnly interred “in the church which he himself had
built in honor of the Holy Trinity, with masses and hymns.”

A Trinity College MS. (f. i., 18) gives us, in the year 1266, the appointment
of Dionysius as Bishop of Aghadoe. Walcott’s List of Suffragan Bishops gives
us at least two other names, viz.:—Gilbert, Bishop of Aghadoe, who, in A.D.
1306, was suffragan of the Bishop of Worcester, and John Camere, Bishop of
A hadoe, suffragan also of the Bishop of Worcester, in the year 1422.

Diocesan returns for 1622, preserved in Marsh’s Library, give us the

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-256.png ---
228 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Aghamore ;* Situated in a small island called Abbey Isle,
near the mouth of the river Kenmare, and adjoining the ex-
treme end of the parish of Kilcroghan.

This small abbey was founded in the 7th century by the
monks of the Abbey of St. Finbar, near Cork, for canons
regular following the rule of St. Augustine. The walls, which
yet remain, of this ancient abbey are so beaten by the sea, that
in a very short time they will probably be demolished.

At low water the Isle of Abbey joins the mainland‘

Ardfert ;*** Is a small decayed village in the barony of
Clanmaurice, yet is the see of a bishop, and a borough, sending
burgesses to Parliament.

! War. Mon. and Smith's History, p.94. * Crlled anciently Ardart, Ardfeart-
ys
brenn, or Ardbreinn,

following note :—'‘ There is one prebend left of the ruined Church of Aghadoe,
called Inishouell, value per annum twenty shillings, being the tithes of two
plowlands in the parish of Templedrum.”

In the townland of Knockreer, in the parish of Aghadoe, there is a curious stone
called Cloghmacuda, which 1s traditionally believed to have been sanctified by the
penitential exercises of St. Muchuda, and to retain the impression of the saint’s
knees.

Smith, in History of Kerry (page 147) asserts that the Cathedral of Aghadoe
was dedicated to St. Finnian The o.d Abbey at Inisfallen was certainly dedi-
cated to this saint ; but from the words of the Asmu/s of /nisfallen given above,
it seems manifest that the cathedral itself was dedicated to the Most Holy
Trinity, In the Catholic Church the Sees of Aghadoe and Ardfert were con-
sidered to be distinct, and as late as the beginning of the last century. we find
Aeneas O’Leyne Vicar Apostolic of Aghadove, whilst, at the same time, Donagh
Moriarty held the office of Vicar Apostolic of Ardfert.

3 In the Martyroloyies of Tallaght and Donegal, ‘* St. Loarn, Priest of Achadh-
more,” is honored on the 30th of August. The Augustinian convent erected
there in later times was said to be a branch-house of the Abbey of Molanna, in
the County Waterford.

3 Ardfert is interpreted in the old Latin Life of St. Brendan to mean “the hill of
miracles,” and it probably derived its name from the wonderful gift of miracles
bestowed by God on St. Brendan and his disciples. In the 4nza/s of Inisfallen,
and other early records, the see is sometimes called Ayferte or Iferte, i.¢.,
“*the land of miracles.”

St. Brendan was one of the most illustrious saints that adorned the Church in
this island, and he is deservedly ranked by our ancient chroniclers among *‘the
twelve Apostles of Erin.” The following particulars of his life are taken from the
preface of the Acta Sancti Brendani, edited by Right Rev. Dr. Moran, in 1872 :—

The Latin Life of St. Brendan, preserved in the famous Codex Kilkenniensis of
Marsh’s Library, when treating of the birth of our saint, merely states in general
terms that he was born “ in that western district of Munster which is called Kerry ;”
and from the narrative which is added, it is manifest that the place of his baptism
was not far distant from his home. Zhe /rish Life identifies the spot where St.
Brendan was baptized as Tubber-na-Afolt, or ‘* The Wedders’ Well,”” which is
situated in the townland of Tubrid, not far from Ardfert : and it adds, that ‘‘ the
precise place of his birth was Ad/traighe Caille, situated in Ciarraighe Luachra.” —
(Book of Lismore. fol. 72). That portion of Kerry which extends from the slopes
of Sliebh-Lougher to the sea was anciently known as Ciarraighe Luachra ; and
Alltraighe Caille seems to have designated the lesser district almost wholly com-
prised between Ardfert, Fenit, and Tralee. However, the Tract entitled Navi-
GATIO SANCTI BReNDANI has one phrase which may, perhaps. serve to define still
more closely the birthplace of our saint. It says: “e¢ Staynili regione Momonien-~

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-257.png ---
County of Kerry. 229

St. Brendan erected a sumptuous monastery here in the 6th
century.!

A.D. 1089. The abbey and town were destroyed by fire.™

1151. It was again reduced to ashes by the hands of Cormac
O’Culen ®

1179. The abbey and town suffered the same fate, when,
as is supposed, St. Brendan’s abbey was wholly demolished.

In the year 1253, Thomas, Lord of Kerry, founded a

1 Act. SS. p. 89. © Tr. Th. p. 633. 2 Annal. Annon. ° Annal. Munst.
Contin.
sium ortus fuit." We may translate this sentence :—‘‘ He was born in a district
of Munster called Annagh,” for this old Irish name, which means a marsh, pre-
cisely corresponds with the Latin Stagui/e. Close to Tralee there is still a parish
which bears the name of Annagh.

The name of St. Brendan occurs in all our ancient Martyrologies, and his feast
is invariably marked on the 16th of May. Thus, St. AEngus in the Fe/éré on that
day :—

«¢The summons of Brendan of Cluain
Into the victorious eternal Kingdom,”

and the gloss adds :—‘‘ #e., the calling of Brendan of Clonfert to the Kingdom of
God.” The Martyrology of Tullaght has, on the same day :—" Brendini Cluana
Ferta.” Marianus O'Gorman devotes one line to his memory :—* Brendan, with-
out a particle of pride.” The AMartyrology of Donezal has a long notice of our
saint on the r6th of May, and styles him ‘‘ Abbot of Cluainferta-Brenainn.”
The Martyrology of Christ Church. published by Dr. Todd, has also, * Sanctus
Brendanus, Abbas et Confessor.” Selbhach. in his ‘‘ Metrical List of the Saints
of Inisfail,” thus commemorates SS. Brendan and Mochuda :—

« Brendan, son of fair Findlug,
And Mochuda. son of Findall,
A holy pair, with penitential countenances,
Of the race of Ciar son of Fergus.”

The very ancient Catalogue of Saints ‘who were similar in their manner of
life.” preserved in the cok of Leinster, unites together ‘* St. Thomas the Apostle
and St. Brendan of Clonfert.” St. Cuimin of Connor also, in his poem on the
characteristic virtues of the Saints of Lreland, devotes a strophe to our saint :—

‘* Brendan loved perretual mortification,
According to his syno:l and his flock ;
Seven years he spent on the great whale’s back ;
It was a distressing m de of mortification.”

Some writers have supposed that St. Brendan was Bishop as we!l as Abbot ;
and indeed the silence of the ancient Martyrologies would not of itself be sufficient
to refute that opinion. For instsnce. O'Clery, in the Afartrrology of Donegal,
merely styles our saint an Abbot; yet, in the Sook of Genealogies (St. /sidore's
AI.SS.) expressly calls him “ Brenoin Eashace,” that is, “ Bishop Brendan.” The
fragment, however, of the Book of Leinster. preserved among the St Isidore’s
M.SS., sets this question for ever at rest. It gives us a short but invaluable Tract,
ascribed to St. Aingus, which divides the saints of Ireland. according to their re-
spective orders, as Bishops Priests, and Deacons. Now, it is among the Priests
that it marks both St. Brendan of Birr and St. Brendan mac hu Alta, that is, the
great patron of Kerry and Clonfert, of whom we treat.

The Sees of Ardfert and Clonfert honour St. Brendan as their patron. Innu-
merable places in various parts of Ireland bear his name, and several churches are


--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-258.png ---
230 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland,

monastery here for conventual Franciscans, and, probably, on
the site of the ancient abbey. The date of the foundation is
inscribed over the great gate; and the founder was interred
here in 1280,? where we find his anniversary so long solem-
nized on the last day of March.4

1303. Maurice, theson of the founder, was this year interred

here.
1309. William de Bristol was prior, when he brought before

? War. Mon. Lodge, vol, 2,p.102.  % King, ~.354. * Lodge supra.

dedicated to God under his invocation. In Scotland, as we learn from the Mar-
tyrology of Aberdeen (see Kalendars of Scottish Saints, by Dr. Forbes, 1872, page
3286), t. Brendan ruled as patron “the royal Island of Bute” (regalem insulam
de Buta): indeed, as Fordun informs us, it was from a cell erected by St. Brendan,
which, in the old Gaelic, was called Bothe, that the whole island of Bute derived
its name (nostro indiomate BoTHE.—Fordun, lib. i., cap. 29). _Eassie, in Forfar-
shire, is also dedicated to St. Brendan, and many churches in Mull, St. Kilda, and
other parts of Scotland, still preserve his name.

For the details of the life of this great saint, we must refer the reader to the
original documents published by Dr. Moran in the Acta Sancti Brendani, already
referred to, and to a series of articles, which, in 1871 and 1872, appeared in the
Irish Ecclesiastical Record, under the heading of “ Notes on the Life of St.
Brendan.”

The cathedral, which was dedicated to St. Brendan, occupied an eminence on
the north side of the modern town. The following description of the ruins of this
cathedral and of some other monuments which once adorned this neighbourhood,
was written by Samuel Lewis, in 1837: —“‘ The remains (of the cathedral) consist
of the walls of the nave and choir, which are perfect : the east-window has three
lofty lancet-shaped compartments, ornamented internally with light and elegant
clustered pilaster columns ; on each side is a niche, in one of which stands the
figure of a bishop, rudely sculptured, but in excellent preservation, lately found in
sinking a vault, and called and venerated as the effigy of St. Brendan ; near it in
the choir is another of much superior workmanship. On the south side, near the
altar, are nine windows ornamented with pilaster columns, terminating in a trefoil
arch ; at the west end, on the north side, are two square windows, opposite which
are three bold arches resting on square pillars, which led from the cathedral pro-
bably into a chapel, and there were also two other entrances into this part of the
building, the principal at the north-west comer. Four rude Norman arches still
remain, of which the centre is the largest, and was the doorway. A doorway at
the north-west led into a later addition, part of which only remains, and in 1668
was purchased for her tomb by the Dowager Countess of Kerry, and has since been
the family vault of the Crosbies. To the west of the cathedral are two detached
buildings, one having the Norman and the other the pointed arch. An ancient
round tower, which formerly stood near the cathedral, fell about sixty years since.
Within half-a-mile to the east, are the cruciform ruins of the Franciscan Abbey,
consisting ofthe nave and choir, with a lofty tower on the west, a chapel on the
south, and the refectory on the north, adjoining which are two sides of the clois-
ters, the whole principally in the pointed style. The great east window has five
divisions, and is of bold design. on the south side the choir was lighted by nine
windows, under which are five arches in the wall, differing in style and elevation,
and probably intended as monumental recesses for abbots: in the second is an
altar-tomb of the last Earl and Countess of Glandore. The south chapel, of which
the great window is perfect and its details handsome, was connected with the
nave by three noble pointed arches resting on massive, but peculiarly elegant,
Circular columns. A stone in the buttress of the arch nearest the tower, bears a
rude inscription, which, from the difficulty of deciphering it, has given rise to
various opinions, but on lately removing the moss and dirt, proves to be in Latin,
and purports that Donald Fitz Bohen, who sleeps here, caused this work (probably

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-259.png ---
County of Kerry. 231

Sir John Wogan, Justice of Ireland, at Tristledermot, an action
against Nicholas, Bishop of Ardfert, and Odo O’Hayn, George
de Canhan, —— Bensquier, and John O’Dyny, chaplains of
the church of Ardfert, for forcibly taking from the friars of
this convent the corpse of John de Cantelupe, and burying it
elsewhere ; and also for beating and otherwise ill-using sundry
friars of this house ; the bishop at the same time prohibiting
all persons, under pain of excommunication, from furnishing

the chapel) to be done in 1453. In the choir are several very ancient tombstones,
one bearing the effigy of an abbot. Near these ruins stands Ardfert Abbey, the
mansion of the Crosbie family, who have resided here since the reign of Elizabeth.”

AMS. account of Kerry, preserved in Trinity College, Dublin (I. I. 3.) and
transcribed by O’Curry for the Ordnance Survey, gives the following short notice
of Ardfert :—‘* The barony of Clonmorris is called from the Fitzmorrises, Lords
Barons of Kerry and Lisnaw. The chief town of this barony is Ardfert, called in
Latin, Altitudo miraculorum, the name thereof in Irish so signifying. In the town
stands the ruins of a cathedral of St. Brendan, demolished in the last rebellion :
there are also the walls of four other churches, an anchorite’s cell, &c. The friary,
of which there are now remaining only ruins, was a Convent of Friars Minors,
built about the year 1359, by the Lord Patrick Fitzmorris, called on an inscription
which is there found, Dominus Kierrigiae.

In Gough's Camden, vol. iii., Ardfert is styled ‘the ancient capital of the
county, and the seat of a university, which was held in high repute.” The round
tower is described as having been 120 feet high, and built for the most part of a
dark marble. Its entrance faced the west door of the church. The Ordnance
Survey Papers further inform us, that in the present ruins “ some portions of the
primitive Cathedral of St. Brendan may still be seen. Thus, the doorway of the
original cathedral still remains in good preservation : it is placed in the west
gable. It is semi-circular, and formed of red-grit, chiselled and omamented in the
Primitive Irish style. A short distance to the north-west of the cathedral is 7eam-

U-na-hoighe, s.¢., the Church of the Blessed Virgin. It is all in the primitive

rish style, and was, when perfect, a very beautiful church. There is a rectangular
little window in the west gable towards the top. The gables are remarkably high
and sharp, and the corners are ornamented with small pillars, and the top of the
south wall has a row of projecting stones, which were ornamented with heads, now
nearly effaced.”

The Annals of Inisfalien have a few entries regarding Ardfert not noticed in
Archdall’s text :-—

A.D. 1031. O’Ruairc, commonly called an Caileach (i.¢., the cock), plundered
Ardfearta-Brenain.

A.D. 1099. Mac Craith O’Hearodain, successor of Brenan in Ardfeart, died.

A.D. 1151. Cormac O’Cuilean, burned Ardfearta-Breanain, in which were the
favorites or secretaries of Diarmod Sugach O’Conor.

A.D. 1161. Maolbreanain O’Ronain, Bishop of Anlfeart-Breanain, died.

A.D. 1166. Giolla Mac Aibhlin O’Hanamchadha, successor of St. Brendan of
Ardfert died.

A.D. 1180, Ardferta-Brenain, was ravaged and plundered by the Mac Carthys,
who also took away all the wealth and riches of the country, and slew many people
within the walls of the churchyard.

A.D. 1193. Donal O’Conairce, Bishop of Ardfert, died, and David O’Duibhti-
tibh, succeeded him in that see.

A.D. 1283. John, successor of Brendan of Ardfert, died.

In the parish of Ardfert, in the townland of Tuéridmore, there is a famous holy
well called Zudernamult, at which pilgrims still perform their ¢urrasses or peni-
tential rounds. St. Brendan is supposed to have received at this well the waters
of Baptism.

The O'Gorman MS., written about the year 1750, gives a few interesting
particulars regarding the traditional fame for learning enjoyed by the County

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-260.png ---
232 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

the friars with any necessaries, either through charity or other-
wise. The bishop and his ‘chapter were hereupon arrested,
their goods and chattels distrained, and the money arising
from the same was ordered to be paid into the hands of the
Lord Justice on the next succeeding day after the feast of
St. Peter ad Vincula.*

Several of the Lords of Kerry, and many of their respective
families, were interred here, among which we find the follow-
ing :—Nicholas, who died in the year 1324 ; Maurice, in 1339;*
Defideria, daughter of Gerald FitzMaurice, was a liberal bene-
factress to this house, and died on the feast of St. John the
Evangelist, A.D. 1345 ;" John died in the year 1348, Maurice
in 1398, Patrick in 1410, Thomas in 1469, Edmund in 1498,
and another Edmund, who took on him the habit of the Order,
and died in the year 1543.”

This priory was in high estimation on account of numerous
miracles which were said to have been wrought there."”

The ruins of this noble structure stand a little to the east
of the town ; the walls of the steeple, the choir, with some of
the cloisters, the dormitory, and the chapel for morning prayer,
remain entire.* In the church is a fine figure of St. Brendon,
in alto relief ; adjoining was a round tower 120 feet in height,
and esteemed the finest in Ireland; but being neglected, it
unfortunately fell to the ground in the year 1771.7

* King, p. 314. * Lodge, vol. 2, p. 104, Gc. ° King, p. 314. ~ Lodge
supra. ~™ Allemande * Smith, pp. 204 and 205. O'Halloran Introd. p. 85,
and History, vol. 2, p. 94.

Kerry :—“ The great name,” it says, “ which the County of Kerry and Desmond for-
merly had for learning and other branches of education, as harp-playing, &c., as
also for hospitality and generosity, if particularly described, would make a good
part of a volume. As to the harp-playing, said county could well brag of having
the chiefest master of that instrument in the kingdom in his time, Mr. Nicholas
Pierce, not only for his singular capacity of composing, but also by completing
said instrument with more wires than ever before his time were used. The County
of Kerry and Desmond gentlemen were great proficients in the copious Irish language,
not only their antiquaries, who had their estates, allowances, and several privileges
for being well versed in the reading, writing, and understanding thereof with all
its requisite abbreviations and occult manner of writings, and characters before
letters were invented : said characters were called Ogham Craoive, Ogham Cuill,
and Ogham Consini. They were not strangers to the art of poetry, and in the
nicest and most difficult branches thereof, as the poem called ‘ Dane,’ of which there
were six branches, viz.: Derih, Raniaght-Vegg, Raniaght-Voze, Senah, Drinah,
and Casvam, in which many of them were famous, as also in the heroic verse, and
the composition called ‘‘ Tirir,” of whom was Geoffrey O'Donoghue of the Glinn,
Messrs. Pierce Ferreter, John MacCarthy of Ardcanacta, and Daniel Garav
O'Sullivan, and after their time, the famous Owen Roe O'Sullivan, in what he
undertook.”

We will for the present close our notes regarding this see, with the following
extract from the Royal Visitation, held in 1615. .*‘ In this Diocese of Ardfert, the
number of preachers is three, whereof two are resident. The number of reading
ministers is twenty-one. There is no schoolmaster in this diocese.”

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-261.png ---
County of Kerry. 233

Ballinaskeligs, or St. Michael’s Mount ;* in the barony of
Iveragh ; here was.an abbey for regular canons of the Order
of St. Augustine, and under the invocation of St. Michael,
which had been removed hither from the island called the
Great Skelig, but at what time is uncertain ; from the large
traces of the ruins, which the sea is continually demolishing,
this ancient abbey appears to have been a very noble and ex-
tensive edifice.

*In the Trinity College, Dublin, MS. (I. I., 3) already referred to, we find
the following short notice of this monastery :—* The Abbey of Ballynascelly,
or Monte Sancti Michaelis, of the Order of St. Augustine, dedicated to St.
Michael the Archangel: it was originally founded on one of the Séil/ock’s rocky
islands that lie westwards, remote in the sea, but afterwards it was translated to
a more commodious place, on the land of Iveragh: neither the time when it was
founded nor the founder is known ; only the Annals of Inisfallen Abbey tell that
Flann Mac Cellach ‘ Abbas Scelichensis,’ died in the year 885.”

In the barony of Iveragh is situated the parish of Valentia, an island known in
Irish as Oslean-dairbre, i.e. “the island of the oak-wood,” and celebrated in
pagan times as the abode of the chief magician, Mogh-Ruth. It was a favorite
resort of Christian piety in later ages. It still retains the ruins of an old church
called Kilmore, a holy well called Tobereendowney (a corruption of the Irish
“ tobar-righan Domnaigh,”) at which the patron was kept on 22nd March ; and
another holy well, Zoder-Finan, dedicated to St. Finan, frequented by pilgrims
on the 17th March,

There is also the parish of Killemlagh, #.¢., “the church of the borders,” which
is washed by the waters of the Atlantic. The old church stands on an elevation
about one-fourth of a mile from the shore, and commands a good view of the
distant Skeligs. The church was dedicated to St Finan—not St. Finian, as
Smith has it. His festival was formerly kept here on the 16th of March, on
which day our saint is named in all the Irish calendars, The bay here is also
called St. Finan’s bay. His holy well, Zosar-Fineain, ison the sea shore, to the
west of the old church, There is another holy well called Zobar-buaigne ; the
townland is also called A/aduonia, in Irish “ Cille-Baidhne,” and sometimes
written “ Cille-Baine,” There are two ancient burial-places called Cil/-oluaig
and Cill-chaombrach.

In the parish of Prior, called in Irish ‘‘ parish of the prior,” are the ruins of an
old abbey and church, which are gradually encroached on by the sea. It is dedi-
cated to St. Michael the Archangel. St. Michael’s well is situate in the south of
the townland of Dungegan, and the patron was kept there on the 29th of
September. In the east of the townland of Kinnard West, in the same parish,
is an old burial-place called Regies, with the ruins of an abbey.

In the parish of Caher, about one-fourth of a mile to the north of Caherciveen,
at the north side of the little bay, is a curious ancient stone church, or cell, built
without any kind of cement, like those of Kilmalkedar, and a few perches from it
is a stone altar, at which stations are performed. The cell is called Ci/-a-bhear-
nain, and sometimes Cill-a-bharnoge. On Church Island, in the same parish, there
is a similar cell, or church, and with it a beehive stone house.

In the parish of Killinaun, #e., Ci/-Lonain,is the old church of St. Lonan,
whose pattern is held on the 3rd of March. Near it, on the side of the hill, is
Tubber-Gobnet, iz, * St. Gobnet’s well.”

‘he parish of Drummod, in the townland of Caherbarnagh, has Zudder
Fionain, i... “the well of St. Finan, of Loch Luigheach, or Lough Lee.” In this
small lake, called Loch Luigheach, at the boundary of this parish, is an island
called Oileau-a-teampull, i.e, ‘‘Church Island,” and on it are the ruins of a
church and some cells, said to have been erected by St. Fionan. There are two
flags exhibiting an ornamented cross indented : one of these is said to mark the
the grave of St. Finan. On the west end of this island, and washed by the
waters of the lake, is one of the ancient stone houses of round form on the out-


--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-262.png ---
234 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Here is a holy well, consecrated to St. Michael, which is
annually visited on the 29th of September.*

November 24th, 28th Queen Elizabeth, a lease of this abbey
was granted to John Blake for the term of 21 years, at the
yearly rent of £61 135. 4a*

Croebheach ; or Croaibech, near the river Brosnach, was
founded by St. Patrick, who placed there his disciple, St.
Daluan.” St. Trian was abbot and bishop here about the year
450.°

Dingle > A market and borough town, returning two mem-
bers to parliament, and situated in the barony of Corckaguiny.

5 Smith, p.103. * Aud. General. » Tr. Th. pp. 266 and 270. * Act. SS.
P. 725-

side, but nearly square on the inside. The walls are very rudely formed of
enormous stones. This island is sometimes called é#iswasal, or ‘‘the noble
island.” A holy well, dedicated to St. Finan, is situated on the north shore of
the lake. The pattern was held on the 16th of March, St. Finan’s day.

In the parish of Glenbeagh there is a holy well called 7sdder-ui-Chaoil, ie,
“ Toberykeel.” St. Gregory is patron of the parish, and his day, on the 12th
March, was kept as a holiday.

The parish of Kilerohan honors St. Crochan as patron. North-west of the
church is St. Crochan’s well. St. Crochan, a/ias St. Mochrua, is commemorated
in our calendars on the 3rd August, but the people here observe it on the Ist of
August. In this parish is Derrynane Abbey, in Irish Doire-Fhionain, i.e. ‘‘the
grove of St. Finan.” It is only about 4 miles from Logh Luigehach. In this
parish is also the celebrated Staigue fort, which is a circular cyclopean fort, built of
loose stones without cement of any kind, situated on a rising spot of id.

5 Dingle is the chief town in the barony of Corcaguiny, and it would seem as if
this little western promontory was, in early times, wholly devoted to purposes of
religion. In 1852, one of our eminent antiquaries thus wrote of Corcaguiny:—“ Here,
indeed, would the antiquary be tempted to designate this western tongue of land as
the Baalbec of Ireland, if not of western Europe. I some time since amused myself
by making out from the Ordnance Survey Maps and other sources of my own,
a tabular list of the principal remains of antiquity in the barony of Corcaguiny,
and I found them to be as follows :—eleven stone cahirs, three cairns, forty obsolete
burial-grounds, ten castles, eighteen artificial caves, twenty-one churches in ruins,
and nine church sites, two hundred and eighteen cloghauns or bee-hived shaped
stone houses, sixteen cromlechs, twelve large stone crosses, three hundred and
seventy-six raths, one hundred and thirteen immense rude standing stones, fifty-
four monumental pillars, most of them bearing Ogham inscriptions; fifteen oratories,
nine penitential stations, sixty-six wells, many of them bearing the name of
some saint; and twenty-nine miscellaneous remains. The list, of course, only
applies to such antiquities as have had some remains of them existing some years
ago, when I compiled the list." —(7rans. Kilkenny Arch. Soc., vol. ii bee 136.)

Among the most remarkable of these early Christian monuments of Corcaguin)
are the two oratories of Gallerus and Kilmalkedar, and the Church of Kil-
malkedar. Of the first named, Dr. Stokes, President of the R.IA., thus
writes :—‘ Among these early oratories, of which some were built with and some
without cement,the most interesting, because the most perfect, specimen, is that of
Gallerus (in Irish, Gall-voss). It is admirably built, with steep, though not
vertical, gables, and a small east window and square-headed door, with
inclined jambs. A section would give the form of the somewhat depressed Gothic
arch, but the structure shows no knowledge of the principle of the arch, being
covered in, as is seen in pagan sepulchres, and even in the later stone-roofe
churches, by the slight projection of each superimposed stone, until the work
meets at the top. On the summit of each gable is a stone socket, obviously fitted

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-263.png ---
County of Kerry. 235

Here we find an ancient monastery, which was a cell to the
Abbey of Killagh, near Castlemain.* .

4 Smith, p. 177.

to receive a cross. Excepting for the absence of the crosses, this building is as
peace as it was when completed in ages now remote. _In its severe simplicity, it
forms, pethaps, the most interesting as well as one of the most ancient structures
of the more early period of Trish Christian worship.”—( The Life of George Petrie,
by Dr. Stokes, Page 161.) A model of this oratory may be seen in the Museum
of the Royal Irish Academy, and a drawing of it is given in Petrie’s Round
Towers, page 133. The oratory is wholly built of the green stone of the district,
and no cement is used in its structure ; the stones of which it is built are large and
long, being all the same kind in the walls, doorway, window, and roof ; the cell, or
oratory, is itself externally 23 feet long, and is 16 feet high on the outside to the
apex of the pyramid ; its internal breadth is ten feet.

Equally ancient and built in a similar style, though not in such good preser-
vation, is the oratory of Kilmalkedar. It is distant about one mile north from
Gallerus, and lies at the foot of Mount Brandon, near Limerick Harbour. A
drawing of it by Du Noyer will be found in the 7ransactions of the Kilkenny
Archaeological Society for 1864, page 29, That distinguished artist and antiquary
adds that its “gables converge almost as abruptly as the side walls, and in this
respect differs from the oratory at Gallerus. The masonry is formed of large
splintery flakes of the grey grit of the district, the interstices between the stones
being filled with s fragments, the whole most carefully put together and
forming a very solid wall ; a narrow plinth passes along the base of the east gable,
but does not extend to the side walls. The window in the east gable resembles a
narrow flat-headed loop, and is splayed both within and without.” It is a curious
particularity of these oratories, that each of them is surrounded by a number of
primitive houses, which probably were the cells of the monks. Each, too, hasa
monumental stone, inscribed either in the Ogham or the very ancient Roman
ay and presenting an inscribed cross with the name probably of the
founder.

The Kilmalkedar Church is much larger than the oratories, and in its interior
is richly decorated according to the Celtic style. Like most of the primitive Irish
churches, it consists of nave and choir, separated by an arch which is elaborately
ornamented, and in some of its details closely resembles the west door of Ardfert
Cathedral, and the north porch of St. Cormac’s chapel at Cashel. The nave is
26 feet long by 16 wide, and 13 in height to the spring of the roof. The entrance
doorway, which, as usual in early Irish buildings, is in the middle of the west gable,
is formed with an arch in two orders, richly carved, and the archway is filled with
atympanum carried on independent piers. A sufficient portion of the original
roof remains to show that it was originally built of stone, and constructed on the
same Principle as the oratories. This church, though of a very early date, is
probably of later construction than the oratories.

As regards St. Melchedar, to whom this church and the adjoining oratory
were dedicated, his name is entered among the Irish Saints in the Book of Bally-
mote. The following entry in the Martvrology of Donegal, at the 14th of May,
gives some further details :—‘‘ Maolcethair, son of Ronan, son of Uladth, of Cill-
Malchedair, near the shore of the sea to the west of Brandon Hill. He was of the
race of Fiatach Finn, Monarch of Erin,” In a paper read before the R.I.A.,
Archdeacon Rowan, of Kerry, hazarded the conjecture that the person thus
referred to was Mel Brandon O’Ronan, Bishop of Kerry, who died in 1161. The
antiquity, however, of the monuments which bear the saint's name should suffice
to éxplode such a supposition, and I may add that the Afartyrology of Tallaght,
which was composed more than 300 years before that illustrious Bishop of Kerry
was born, registers, on the 14th of May, the name of “ Maelcetair Mac Ronan.”
The original Index of the Martyrology of Donegal adds one small particular
which is full of importance, viz.:—that the name of Maelcetair, son of Ronan, was
expressed in Latin by Mad/egarius: and hence we may, perhaps, be justified in
identifying him with the Irish Saint Madelgarius who is venerated as patron in

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-264.png ---
236 . Ancient Monasteries of Ireland,

many cities of Belgium. He is styled ‘‘ filius Hiberniae regis,” and is supposed to
have received his heavenly crown about the year 660.

Smith, in his History of Kerry, says that St. Malchader's church was probably
built by the Spaniards, O’Donovan, in the Ordnance Survey papers, laughs at
this silly statement, and adds that the details of its ornamentation all belong to the
old Irish style, ‘‘ and this beautiful church is decidedly one of the most interesting
of the class of churches built by the Irish previous to the Anglo-Norman
invasion.” He also gives us the following interesting particulars: —‘ On one of
the lintels of the church there is a rude representation of a human head and face,
believed by the natives to represent St. Brendan, or St. Melchedar. There is a
small square pillar at the N.W. and S.W. corner of the west gable, like those at
the Cathedral of Glendalough. There was a stone cross on the summit of the
west gable, which was hurled from its place by a hurricane: itis now disfigured,
and lying prostrate in the graveyard. Opposite the door of the church is a stone
cross, the lower part of which is buried in the ground. but still the remaining part
over ground measures 9 feet 2 inches in height, and 4 feet 5 inches across the
arms ; there are several small crosses in the graveyard. To the north of the
church, about 200 paces, and at the other side of the stream called Abja-ma Cille,
i.e., Church River, there is a very curious ruin of a dwelling-house, called St.
Brendan's House, and in Irish fotpach Dnesnainn. It is one of the very few
dwelling-houses of the ancient Irish which the hand of envious time has spared to
us, The only remains of houses of the same character which I have ever seen, are
at Kilmacduagh and Lorrach. To the N.W. of this ruin, about one-fourth of an
English mile, on the same townland, is a curious C/oghan, or stone cell, more
curious than any of those now remaining in the islands to the west of Connaught.
[This is the oratory of St. Melchedar]. Eleven feet in height of the walls still
remain, but the ro.f is destroved. Tradition ascribes the erection of this cell,
which they call a chapel, to the great St. Brendan and his cotemporary, St.
Melchedar. Still farther, to the S.W., in the townland of Caher-aorgaun, is a
very curious Cafer, or stone fort. It has within it three round Cloghauns, or houses
of stone of considerable size, and two very small ones. The external wall of this
caher forms a circle 88 feet in diameter, and the wall itself is 9 feet in thickness,
and built of loose stones without any kind of cement. The most conspicuous of
the bee-hive houses within it lies towards the west side: it measures on the inside
15 feet in diameter at the floor, which is prefectly circular, and the diameter
gradually decreased towards the top till it was closed at the top with one stone,
‘The roof is at present destroyed, but g feet of the height of the circle is up and
in very good preservation.”

Some of the other parishes in this barony also retain interesting memorials of
our early saints. Thus, in the pansh of Clohaun North, in Irish Clochan, there
are the ruins of an old church situate on the west of the margin of Brandon
Bay. It consisted of nave and choir, 24 feet long, 20 in breadth. Inthe south

is inserted a rude representation of a head and face, supposed to represent
the head of Crom-Dubh, of whom there are traditions connecting him with some
of the highest mountains in Ireland, ¢g., Slieve-Donard, in the County l’own,
Croaghpatrick, in County Mayo, and Brandon-hill, in Kerry. At the distance of a
hundred paces from the church is a holy well dedicated to St. Brendan, at which
8 pattern is annually he'd on “ Domnach Cruim Duibh,” which is the last Sunday
in Summer. In Clohaun-South is Tober-Martin, #.¢., St. Martin’s well, and a
burial-place called Keel, in Irish Cid/, i.e. ‘‘the Church :” probably it, too, was
dedicated to St. Martin.

In the parish of Minnard are the ruins of a very ancient church called Ci/-
Muire, iz., the Church of the Blessed Virgin Mary: from it the townland is
called Kilmurry. The ruins of the old church are about 400 yards ‘rom the sea.
About 100 yards nearer to the sea is the well of St. John the Baptist, at which
the patron was held on the 29th of August.

In the parish of Aunagh, in Irish Eanach, #.¢., ‘‘a marsh,” there are the ruins of
achurch, and near it the remains of a caher, or ancient stone fort. At a short
distance, at the north side of G/eann-Scoithin, is a long flag called by the natives
** Scota’s grave.” This district is mentioned by all our authorities on the subject
as the landing-place of the first Milesian colony in Ireland.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-265.png ---
County of Kerry. 237

Innisfallen °° An island, containing twelve acres, on the -
Lake of Killarney.

* Called anciently Inisfaithienn.

The parish of Ventry, in Irish Fionn-traig, t.e., the white-strand, is so called.
from the situation of the old parish church on the margin of a beautiful strand,
remarkable for its fine white sand. At the east end of the strand, there are
remnants of several small cairns.

The parish of Kilquan. :.c., Cill-Cuain, is situate in the west of the barony.
The old church was 50 feet in length and 174 in breadth. The foundations and
a portion of the south wall remain. It is remembered that St. Cuan’s day was
formerly celebrated here as patron. There is also a well of St. Kieran two miles
to the west of the church.

In the parish of Kildrum is the townland of Kilfountain, known in Irish as Cil/-
Fionntain : there remain the foundations and some ruins of the old church of St.
Fintan.

In the parish of Ballanvoher (4.2. daile-an-bhothair, ‘‘the town of the road”) is
Teampall-na-hinse, é.¢., church of the island,” though Inch island, as it is called,
is rather an isthmus than an island. In the townland of Kilduff, is a burial-place
called Crlt-dubh, ‘* black church” or Cella nigra.

In the parish of Ballinacoorty, in the townland of same name, is Toberreen-
dony, #2, Zobar rigan Domhnaigh, and there is still a holy well there: also
another holy well called 7oternacrugha, i.¢., ‘‘ the well of the cross,” from a stone
cross which stands over the well.

In the parish of Dingle, townland of Ballvreagh, is an old small church or cell
called 7zampull-geal, i.¢., ‘* the white church,” from the whitish colour of its
stones ; but also. and more properly called 7eampull Manchain, from its patron,
St. Manchain. At the distance of 300 yards. is a well called Tubber-Manchain,
where stations are still performed. 300 yards from the cell to the west is a
grave 14 feet in length, and marked by a pillar stone, on which Oghams are
inscribed, and which is also marked with a cross. It is called the grave of St.
Manchain.

In the parish of Stradbally, and townland of Ardbeg, there is a holy well called
Tubber Muire, i.e, “the well of the Blessed Virgin Mary.” There is also the
parish of Killiney, in Irish A‘/-Einne, i.e.,* Church of St. Enda.” This is the
same saint who is honoured at Killeany, in Arrann, and in several other parts of
the south and west of Ireland. Another parish is called Kilgobbin, #.c., St. Gobban's
Church: and its townland of Killeordrann preserves the name of St Odran, or
Ottaran.

The parish of Marhin, in Irish Marthain, presents three hallowed memories—
the Cruach-Marthain, or “ hill of St. Martan ;” the holy we:l of St. Molagga ; and
“the Church of the Colmans.” The parish of Kinnard honours St. Fintan, also
written Fionan, as patron on 17th February : his holy well also marks the spot,
and near it there is another holy well called 7ober-Muire, or ‘‘ well of the Blessed
Virgin Mary.” It, too, honours the memory of St. Martin, at Zeampull-Martin,
where the ruins of the old church may still be seen.

® Inisfallen, also written Inisvalen, is situate in the centre of Lough Lane, or
Lower Lake of Killarney. It is famed for its scenery, and in an antiquarian point
of view is remarkable for the ruins of its abbey, and of a very ancient oratory
founded by, or dedicated to, St. Finan, surnamed Lobhar, #,¢., ‘‘the Leper.” The
memory of this patron was honoured at Inisfallen on the 16th of March. and all
our Martyrologies mark on that day the festival of St. Finian Lobhar. Thus, in
the Martyrology of Donegal on that day :—‘‘ Fionan, the Leper, of Swords and of
Cluanmore in Leinster, and of Ardfionain in Munster. He was of the race of Cian,
son of Oilioll Oluim.” The Calendar of Cashel has :—“ S. Finanus Lobhran, filius
Conalli, de Surdo, et de Cluainmor Maidoci in Lagenia, et de Inisfaithlin in lacu
Lenensi, et de Ardfinain.” The Filiré of St. dingus styles him—“ Praefulgidus
Finanus Lobhra,” and adds the note :— At Sord Choluim-Cille, and in Inis
Faithlend, on Loch Lein, and in Cluainmor Moidhoc, and in Ard-Finan in
Munster, he is honoured, And Mella, sister of Coemghen of Glendaloch, was the

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-266.png ---
238 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

St. Finian Lobhar, or the Leper, son of Alild, King of
Munster, and disciple of St. Brendan, founded an abbey here
towards the close of the 6th century.'

A.D. 640. This year St. Dichull, the son of Nessan, was
abbots

1145. Died Flannan of Innisfallen.*

1180, This abbey, says our annalist, being ever esteemed a
paradise and a secure sanctuary, the treasure and most valu-
able effects of the whole country were deposited in the hands
of its clergy ; notwithstanding which, we find the abbey was
plundered in this year by Maolduin, son of Daniel O’Donag-

* Act. SS. pp. 4b and 628. © Id. p.92. —* Annal Annon.

mother of Finan.” He was a native of Ely O’Carroll, at present a barony in the
King’s County, but in early times belonging to East Munster. He was of noble
descent; and O’Clery, in his MS. Book of Genealogies of the Saints of Erin,
styles him, “the son Conall, son of Eathnach, son of Tadhg, son of Cian,
son of Oilioll Oluim ;” but adds that many links are wantmg—‘“ malta in
hac genealogia desunt.” He pursued the paths of holiness in the monasteries
of St. Brendan in Kerry, and in St. Columba’s monastery at Swords, which
monastery he also ruled as abbot for many years. He was famed for miracles,
and is said to have raised three persons to life. Desirous of ,martyrdom,
he took upon himself the loathsome leprosy of a child that was brought to
him to be cured, and endured it joyfully till his death. He lived for some
time in the Monastery of Clonmore Moedhog, in the County Carlow—(see
notes to vol. i., Pree 5), and is supposed to have died there. Some ancient
writers attest, that that monastery was further enriched with his relics :
others assign that treasure to Swords. It is probable that a portion of his relics
was deposited at each monastery. As early as the eighth century, when the
Martyrology of Tallaght was composed, it was doubtful which monastery had the’
higher claim to celebrate his feast. The text of that Martyrology as published by
Dr. Kelly, which, however, was taken from a very corrupt and imperfect transcript,
gives merely the entry—‘* Finan, Lobhar, at Swords :” but in the original text as
reserved in the St. Isidore’s fragment of the Book of Leinster, we have, “ Finani
bhar, Suird vel Cluainmor,” é.¢., “ St. Finan, the leper, at Swords or Clonmore.”
Our saint cherished special piety towards the great founder of the monastery of
Clonmore, St. Aidan, and when the close of life was at hand was favored with the
following vision. “‘ He saw,” writes his biographer, ‘a wonderful chariot descending
from heaven to the Monastery of St. Aidan, and in it a venerable man in religious
attire, with a radiant virgin beside him. ‘I am Aidan, servant of Christ’ said the
venerable senior addressing him, ‘and this is the holy virgin Brigid,-protectress of
Erin (Brigida domina Hiberniae); my feast will be celebrated to-morrow, and hers
on the following day : and we are come to bless those who honour us. Be thou
prepared and joyful, for the following day thou shalt migrate to heaven.’” This
would fix the day of the saint's death as the 2nd of February, but that day being
engaged by another great feast, his memory was venerated on the 16th of March.
It is not easy to fix the precise year of his rest. His life merely states that he died
in the reign of the Monarch Finnachta, who reigned from 675 to 694. From the
facts narrated in his life, it is probable that he died at a very advanced age, soon
after the year 675. His memory was cherished in many churches of Scotland, for
which see Dr. Forbes’s Calendar of Scottish Saints, page 347-

It is scarcely necessary to add that the Monastery of Tnnisfallen was not founded
at so early a date as that assigned by Archdall. Neither was St. Dichull abbot of
our monastery : he was abbot of the Monastery of Ireland's Eye, which, in early
records, is sometimes called Inisfaithlenn. See Colgan’s remarks on “the Sons of
Nessan,” at 15th of March.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-267.png ---
County of Kerry. 239

hoe, many of the clergy were slain, and even in their cemetery,
by the M‘Carthys ; but God soon punished this act of impiety
and sacrilege, by bringing many of its authors to an untimely
end:

1191. Died the abbot M‘Mugy.*

1197. Died the Abbot O’Haurehen.!

The same year, on the 19th of December, died Gilla Patrick
O’Huihair, in the 79th year of his age; he was archdeacon of
Faithlin, superior of this convent, and the founder of many
religious houses, to all of which he presented books, vestments,
and all other necessary furniture; he was a celebrated poet,
and was in the highest estimation for his chaste life, piety,
wisdom, and universal charity.™

1198. Died the Abbot O’Kennedy22

1204. The Abbot Ligda, otherwise Niall, died this year of
the plague.

1208. Gillacolman O’Riadan, a reverend priest of the people
of Cloomvama, died in this abbey, where he passed the evening
of a life chequered by misfortune, in penitence and prayer ;
he was interred here?

1320. Dermot M‘Carthy, King of Desmond, being murdered
at Tralee, was interred here, and at the same time O’Donecha
was also interred.9

August 18th, 37th Queen Elizabeth, a grant was made to
Robert Collan of this abbey and its possessions, being three
plowlands, containing 120 acres of arable, with the appurten-
ances, called Manleigh, Aghachurryn, Dems, and Bownrore,
and the advowson of the churches of Kilertee and Kennymora,
in this county; together with the parsonage of Terlogin, and
the presentation to the vicarage thereof; parcel of the abbey
of Donbrodye, half a plowland called Cowlesheine, and
sixty acres of small measure in Cowltevecoroghe, with the
patronage of Kilcornan, all in the county of Limerick, also the
abbey of Irelagh, with its possessions. To hold the same for
ever in fee-farm, by fealty only, in common soccage, and not
in capite, at the annual rent of £72 3s. sterling. Note, in
this grant are included some other townlands besides the
abbey lands.*

The remains of this abbey are very extensive, and its situ-
ation is extremely picturesque.t A small chapel standing at
some distance from the abbey, and which had originally be-
longed to it, is now converted by the noble proprietor into a
banqueting house for the reception of visitors to the romantic
scenes of Killarney.

1 Annoal Munster. * id, \7d, ™ Id, 2 Id, ° Id. Pid, ld.
* Aud Gen, * Smith, p. 128,

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-268.png ---
240 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Irvelagh ;’ In the barony of Magunihy, and on the borders
of Loughlean ; Donald, son of Thady M‘Carthy, in the year
1440, founded a friary here, under the invocation of the Holy
Trinity, for Conventual Franciscans ; he repaired it in the
year 1468, a few months before his decease.t

Irrelagh has continued since that time the cemetery of the
M‘Carthy family. And Donald, Earl of Clancare, was interred
here ; as was Patrick, Lord Kerry, the Earl’s nephew, who
died August 12th, anno 1600."

This abbey was re-edified by the Roman Catholics in the
year 1602, but was soon after permitted to go to ruin. It is
surrounded by a venerable grove of very tall ash trees, which,
in some places, grow spontaneously from the ruins. The
choir, nave, and steeple, are yet entire, as are the cloisters,
which consist of several Gothic arches, all of solid marble, en-
closing a small square, in the centre of which stands a very
tall yew-tree, whose spreading branches, overshadowing and
throwing a brown shade over the niches of the whole cloister,
form a much more solemn and awful kind of covering than
the original one. The steeple of this extensive building is
supported by a Gothic arch, which, from its size, could only
contain one bell.” A miraculous image of the Virgin Mary
was said to have been preserved here.

This abbey, with its possessions, containing four acres of

* War. Mon, * Lodge, vol. 2, p. 109. Y Smith's K., p. 143.

7 According to the Franciscan records, it was M‘Carthy More, Prince of
Desmond, who, in A.D. 1430, laid the foundations of the Franciscan convent at
Irrelagh, now better known as Mucross. He was ever afterwards, for this reason,
styled Desmond “ of the monastery :” his son Donnell completed the building in
1440. In the centre of the choir, MacCaithy More erected a tomb for himself
and his posterity. Here, too,in 1582. was interred Catherine, daughter of Teige
M‘Carthy, and wife of Fitzmaurice of Kerry. The O'Sullivan More and the
O’Donoghoes had also their sepulchres within its hallowed precincts. The friars
were driven from the place in 1589, when some of them were slain by the soldiers
of Sir William Fitzwilliam, then Lord Deputy. The guardian. Father Holan, and
some religious resumed possession of the convent in 1602, and found a great part
of the church in good preservation. They by degrees perfectly restored the
ancient buildings, but were again obliged to abandon them in 1629. A few years
peace again smiled on them during the rule of the Confederation of 1641: these
were followed by utter ruin under the Puritans. The O’Gorman MS. in R.A.
tells us that Father Caveagh, a native of Kerry, a pious and learned man was
Provincial of the Franciscan Order in Ireland, and during the Cromwellian
usurpation suffered martyrdom for the faith at the island of Scariff, in the west of
the County of Kerry.

In the same barony with Mucross, is the townland of Kilgobnat, in which there is
the ruin of a small rude church dedicated to St.Gobnat. Some of the names of the
parishes also recall the memories of early saints, as A‘leentierna, i.e., “the little
cell of St. Tighernach ;” Xilcummin, ‘* St. Cummin’s Church ;” Ai/binaun,
“the Church of St. Benignus ;” and Mo/ahif, in Irish Magh-/aithimsh, is probably
“ De aan Muighe-laithimh” which is mentioned in some of our early
records,

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-269.png ---
County of Kerry. 241

land or thereabouts, two orchards, and one garden, valued at
.16s. yearly, was granted to Robert Collon.—See the Abbey of
Innisfallen*

Killachad-Conchean ; situated in Corcach-duibhne,’ was
founded by St. Abban in the 6th century, for the holy virgin
St. Conchenna, who is honoured here on the 28th of April.

Killagh ;° or, De Bello Loco, near the river Mang, in the
barony of Trughanackmy.

A priory of regular canons was founded here under the in-
vocation of the Virgin Mary, by Geoffry de Maricis, in the
reign of King. John. The prior of this house was a lord of
Parliament ; but, on account of the very great distance between
his place of residence and the metropolis, he was seldom sum-
moned.* The walls of the church are of a great length, and
strong in proportion ; these, and a noble Gothic east window,
are yet entire. The architecture, which is of a dark marble,

‘ bespeaks the structure to be much more modern than the
time before mentioned. Large possessions, situate in divers
parts of the country, did belong to this house, which were
granted for the term of twenty-one years to Thomas Clinton,
at the annual rent of £17 and 21d.»

An Augustine friary was said by some writers to have been
founded here.°

Lislaghtin ,° in the barony of Iraghticonnor.

® Allemande. Y The barony of Corcaguiny. 2 Act. SS. pp. 615 and 622.
* War. Mon. > Smith, p.150. Auditor-Gen. °° Allemande.

® InIrish Cilefahah. This seems to have been the centre of a religious com-
munity long before the English invasion. It was on the banks of the Mong that
the youthful Mochuda was so enraptured with the chant of the monks, that he
abandoned everything to serve God alone. The O'Gorman MS. having given a
list of several monasteries of Kerry, says:— The founders of the two last
(Irrelagh and: Killamey) were M‘Carthy More and O’Sullivan Beare. I could
never learn who were the founders of the other five, but that it is said that the
family of the Moriarty's built some, particularly that of the aforesaid Cil¢/ahah ;
the rest are supposed to be of the hundred monasteries built by Loanus, disciple
of Comgall of Beanchuir.”

In the same barony of Trughanackmy is the parish of Brusnagh, of which St.
Moling of Luachra, is patron. His holy well is near the churchyard. He was a
native of Sliabh-Luachra, in the neighbourhood. In the parish of Castleisland
there is the ruin of an old church called Cill-Fionain, which honored St. Finan
as patron. There is also the site of an old church in the townland of Kilquan, in
the parish of Ballymacelligot. It was about 30 feet in length and 15 feet in
breadth, but its walls were mercilessly destroyed some years ago. It was
dedicated to the celebrated St. Cuan Airbre, who was the second Abbot of Mothel,
in the Decies, near Carrick-on-Suir,

® This monastery, situate on the Shannon, about a mile from Carrigfoil, was
erected on the site of a more ancient but smaller edifice, founded early in the 7th
century by St. Lachtin, of Bealach-abhra, who died in the year 622, The chapel
of this abbey was divided into a nave and choir, and a square tower was erected
over the’choir arch, ,This abbey and the castle of Carnckaphile, or Carrigfoil,

VOL. 11, B


--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-270.png ---
242 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

A monastery was founded here in the year 1464, by O’Con-
chovar [O’Connor], Prince of Kerry, for Franciscan friars of
the Strict Observance.4

Other writers erroneously give this foundation to the Lord
John O'Connor, and place it in the year 1478.

On the suppression, the abbey was granted to James Scolls.*
It was afterwards granted for the term of twenty-one years to
Sir Edward Denny, at the annual rent of 71s. and 1446

4 Act. SS. ~.657. * War. MS. vol. 34, p. 164. * Smith, p. 227. © Aud. Gen.

were reckoned by our forefathers “‘ great monuments of the power, civilization, and
piety of O’Connor, Prince of Kerry.”

In the same barony of Iraghtyconnor is the parish of Killahinny, in Irish Cxd/-
Eithne, i.e., the Church of St. Eithne. ‘Another parish bears the name of Kil-
naughtin, i.¢., the Church of St. Neachtain, and there is also a holy well called
Tober-Nagthin, dedicated to the same saint. The present ruins of Kilnaughtin are
about four centuries old, but according to the Ordnance Survey, there can be no
doubt that the present building occupies the site ofa more ancient church. In the
townland of Termon East, in this parish, is another holy well called Tober Martin,
dedicated to St. Martin, and another sacred to St. Senan, of Iniscathy. There
are also the ruins of an old church at At//murri/y, which means the Church of St.
Murghal. .

On Carrick island, in the parish of Aghavallen, are the ruins of anold abbey. The
edifice, like that of Lislaghtin, consisted of a nave and choir, with a square tower
over the choir arch.

The parish of Lisse/ton derives its name from “the earthen fort of St. Eiltin.”
This saint is generally called St. Elteen of Kinsale, and his feast is on the 1th
December. The site of the old Church of St. Elteen is now occupied by the modern
Protestant church, The parish of Kilconly, #.e., Church of St. Connla, honours its

atron on the 10th May. The old church of this parish is situated in the town-

d of Kilconly, in a glen on the north side of a mountain stream. It is in good
preservation, and measures on the inside 42 feet 6 inches in length, and 22 feet in

readth, and its walls are 4 feet in thickness, and g feet in height, and built of
small hammered stones and lime and sand cement.

The parish of Dysart was originally called Desertua de Triallagh, i.e. “ the her-
mitage of St. Triallagh,” and this saint is the patron of the parish. M(‘Firbis

Genealogies of the Irish SS., R.1.A., page 253) gives the following story regarding

t. Triallagh :—“Fearamhla, the daughter of Dioma-Dubh, was the mother of the
three O'Suanys, and also of Aidan, of C/uain-Eochaille, in Corran. She was also
the mother of Diclethe-O’Triallaigh, whose cell is in the territory of Ciarraigh
Luachra; and she was also the mother of Colman, the son of Eochy, of Shanbo,
in Hy-Kinsellagh. These are called the saints of the Hy-Neathaeh-Moy. . . -
St. Dicleth-O Triallagh, commonly called 7yiallach, iz. ‘‘ the wanderer,” secretly
went away from Tyrawley, and settled at Disert-O’ Triallaigh, on the brink of
Casan Ciarraighe (now the river Cashen.) A great miracle was performed on him
when he resolved to go away from his mother's sons on a journey to look for God.
They took him and bound tim, and put an iron fetter on his Fea and feet, and
they flung the key of the fetter into the ocean. Nevertheless, the saint persevered,
and went to Disert-Triallaigh sailing in a curach without a hide, round the west
of Ireland. On his arrival there, the key of the fetter was found to have been
miraculously brought before him to Disert-Triallaigh. This fetter,” adds M ‘Firbis,
“is still preserved as a miraculous reliquary, and is known by the name of G/asan-
Triallaigh. The reason why he is called Dic/eth is because he concealed himself
when flying from his brothers.”

In the parish of Ga/ey, there is also a small fragment of the old gable of a church
in the graveyard. About halfa mile to the east of it is the well of St. Bartholo-
mew, who is patron of the parish.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-271.png ---
County of Kerry. 243

The steeple, choir, and many other parts of the building
may still be seen.

10 Monaster Ni Oriel; in the barony of Glanerought. Here
are some traces of an ancient building, which, according to
tradition, was a religious house. Smith, in his history of the
country, is the only author who mentions this monastery.*

1 Odorney ; situated near the river Brick, in the barony of.
Clanmaurice. An abbey, under the invocation of the Virgin

» Smith, p. 82.

3° In this barony of Glanarought is situate the parish of Kenmare, in which St.
Finan's well was formerly visited by pilgrims on the 3rd of May and 14th of Septem-
ber. There is also the parish of Kilcaskin, famous for its Zzampull-Fiackna, or
Church of St. Fiachna, of which only a few ruins now remain. In the parish of
Tuosist is the townland of Kilmakilloge, which takes its name from the old church
of St. Mokilloge. The adjoining bay is called after the same saint, and near the
church is one of those primitive cells so characteristic of the early ages of faith in
our country; itis supposed to have been the cell or hermitage of St. Mokilloge,
and is still a favorite resort of pilgrims when performing their penitential
exercises. About a quarter of a mile north-eastward of the old church there is a
small lake called Lough Quinlan, which is a corruption of the Irish name “ Keen-
laun.” Dr. O’Donovan, however, remarks that the ancient name is Lough
Mochionlain, i.e, the Lake of St. Mokilloge. The name Mokilloge, as those
conversant with Irish hagiology will easily understand, is only an endearing form
of the name St. Killian. Several saints of that name are mentioned in our
calendars, but the annual patron festival has been kept here from time immemorial
on the 8th of July, which is popularly styled St. Keenlaun’s day, on which day is
commemorated the martyrdom of the great St. Killian, patron of Wurzburg. It
is traditionally recorded that St. Killian founded a church in the neighbourhood of
Lough Keenlaun, and lived there for some years before he entered on his
missionary labours on the Continent ; and thousands still flock to the banks of the
lake on the 8th of July, to perform special devotions in his honour. This great
saint was of prince! y rank, and was born about the year 610. In his early years
he devoted himself to the practice of virtue in the Monastery of Clonmacnoise,
and subsequently, when raised to the episcopate, he seems to have made Kerry
the field of his spiritual labours. About the year 650 he resigned his episcopal
charge, and set out on pilgrimage to Rome. We afterwards meet with him
visiting his relative St. Fiacre, and sharing with him for a time his holy hermitage
at Meaux. For several years he laboured with such devoted zeal in Artois, and
throughout the whole territory of the Morini, as to merit to be honoured as their
Apostle. With the sanction of the Holy See, he, with some chosen companions,
sought to scatter the Gospel seed in Franconia, and received their the martyrs’
crown on July the 8th, 689. His relics are enshrined at Wurzburg, and that city also
possesses the venerable copy of the Gospels written in Irish characters, which he was
reading at the altar at the time of his martyrdom, and which was besmeared with
his blood. The Cathedral of Wurzburg was erected by another Irish bishop, St.
Burchard, who translated to it the relics of our saint in the year 752.

4 About two and a-half miles from Ardfert are the ruins of the great Abbey of
Odorney, which, from some affinity with the name of the County Kerry, in which it
was situated, was known on the Continent by the name of the Abbey of Kyrie-
eleison. It belonged to the Cistercians, and its abbot voted in the House of Lords,
In the Acts of the Chapters General of the Cistercian Order, published by Martene,
there is a curious entry regarding this abbey, as follows :—“ A.D. 1274. Cum
Abbas de Kyrie Eleison anno praeterito per literas quorundam abbatum ordinis
Nostri accusatus fuerit et denunciatus capitulo generali super quibusdam intolerabi-
libus, propter quae ipsum absolvimus a imine abbatiae ; et ipse hoc anno per
literas quorumdam abbatum, et testimonio fide dignorum innocens repertus fuerit
de praemissis, eumdem abbatem in instanti restituit capitulum generale, et de Mellie

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-272.png ---
244 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Mary, was founded at Odorney, otherwise called Kyrie Eleison,
in the year 1154, and was supplied with monks from the Cis-
tercian abbey of Magio, in the County of Limerick. Keating
fixes its foundation in the year 1161.

A.D. 1186. Christian O’Conarchy, Bishop of Lismore, and
Apostolic Legate, having retired from the world, died in this
abbey, and was there interred in this year.

1188. The Abbot Nicholas was made Bishop of Ardfert
this year. He continued to fill that see during the space of
forty-eight years.!

Thomas was abbot of this house, and was also abbot of
Fermoy ; he was the fifth son of Maurice Lord’ Kerry, who
died about the year 1303.™

1410. This year we find that AEneas O'Cormac, the abbot
of Odorney, was fined tos. but we are not told for what
offence."

Gerald, third son of Patrick Lord Kerry, was abbot of this
house ; his brother Nicholas was made Bishop of Ardfert in
1420.°

1537. This being a very rich abbey, Edmund Lord Kerry
was created Baron of Odorney and Viscount Kilmaule ; in the

‘ War. Mon, _* War. Mon. and Bps. p.451. \ War. Bps. .451. ™ Lodge,
vol. 2, p.103.  ® Harris's MSS. vol. 4. ° Lodge, Ibid. p. 105.

fonti et de Dublina abbatibus committitur auctoritate capituli generalis, ut dictam
restitutionem exequantur, ct contra accusatores dicti abbatis diligenter inquirant,
et eos puniant secundum quod videbitur expedire.” Towards the close of Eliza-
beth’s reign the abbey, with a great part of its possessions which had passed into
the hands of Sir William Lovelace, was purchased by Patrick Crosbie, of Mary-
borough, in Queen’s County.

In the ruins of the abbey is a small limestone flag with the inscription :—“ Am-
brosius Piers, Vicarius Generalis Dioecesis Ardfertensis, hunc tumulum sibi fieri
curavit anno 1687.”

In the same barony is the parish of Kilflin, which honours St. Flann as patron,
and Kilcarha, in Irish Ci//-Carthaigh, in which the old church was dedicated to St.
Carthage. There is in this parish a townland formerly called Killbinnaun, in
memory of the Church of St. Benignus, which was erected there ; now it is called
Monument-farm. There is also the parish of Kiltomy, i.e., “the Church of St.
Toma,” whose festival is kept on the 22nd of April : one of its townlands is called
Killaspicktarvin, i.e, “ the Church of Bishop Tarvin,” and probably it is the only
record that preserves the name of this holy bishop. Other ancient parishes are
Killfeighney, “ Church of St. Fiachna ;” Kilshinnan, “ Church of St. Senanus ;”
Kilmoyly, “Church of St. Maoile ;” and Killahan, “Church of St. Laithin.”
Killoory honours St. Lurach Mac Cunach as patron on 17th February. His holy
well still remains, and not far from it, on the townland of Kilmore, are pointed out
the sites on which its seven churches once stood. In the parish of Ballyhaigue
is the old Church of St. Mac Deaghaidh, whom Smith erroneously calls Afac [da :
a holy well of the saint is situate on the sea shore to the east of the church. A
rude image of the saint is said to have been held in great veneration here, espe-
cially by a colony from the County Clare that settled in this neighbourhood
some centuries ago. In the same parish, about two miles from Kerry Head point,
is Teampull Dasthlionn, dedicated to St. Daithlinn. Her holy well is also
pointed out. She is supposed to have been sister to St. Mac Deaghaidh,

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-273.png ---
County of Kerry. 245

same year a grant was made to him of several religious houses,
among which was this abbey, with the appurtenances, to him
and his issue male ; but, in default thereof, they reverted to
the crown.P

The abbot of this house was a Lord of Parliament.4

28th June, 39th Queen Elizabeth, the town of Menecrie,
containing the sixth part of a carve of land, parcel of the pos-
sessions of this abbey, was granted to the Provost and Fellows
of the College of the Holy Trinity, near Dublin. See the
Abbey of Cong, in the County of Mayo.

This abbey is now a shapeless ruin; nothing but old low
walls are to be seen, which resemble those of an ancient church
without a steeple.

2 Rattoo ; called in some old records Rafhtoy, is situated

P Smith, p. 218, « War. Mon.

3 Rattoo, in Irish Rath-tuaidh, t.e., the “ northern fort” (sometimes pronounced
Rathtoy) is called Rathmore, or the great fort, in some ancient records. It is about
five miles from Ballybunion, and retains still the ruins of two churches as well as
a majestic round tower. Thismonument of our early church is here popularly called
Gioltach, which name seems a corruption of c/oicteach, by which the round towers
were generally designated. Tradition records that there was a silver bell in the
top of this tower, which had a remarkably sweet tone, and that it is now at the
bottom of the river Brick. To the east of the tower inthe same field, but at about
one furlong distance, are the ruins of the more modern abbey, whichjwas erected in
the reign of King John, In the same parish, in the townland of Derrycodoire-
Chua, are the ruins of a remotely ancient church, the walls of which are not
unlike those of the cahers on the Aran Islands. It was 50 feet in length, and 22
feet in breadth. The side-walls are 3 feet 9 inches in thickness, and about 11 feet
in height, and built of blocks of sandstone evidently found on the sea shore, but
none like them are to be seen in the immediate vicinity. The cement is very
good, though the external face of the walls looks as if they were in the cyclopean
style.

‘O'Donovan, in the Ordnance Survey Papers, informs us that the Rattoo, in op-
Position to Rattass, was sometimes called by the Irish writers Kath-muighe.tuats-
cirt, iv., “the fort of the northern plain.” This enables us to identify St.
Lughaidh, as one of the early bishops of this see. His feast is on the 6th of October.
The Martyrology of Donegal speaks in a somewhat doubtful manner, and calls him
“Bishop of Cuil-Beaunchair, on the brink of Loch Erne, and of Rath-muighe-
tuaiscirt, in Ciarraighe Luachra; or of Cuil-Beaunchair, in Hy-Failghe, and of
Tuaim-fobhair, in Luighne.” However, the Féliré of St. AEngus removes all doubt
on this head. In the text of the Feliré the saint is commemorated as ‘‘ the gentle
Bishop Lughdhach;” and then the note is added, “ This is Bishop Lughdhach
from Daire-na-Flann, in the Eoghanact of Caisel, viz., Lughdhach, bishop in Cuil
Bendchair, in Uibh-Failghe. The same Bishop Lughdhach is in Cuil-Bendchair
in Lurg, on the brink of Loch Emme ; and he is in Rath-muighe-tuaiscirt, in Ciar-
raighe Luachra, viz., at Daire Mochua on the banks of the Feile.”

Rattass, to which we have just referred, derives its name from Rath-muighe-
deiscert, i. ‘the fort of the southern plain.” In the parish of Rattass there is a
venerable old church; and O’Donovan, in the Ordnance Survey Papers,
expresses his surprise that Smith, inhis //tstory of Kerry, should pass it by without
mentioning its beauty and antiquity. The quoin stones in it are all chiseled.
The east and west gables, and the greater part of the north wall, remain in
good preservation. ¢ doorway, a usual in the Irish churches of great anti-
quity, is in the middle of the west gable, and is now stop up on the inside
with rough masonwork. It is of quadrangle form, and its sides slope in a


--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-274.png ---
246 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

in the barony of Clanmaurice, not far from the confluence of
the rivers Feal, Brick, and Galley ; Rattoo is said to have
been a corporation town, in which were seven churches, and
the residence of a bishop ; a high round tower stands in the
present churchyard."

We are told that there was an hospital or commandery
erected here for knights hospitallers by a brother William,
which was confirmed by Meyler, the son of Meyler, in the
reign of King John. The words of Meyler’s charter are:
Which was built by friar William in my land of Kerry.
Witness, David, Btshop of Jarmuan, or Ardfert, who was
consecrated in 1193, and died in 1207. It was afterwards
converted into a monastery of regular canons of the order of
Aroacia, and dedicated to St. Peter and St. Paul.*

The Abbot John having resigned, King John granted a
licence, dated November 14th, 1281, to proceed to an election.t

On the 7th of October, anno 1336, King Stephen granted a
pardon to the abbot and convent for receiving and protecting
Maurice, the son of Nicholas, and his accomplices, who, in a
treasonable manner, had made an insurrection in this country."

In the year 1600, the rebels fortified this abbey, but, on the
approach of Sir Charles Wilmot, they set firetoand destroyed it.”

This abbot was also a Lord of Parliament.*

14th September, 23rd Queen Elizabeth, a lease was granted
to John Zouche of this abbey, for the term of twenty-one
years, at the yearly rent of 79d. Irish money.’

38 Skelig ; situated on the island of the Great Skelig, about

¥ Smith, pp. 213and 214. * War. Mon. * Prynne, vol. 3, p.297. ° King,
p. 205. Y Pacata Hibernia, p. 101. * King, p. 205. ¥ Aud. Gen.

remarkable manner. There are two small pillars at the two corners of the gable
like those in the Cathedral of Glendalough. O'Donovan adds, “ This is un-
doubtedly an erection of the primitive age of the Irish Church.” In the parish
there is a townland called Baile-na-m Breatnach, i.e. “‘ Ballybronagh, or town of
the Britons,” where there are the foundations of an old church, which was 31 feet
in length and 15 in breadth. Similar foundations and portions of a venerable
ruin are found in the townland of Lismore, same parish.
13 The name Séelig is said by our antiquarians to be of Scandinavian origin. It
roperly means “an island rock,” or scopu/us maris, The chief of these rocky
islands, called Skelig-Michael, dedicated to St. Michael, was a favourite resort of
pilgrims from all parts of Ireland in theearly ages. It still retains the ruins of two or
three small stonework oratories. The Annals of Junisfallen give, under the year
812, the entry—“ The Danes plundered Sceilig-Michael in the west of Munster,
and took the anchorites that were in those places, and kept them captives till they
were starved to death.” This, however, did not deter other holy men from
resorting thither; and from the Wars of the Danes (edited by Dr. Todd, page
223) we learn that in another incursion of the northern marauders, the Scellig-
Michael, which was inhabited by a holy solitary named Edgall, was in plun-
dered by them. It adds, that ‘‘ Edgall of the Skelligs was carried off by them
into captivity ; it was by a miracle that he escaped death at their hands, but he
afterwards died of hunger and thirst amongst them.” The Annals of Ulster
chronicle this same event in the year 823—‘‘ Eitgail of Skellig was carried away
by the Gentiles, and he soon after died from hunger and thirst.”

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-275.png ---
County of Kerry. 247

ten miles from the mainland of the barony of Iveragh ; an
abbey was founded here by St. Finian.?

We find St. Suibhneus Abbot of Skelig,* but the time is not
accurately known. .

A.D. 812. The Danes plundered and destroyed the abbey
about this year, and kept the monks in close confinement
until, through hunger, they perished.>

860 The abbey was re-edified.»

885. Died the Abbot Flan M‘Cellach.*

The situation of this abbey being found extremely bleak,
and the going to and from it highly hazardous, it was removed
to Ballineskelig, on the continent,‘ which see.

Tralee ;“ In the barony of Trughanackmy ; is a corporate
town, sending members to parliament.

A.D. 1213. A monastery for Dominican friars was founded
here under the invocation of the Holy Cross,° by the Lord
John Fitz-Thomas.!

1261. The founder, with his son Maurice, was slain in this
year by M‘Carthy More, at Callin, in the principality of Des-
mond ; they were both interred in the north part of this friary.6
Eight barons and fifteen knights unfortunately fell with Fitz-
Thomas and his son, and many others of inferior rank.

1295. The prior in this year sued Andrew le Eyschur, John
le Fleming, and sundry others, for the sum of eighty marcs.!

This became the general burial place of the Earls of Des-
mond, amongst whom we find mention of the following :—
Maurice, who died in the year 1355 ;* Maurice in 1520 ;! James
in 1529 ;™ and John in 1536; hehad been a lay-brother ; they

x Smith, p. 113. * Act.SS. p. §7. -Annal. Annon. O'Halloran, vol si., pp.
155 and 180. ° Act. SS. p.179. 9 Smith, p. 113. * War. Mon. King, p. 87.
* War. MS. vol. 34, p. 148. ® Jd. * Hanmer, p.201. | King, p. 95. Lodge,
vol. it. p. 10. Mid. p15. ™ dd. p. 16.

\ Tralee is called by the Four Masters, Traigh-Li, i.e., “the shore or strand of
the river Leigh,” a small rivulet which runs below Castlemain. The MS. account
of Kerry, preserved ,in Trinity College, Dublin (I i., 3) states, that “the traces
of the ancient friary, in this town, are at present not discernible, for it was first
burnt down in Desmond’s wars with Queen Elizabeth ; and about the year 1652
it was totally defaced by Cromwell's army, and the stones employed in buildin,
houses and fortifications. It was a convent of the Order of Preachers, found
anno 1243, by one John Fitzgerald, the son of Thomas. This John and his son
Maurice were both killed by M‘Carthy, nicknamed Feneen Ranarone, and were
buried in the church of the friary, which has ever since been the chief burying-
place of the Fitegeralds, Earls of Desmond. Before the absolute destruction of
the church, there was therein the monument of one Maurice Fitzgerald, who was
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland in 1232. He died in May 1259, and was buried there,
though Borlase says he lies interred at Youghal, in an abbey there which he him-
self founded, Ware says that that abbey was founded by one Thomas Fitzmorris
and two others in anno 1268 or 1271, both dates being after the death of this
Morris Fitzgerald.

--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-276.png ---
248 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

were all interred here" There are now no remains of this
ancient abbey, which had formerly a very fair steeple.°
Inquisition 6th October, 26th Queen Elizabeth, finds
that this friary had twelve acres of demesne lands in
Tralee, called Ballyveylan, and certain gardens adjacent
thereto: a house with two acres of arable, near the town of
Dingle, and the twentieth part of the corn of every kind in the
following lands :—Manernoa, in this county, containing four
carrucates ; Countesse-Castell, containing twenty acres; the
manor of Tralee, twelve carrucates ; Tawlaghtye, four carru-
cates; Barrowe and Knockenaghe, two carrucates ; Killivally-
lahiffe, eighty acres ; Killynecleragh, forty acres ; the park of
Dingle, five acres; Ballyee, eighty acres; Monenerye, four
carrucates ; and the manor of Island, eighty carrucates.P
Commandery ; The Knights of St. John of Jerusalem had a
commandery or hospital in this country ; for we find, that in
the year 1333, Roger Utlaugh, Prior of Kilmainham, made a
grant of it to Gilbert Ostestenan and Thomas Olethe, for the
term of their own lives, at the annual rent of two marcs ster-
ling, payable at the commandery of Any. Given at Kilkeel.4

COUNTY OF KILDARE.

Athy ;) Situated on the river Barrow, in the barony of Noragh
and Rheban. A borough town sending members to parlia-
ment.

® Lodge, vol. ii. p.16. ° Smith, p. 161. © Chief Remembrancer. % King, p. 32.

1 The following is the explanation of the word “ Athy” as given by O'Donovan
from the Book of Lecan, folio 105 A, in his edition of the Four Masters, year
634 :—“ It was at Athtruisden, near the hill of Mullaghmast, the first engagement
took place, and the men of Munster were routed thence to the river Bearbha
(Barrow), where, at Ath-I (Athy), a second battle was fought, in which Eo (or E)
son of Dergabhail, the fosterer of Eochard Fothart, was slain, and from him the
ford was called Ath-I, s.¢., the ford of Eo.”

Keating, p. 269, gives but one battle at the ford of Athrodain, #.¢., “the ford of
conflict,” now known by the name of Athy. In Lewis's Topag. Dict., vol. i. p-
go, the derivation is from “Athelehac,” #.¢., ‘the ford towards the west.”
M ‘Geoghegan, Joyce, and the Ordnance Survey Letter, adopt the common ex-
planation. The last writer adds, that Moore, in one of his poems, has given celebrity
to the battle at this ford :-—

“* While the moss of the valley grew red with their blood.”
In allusion to this bloody conflict, we have, in Dow/ing’s Annals, p. 28, the “red
ford,” and ‘‘ red meadow,” of Athy.

No dun or fort existed here (Athy) in the Irish times, but it was a walled town of
considerable importance after the arrival of the Anglo-Normans. There are no ruins
at Athy, except the south-east gate, which is still in existence, and those of the
two old parish churches, St. Michael and St. John’s.—Ordnance Survey. There
is a view and description of Athy in the Anthologia Hibernica, vol. i., p. 325+

