OCR results for Dunfermline.pdf

--- Dunfermline_page1.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page2.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page3.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page4.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page5.png ---
4

LIBER
CARTARUM ABBATIE BENEDICTINE

S.S.TRINITATIS ET B. MARGARETE REGINE

DE DUNFERMELYN

IMPRESSUM EDINBURG]
M.DCCC.XLIL,

Lop wey


--- Dunfermline_page6.png ---
EDINBURGIL: PRINTED BY THOMAS CONSTABLE
PRI

TER TO HER MAJESTY.


--- Dunfermline_page7.png ---
PRESENTED

THE BANNATYNE CLUB

THE DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM AND CHANDOS.
THE EARL SPENCER,
THE LATE EARL OF ROSSLYN,
THE RIGHT TON. THOMAS GRENVILLE,
THE LATE ROBERT FERGUSON, ESQ. OF RAITH,
JAMES LOCH, ESQ.

JOHN RICHARDSON, ESQ.


--- Dunfermline_page8.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page9.png ---
THE BANNATYNE CLUB.

OCTOBER, MDCCCXLIL.

THOMAS THOMSON, ESQ.
PRESIDENT.

THE EARL OF ABERDEEN,

THE VISCOUNT ACIIESON,.

VICE-ADMIRAL SER CHARLES ADAM.

THE EARL OF ASHBURNITAM.

LORD BELHAYV AND HAMILTON.

ROBERT BELL, ESQ.

WILLIAM BELL, ESQ.

WILLIAM BLAIR, ESQ.

REVEREND PHILIP BLISS, D.C.L.

JOHN BORTHWICK, ESQ.

BERIAH BOTFIELD, ESQ.

THE MARQUESS OF BREADALBANE.

SIR THOMAS MAKDOUGALL BRISBANE. BART.
GEORGE BRODIE, ESQ.

CHARLES DASITWOOD BRUCE, ESQ.

O. TYNDALL BRUCE, ESQ.

THE DUKE OF BUCCLEUCH AND QUEENSBERRY.
THE DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM AND CELANDOS.
20 JAMES CAMPBELL, ESQ.



--- Dunfermline_page10.png ---
AC

THE BANNATYNE CLUB.

DAVID CARNEGY, ESQ.

SIR GEORGE CLERK, BART.

WILLIAM CLERK, ESQ.

HON. H. COCKBURN, LORD COCKBURN, (VICE-PRESIDENT.)
DAVID CONSTABLE, ESQ.

ANDREW COVENTRY, ESQ.

JAMES T. GIBSON CRAIG, ESQ. (TREASURER.)

WILLIAM GIBSON CRAIG, ESQ.

GEORGE C OUN, ESQ.

JAMES L NISTOUN, ESQ.

GEORGE DUNDAS, ESQ.
RIGHT HON. WILLIAM DUNDAS, LORD CLERK REGISTER.
LORD FRANCIS EGERTON.

SIR CHARLES DALRYMPLE FERGUSSON, BART.

COUNT MERCER DE FLAHAULT.

WILLIAM GOTT, ESQ.

ROBERT GRAHAM, ESQ.

LORD GRAY.

RIGHT HON, TILOMAS GRENVILLE,

THE EARL OF HADDINGTON.

THE DUKE OF HAMILTON AND BRANDON.

EDWARD W. DRUMMOND HAY, ESQ.

SIR THOMAS BUCHAN HEPBURN, BART.

JAMES MAITLAND HOG, ESQ.

HON, JOHN HOPE, LORD JUSTICE-CLERK.

COSMO INNES, ESQ.

DAVID IRVING, LL.D.



--- Dunfermline_page11.png ---
Go JA)

70

THE BANNATYNE CLUB.

HON. JAMES IVORY, LORD [VORY
SIR HENRY JARDINE
HON, FRANCIS JEFFREY, LORD JEFFREY.
THE EARL OF KINNOULL.
DAVID LAING, ESQ. (SECRETARY.)
THE EARL OF LAUDERDALE.
YERY REVEREND PRINCIPAL 1
LORD LINDSAY.
JAMES LOCH, ESQ.
LORD LOVAT.
ALEXANDER MACDONALD, ESQ.

‘J. WH. MACKENZIE, LORD MACKENZIE,
S MACKENZIE, ESQ.
JOHN WHITEFOORD M
WILLIAM FORBES MAC
JAMES MAIDMENT, ESQ.
THOMAS MAIT

. DD.

KENZIE, ESQ.
ZTE, ESQ.

HON. A. MACONOCHIE, LORD MEADOW BANK.
THE VISCOUNT MELVILLE,

THE HON, WILLIAM LESL
WILLIAM HENRY MILLER,
THE EARL OF MINTO,
HON. SIR J. W. MONCREIFF, BART.. LORD MONCREIFF.
JAMES PATRICK MUIRHEAD, ESQ.

HON, SIR JOHN A. MURRAY, LORD MURRAY.
WILLIAM MURRAY, ESQ.

MACVEY NAPIER, ESQ.

MELVILLE



--- Dunfermline_page12.png ---
THE BANNATYNE CLUB,

ROBERT NASMYTH, ESQ.

SIR FRANCIS PALGRAVE,

LORD PANMURE,

SIR THOMAS PHILLIPPS, BART.
EDWARD PIPER. E
ROBERT PITCAIR S
ALEXANDER PRINGLE, ESQ.

St

THE EARL OF ROSEBERY.
THE DUKE OF ROXBURGHE.
ANDREW RUTIHERFURD, ESQ.
THE EARL OF
JAMES SKEN ib
WILLIAM SMYTIIE, Es
THE EARL SPENCER,
90 JOUN SPOTTISWOODE, ESQ.
EDWARD STANLEY, ESQ.
THE HON. CHARLES FRANCIS STUART.
THE DUKE OF THERLAND,
ARCILIIBALD SWINTON, Q.
ALEXANDER TILOMSON, ESQ,
WALTER CALVERLEY TREV
DAWSON TURNER, ESQ.
ADAM URQUHART, ESQ.
RIGHT HON. SIR GEORGE WARREN DI BART.
lwo THE VENERABLE ARCHDEACON WRANGHAM,

ILYAN. ESQ.



--- Dunfermline_page13.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page14.png ---
Jeted ast git Get (4 Andetrsmime Sntiae (e
Indit ete filus ding vais Saté Qin ad offiait rim
nommnrs Peare Teka vi edifice 1que edtficdta titer
mimielant emendare:ngnii durmus agin ed,
DunfirrlenS oftrmanda erie. (ubpans rte-mallecd

eet
lee FF aeevee Gon Velie at!
Sunfevmtny w (af Quy ofine month
f of Tuli ye ier off one (2D 9 thonfard
CZ poueigundzoth thvette 1(e6yr- Dre Ge Robart]
“of Cenenftoy of Semen ToGH of cobBury of

‘eree")

pertef monattRun Se BimPrehisarss hg Sen ener Capty Burka P~ vena Se CrlenP.A EA AS SPs
WHXng pone mond Mian Se Crtem®-$.gr Poop Sen Pict Capt Bunkelgrc: Cop fr Se Bunk Grama MenaQe artis”
slabifi firnmedee whuarid: Lpuse? Bas ay. Cont & AP aT agli retip prt aginety, Bio ERCP Be Rarmed: Dai?
Nite Se (jiu aair hanfale pet SETA Praia SE Come agus Grfhne y Cepia disp Sm Come!’ afano
caplts Comite 7 tulad Ais. LAS anne we: a cee eh. Apud Bunf2aD patty

Tomy

aunnerenequuiimt WBE Qtr finan WT p af. fep.man fe : hd ae

mu nant Bey Q Feat inquncites fry praifRe uy yor
Teedig gunencia Siew pln? pocktie renee ora tingle g muerte RRA a ie uot %
figihl-vits p Refer Hiatt Tfrrtear@-Tegend q® wepAreHiRrinmG- Afro nde. Hae huge
{aug Porn P iti anno my.


--- Dunfermline_page15.png ---
PREFACE.

‘Tercor, the confessor of Saint Margaret, relates, that immediately after her marriage
with Malcolm 11., the Queen, in that place where the nuptials were velebrated, as a
lasting memorial of her name and her piety, founded a ehureh, which she dedicated
to the Holy Trinity, and enriched with numerous ornaments, vessels of solid gold.

and an inestimable eru :

ifix, formed of gold, silver and precious ston

This passage, of the best authority, seems partly to countenance the narrative
of Boece, who, after detailing the storm which drove the fleet with the on Princes
into the Firth of Forth, and their sheltering in the road still ealled Saint Margaret's
Hope,’ gives his usual romantic colouring to the incident. Maleolm, who then
resided at Dunfermlin, sent envoys to enquire of what lineage and country the strangers

were,—

Sed vos qui tandem, quibus aut venistis ab oris,
Quove tenetis iter?
And having learned that they were of the line of the Confessor, his benefactor,

received them with courtly honour, and ina few days proposed mary
of the Saxon prince.

ge to the sister

This auspicious marriage took place certainly not later than the year 1070

‘= { can speak more confidently of these, as 1 was And all the weddrys in thaire fi
appointed by the Queen to take charge of them, and Wes to thare purpose all contrayre,
Jong had them in my enstody."— Fite Murgerete apud ‘That of fors, as wynd thame movyd,
Rolanulum et Pinkerton, See also Fordun. Come in the fyrth than thame behowyd,
2 Wyntoun gives the aceount of the Saxon princes And in Saynt Margretis Hope he-lyve
being driven by stress of weather into the Firth: — Of propyre nede than till arryve,
“ Quhen this Edgare Ethly On this manere Saynt Margret,
That of laweh suld have bene kyng, In-til the kynryk apon thret
The kynryk saw dystrowblyd swa, Come of hapnyng in Seotland,
Of cownsale wyth hys systrys twa, Quhen Maleolme in it wes kyng ryngnand.”
A sechype he gat and tuk the se. Fordun also states, that the place where the Saxon
For to pas agayne thoweht he princes landed was called Sinus $, Margurete ; and

And arryve in the Empyre, follows Turgot in placing the nuptialsat Dumfermilin.
Quhare-of than lord wes his gud-syr. v.16, 17,

And as thai ware on se sayland,
‘The wynd swa skant wes than blawand,

3 The chronicle of Melros, in an old interpolation,
es the date of the martiage of Maleolm and Mar-



--- Dunfermline_page16.png ---
x PREFACE.

and if it was celebrated at Dunfermlin, we must suppose that at that early period it
It probab!
Maleolm, for otherwise the Queen’s confessor and constant attendant could not have
had the personal custody of the treasures of the new chureh.

The situation of Dunfermlin, within an easy distance of the principal streugths

was already a Royal residence.

y continued to be so during the reign of

of Seotland, and protected from Southern invasion by the Scoteuter, is likely euough
to have marked it out as a suitable residence of the Court; and the local tradition
which conneets a very ancient tower in the grounds of Pittenerieff, with the name of
Maleolm Canmore, may perhaps point to the rude dwelling of Royalty before the
new convent. with the pleasant site whieh marks all the houses of the Benedictines.
and the comparative Juxury whieh churehmen first knew to throw around their
dwellings, allured the Sovereign to become an inmate of the eloister.

Dunfermlin continued for many generations peculiarly a Royal House. Its
carly benefactors were all Kings ; and in imitation of its saintly founder, the sneceed-
ing Princes of the Royal Family of Seotland for the most part chose it
of burial.

s their place

Before the rwde awtare wyth honowr
Scho wes layd in haly sepulture.
Thare hyre Jord wes layd alsua,
And wyth thame hyre sowmnis twa,
Edwarde the first and Ethelred.

Saynt Margretis body a hundyy yhere
Lay befor the rwd awtere,
Into the kyrk of Dwnfermlyne ;
Bot scho wes translatyd syne
Into the qwere quhare scho no
Her spyrit intil paradys.
And of that translatyowne.
Made wyth weneratiowne,
The fest yhit is haldyne ay
Befor mydsumyr the fyft day?

garet 106
year 1070,

but the record itself, places it in the in se munitissimus, densiseima silva cireumdatus,
preruptis rupibus premunitus, in cujus medio erat

© Nuptive quidem fact suntnon procul a sinu maris,
quo applicuit et magnifice celebrate s.0. 1074, loco
qui dicitur Dumfermelyn quem tune temporis Rex
habebat pro oppidlo. Erat enim locus ille naturaliter

venusta planities etiam rupibus et rivulis munita, ite
quod de ea dictum esse putaretur,
non homini facilis,

Fordun. v.17.

adeunda teris."—
# Wyntoun. sii, 3.



--- Dunfermline_page17.png ---
PREFACE. xi

Who were the first oceupants of the Abbey, we do not find.

Tt has been gene-

rally stated that the house was only a Priory until the time of David,—an opinion

which scems to have no other foundation than the occurrence of a Peter, Prior of

Duntermlin, among the amb

cadors to England in 1120.1

It eannct now be neces-

sary, even in Scotland, to remark, that the existence of a Prior does not preelude the

existence of an Abbot.

and to have placed in it an Abbot and twelve monks from Canterbury.”

David L. appears to have remodelled the original foundation,

The Chureh,

as completed or restored by him, was dedicated in 1150.

David's first’ Abbot was
He wy

eximic,

as ordained by Bishop Robert of Saint Andre

Geoflry, formerly Prior of Canterbury, eér religionis

vs in 1128.7 died in

1154, and was suecceded by his nephew of the same names

Galfridus the second died in 1175."

Archibald. or Erkenbald, was the next Abbot.

It wonld appear that the use

of the initial letter only of his name in instruments, has produced the mistake of

Robert de Berewiek was his successor

ving Alanus as the name of the Abbot in his time.7

Avebibald died in 1198.
* who was deposed, probably for irregu-

lavities. by the Cardinal Legate John de Salerno, a.p, 1202."

Patrick, sub-prior of Durham, was chosen to succeed him,

4 He is a witness in

trausaetions along with William de Malvoisin, Bishop of St. Andrews,” and it must
have been during his incumbeney that that lordly prelate is said to have levied on

the Abbey the mulet of no less than two churches, for supplying wine too scantily
in the Bishop's chamber, when visiting Dunfermlin,*
We hear of no other Abbot till William ; and all we have recorded of him is

his death in 1238.
~ Galfridus prior ejnsd
He died in 1240.

1 donmus suceessit,”™ but held the office only two years.

His suecessor was Robert, a monk of the convent, of the local surname of Kel-

deleeht,—probably the same name whic

Eadmer.
+ Forduny vs 48,
3 Chronic, S, Crucis,
* Florence of Worcester.
Chvon. 8. Crucis, Fordun, xii. 60,
© Chronic, Maitr, Fordun, viii. 25. Chron, 8, Crucis,
* Alanus is among the witnesses named in (the copy
of) a charter of William the Lion, before the Chan-
cellorship of Hugo. Registr. de Pusselet, 100,
» Muir.
2 Mailr.
© Furdun, viii,

|, after passing

through many phases. has

1 Fordun, ibid.

1 Regist. priorat, 8, Andree,

8 Abstulit a domo de Dunfermelyn, voluntane ut
Uicitur, collationem vieariarum de Kinglassy et de
Hales, quia quadam vice dum apud Dunfermelyn per
noctaret, defecit sibi potus viniad collationem ineamera
sua, et boe non ex defectu ministrorum monacho
rum, sed suorum, qui deliberato sibi ad sufficientiam,
minus caute expendendo, ante tempus consumprerunt,
vordun, vie 42.
“4 Mailr,  Fordun, ix. 53.
18 Muilr.

© Mail


--- Dunfermline_page18.png ---
xii

settled into that of Kinloch.
solenmn translation of Queen Margaret.
of Alexander IIT ;—

PREFACE.

In his time, after much negotiation, took place the

It was in 1250, the year of the coronation

That yhere wyth weneratyown
Wes made the translatyown

Of Saynt Margret,
A fayre my’

kil thare wi

the haly qwene.

sene :

The thryd Alysandyre bodyly,

Thare wes wyth a gret cumpany

Of erlys, byschapy

And mony famo

. and barownys,

S gret persownys :

Of Saynt Andrewys thare wes be name
The Byschope Davy of Barnhame :
Robert of Kyleleth syne

That Abbot wes of

Dunfermlyne.

Powere had thai than at fulle

Grawntyd be the Pap

To mak that tr

bulle.t

And that to do thai mad thame bowne.
And fayniyt to gere the body
Translatyd be of that lady.

Wyth all thare powere and thare slyeht
Her body to rays thai had na mycht,
Na lyft hyr anys owt of that plas.

Quhare scho that tyme lyand wa

For all thare devotyownys,

Prayer

aud gret orysownys,

That the persownys gadryd there
Dyd on devot manere ;

Quhyll

t thai tuk wpe the body

Of hyr lord that lay thare-by,

In 1246, Innocent IV, at the instance of the
Scotch King, granted 2 commission to enquire into
the life, merits, and miracles reported of Queen Mar-
garet. (NV. 281.) In the following year he issued
a new commission, because the former commissioners
had made an imperfect report, giving neither the
names of the witnesses, nor their actual depositions,

and hecanse “non sit eurrendum in talibus™ (285.)
And from two bulls of Octoher 1249, (N. 290, 291.)
we gather, that His Holiness had been at length satis-
fied, and had allowed to Margaret the honour of eanon-
ization; and indulgences to the faithful visiting her
shrine on the day of her festival.



--- Dunfermline_page19.png ---
PREFACE. xiii

And bare it bene into the quere.
Ly: re manere

syne on

Hyr cors thai tuk wp and bare ben,

vd togyddyr then.
vd thare

And thame ente
Swa trowyd thai all than gad
Quhat honoure til hyr lord sebo
Swa, this myrakil to record
Notis gret reverens dwne til hyr lord ;
As scho oysyd in hyr lyf,
Quhen scho wes hys spousyd wyt.

Of this sulempne translatyowne

Befor thare is mad mentyown :

Bot thare is noueht notyd the yhere.

Na this myrakil wryttyn here,

That suld noueht have bene forghet

For the hononre of Saynt Margret.!
Abbot Robert beeame Chancellor of the kingdom, and had inflnence enough to obtain
the privilege of exercising within their
and using the insignia of Bishops. From this tine Dunfermlin
Being mixed up with the obsenre plot of Alan of

from the Pope, for him and his suecessor
Abbey the functions
became a mitred Abbaey:
Durward, in the early part of the reign of Alexander IIL, Robert relingui
his office of state and his Abbacy in 1252, and retired as a simple monk into the
Abbey of Newbotle, from whence he again emerged to become Abbot of Melrosx in
12

hed both

which office he held for three years till his death.
John, prior of the Convent, cir mira mansuetudinis, was made Abbot in 1252,
ation of Robert! It appears that Dunfermlin, with other religious

on the resigi
houses of Scotland, was subjected to a Papal interdict for default of sums it had
undertaken to pay for promoting tho confirmation of Gamelin the new Bishop of St
Andrews. In 1256, Abbot John set out for Rome to negotiate the release of his
Honse, but died on the road at Pontig

Matthew, the cellarer, was the next Abbot. who was dead before 1270; for in

that year we find
Simon, Abbot of Dunfermlin

sent with the Karl of Mar, a adors to Eng-

of State, p.13,) who calls him a monk of Newbotle
7 Fordun, ix. 56.4,
> Muitr., correcting the error of Crawfurd, (Ogivers + Tidy x. 4. 5 Mid, x. 1M. «Tid.



--- Dunfermline_page20.png ---
xiv PREFACE.

land, for the recovery of the King’s Earldom of Huntingdon. He was deposed in
1275, by the Legate Baiamund, and must have deserved his sentence, since Fordun,
who was no admirer of Cardinals or Legates, says he was punished “ ob énnatun
animé pertinaciam et intolerabilem operwn proterciam.”?

Ralph de Grenlaw, the sub-prior, “ ei mansuctus ac providus, ac in monastica
disciplina satis exercitatus,” succeeded in the Abbacy. He is found in transactions
recorded in the Register, in 1280 and 1284; and in 1291 he did homage to Edward
in person at Dunfermlin, and again at Berwick in 1296.°

Hugh is said to have been Abbot of Dunfermlin in the 7th year of Robert 1.4

Robert de Crail was Abbot in 1316, when Dunean Earl of Fife did homage to
him for the lands of Cluny, held of the Abbey

Alexander Ber became Abbot in 1381,

in capite.®

He held the office for twenty-two
years, and having made a journey to Rome to solicit a grant of a general indul-
gence, he and his whole company died (apparently of the plague) in Lombardy on
his way home in 1353.

The Convent elected® in his room John Blak, their cellarer. But John of
Stramiglaw, a young monk of the Abbey. then studying at Paris, hurried to Avig-
non, and obtained a Papal presentation to the Abbacy, whieh Blak did not think
proper to resist, but accepted from his rival first a pension and afterwards the Priory
of Urehard in Moray, a cell of the Abbey.’—Here, unluekily, we lose our faithful
chronicler, old John of Fordun. The measured terms in which he speaks of the
juggle by which John of Stramiglaw obtained the Abbacy, leave the impression that
he was still in office while the historian was writing, and therefore not to be lightly

spoken of!

Fordun,
5 Ragman Boll
313. Father Hay, quoting a charter, § N. 349,
© Per licentiam patroni domini Regis et consilio
Diocesani, elegerunt” &e.  Fordun, xiv. 8.

? Fordun, xiv. B.

> The story is curious; Eodem tempore mona-
chus quidam ejusdem monasterii Johannes de Stramig-
law uomine, studens Parisius, timensque dispendium
imminere monasterio sun propter reservationem gene-
ralem factam per Summum Pontificem de omnimodis
dignitatabus eorum qui decesserunt in hujusmodi pere-
grinatione : ne ista dignitas devolvetur in manus eujus
dam estranei, curiam Avinionensem adiit et impetra.
vit abbaciam de Dumfermelyn per bullas Apostolicas.
His vero auditis. dictus dominus Johannes Blak, con-
sultus per seculares et dominos temporales ne cederet
dlignitati sue abbaciali aut ipst Apostolico quoquo:

2 Ibid, x. 3b.

modo, dissimulavit : sed cognitis reservatione Apos-
tolica et collatione facta per bullas sihi Papales, dum
ipse Apostolicus cemeteruim monasterii cum paucis
intravit, abbas prefitus, de consilio fratrum suorum,
pro conservatione indempnitatis monasterii, ecclesi-

ornatus indumentis et mitratus, procedens ei
obviam, convent processionaliter subsequente. ipsam
mitram capiti Apostolici et baculum pastoralem manu
ejus imposuit, cum Te Deum Landamus canora voce
ad chorum et altare perdusit, et facta oratione, eum
iustallari non minus humiliter quam hilariter effecit ;
obedientiam manualem flexis genibus, prius prestitit,
aliis consimiliter suhsecutis, Cui vice versa Apostolicus
se gratum exhibebat, sibi de honesta pensione provi-
endo: qui postea in Priorem de Urehard est electus.”
Qui quidem Johannes de Stramiglaw pro taxatione
sui monasterii facta in curia, solvit camer A posto:
lice 50 marcas sterlingorum,



--- Dunfermline_page21.png ---
PREFACE. XV

Johu de Torry He held
the office on the 4th December 1404,! and we find him increasing the allowances of
his monks, en the statement of increased dearness of clothing, on the 13th Jane 1409."

William de Sancto Andrea was Abbot of Dunfermlin in 1414 and 1419." of
whom nothing is known but his name.

the next Abbot whose name we find mentioned.

On the last day of July 1437.4 we find Andrew Abbot, who appears in- many
transactions till the month of January 1441

On the 16th day of December 1446, Richard de Bothuel appear
Duntennlin,® and he figures in numerous transactions of the Abbey ait
the latest of which recorded is of the 4th of May 1468.7
4th November 1472."

It is to the occasion of the vaeaney by his death, we owe a notable passage of

as Abbot of
that date,
He was dead before the

Bishop Leslye on the abuses of Court patronage :

~The Abbaeye of Dunfermeling vacand, the Convent cheisit ane of thair awn
monkis, eallit Alexander Thomsoun ; and the King promovit Henry Creyehtoun.
Abbot of Paislay, thairto, quha wes prelerrit be the Paip, through the Kingis sup-
plicationis, to the saide abbaeye. And sie lik Mr, Robert Schaw, persoun of Mynte.
was promovit be the King of the Abbacye of Paisley. And sua than first began sie
maner of promotione of seeularis to abbacies be the Kingis supplicationis ; and the
godlie erectionis war frustrate and dekayde, becans that the Court of Rome admittit
the princis supplicationis, th
money thairt

rather that thay gat greyt proffeit and sowmex of
; quhairfore the bischoppis durst not conlerme thame that wes chosen
And
cam to secular abussis, the Abbots and Pryonris being promovit
‘ort. yuha levit courtlyk, secularlye, and veluptuouslye. And than
ceissit all religions and godlye myndis and deidis: quhainwith the secularis and
temporal men beand sklanderit with thair evill example, fell fra all devoeioun and

he the Convent; nor thay quha wer electit durst not persew thair awn ryght.
sua the Abbay
furth of the

godlynes to the warkis of wikednes, quhairof daylie mekil evill did increase."

VL 398, oN. 399,
7, 401, 402, +N, 406,
5M, 42: oN. 423.
474.

duvitiee quae ad pauperum miserias levandas sepositie
fuerant, posteaad divitum explendas voluptates evoca-
buntur, Non jam Abbates qui pietate prestabant sunt
clecti a monacbis, sed qui gratia valebant selecti a

* Leslye, Eatit, Edin, V830, p. 39, Tt was incon-
venient to publish such strictures at Rome, and accord-
ingly, the Roman edition says nothing of the Pope's
yielding to the temptation of “profieit and sowmes of
money.” ‘The passage in the Latin version ends in a
higher flight :—* Interea temporis pie contributiones
eleemosynaque in deliciarum ahusum converse, et

Regibus, Pro Bernardis et Benedictis homines ex
aulicorum greye, voluptatibus et deliciis servientes
sunt substituti ; unde vitio atque odio secularium im
monasteriis impie helluantium ipsi ecelesiastiei in
populi offensiones maxime ineurrebant."” esl. de re.
west, Scot. ad an, ATA,


--- Dunfermline_page22.png ---
xvi PREFACE.

Henry Creichtoun, the King’s Abbot, held the office till after 6th May 1482.

Adam was Abbot from 1483, till 20th June 1490.2

George is said to have been Abbot in 1496.2 and was Abbot, 4th February 1499.

Robert Blacader is said to have been Abbot of Dunfermlin, and to have died in
his journey to Syria in 1500.4

James Stuart, second son of King James IIL., Duke of Ross aud Arehbishop
of St. Andrews, held the Abbacy of Dunfermlin é commendam from 1502 till his
death in 1504.

His succe

or in the Abbacy was James Beton, then Provost of Bothwell, after-
wards Bishop, Arehbishop aud Primate, who held it mntil promoted to the Bishoprick
of Galloway in 1508, or perhaps till the return from Italy, in 1510, of hi

destined

suee

or.

This was Alexander Stuart. natural son of King James 1V., Archbishop of St.

Andrews, and Legate a Iatere. a prince whom E

mus, uot in mere flattery, cha-
s his father.S He held
the Abbaey ¢x commendam till his death at the field of Flodden, 1513.

The Abbacy, with other great henefices, was now a subject of fieree contention
hetween the family of Hepburn and Andrew Forman, Avehbishop Legate,—a dispute
which ranked all the nobility of Scotland with one or other of the parties. James
Hepburn assumed the title of Abbot in 1515,° as chosen by the Convent. The Le-

racterised as worthy to spring of a king, and of such a king

gate held a prior grant from the Pope. The law was not quite clear; but, at any
. in the regency of Albany. The Regent endea-
voured to appease the factions by a compromise, in 1517; and the Abbacy of Dun-
fermlin fell to the share of the Archbishop, while James Hepburn had the Bishop-
rick of Moray. Andrew Forman was buried in the Abbey Chureh in 1

James Beton, Arehbishop of Glasgow. who succeeded Forman in the Primacy.
was his successor also in the Abbacy of Dnnfermlin, which he held a second time
in commendam, and afterwards styled himself usufructuarius, or administrator fruc-
tuum, while he allowed the name and probably devolved the duties of Abbot on
George Dury.

rate, it was not heard in sueh eas

George Dury, Archdeacon of St. Andrews, styled himself Abbot of Dunfermlin
in 15302 and he continued to take the title of Abbot or Commendator, apparently
subordinate to the Archbishop, during the life of the latter. After the Primate

© Erasmi Adapt,

© Cruwfierd, Treasurers, 369.
. + Keith,

+ Putler Hay. ©, 313, ete,



--- Dunfermline_page23.png ---
PREFACE. xvii

death, in 1539, he acted as Abbot or commendator. The latest deeds of the Ancient
Register are granted by hint, and in two of the volumes of feu-eharters, he is the

granter down to the year 1560, when he went to France ; and it is uncertain if he

ever returned!

Robert Piteairne, of the opposite party, apparently by some friendly arrange-
ment, succeeded Dury in his Abbaey, as well as in the ottice of Archdeacon of St.
Andrews. He joined the party of the Regent Moray, beeame Secretary, and was
much trusted and employed in many of the negotiations of that distracted p
In 1583, he was denounced rebel for his share in the raid of Ruthven,’ and in 1585.
Patrick, Master of Gray, had a Crown grant of the Abbacy,? whieh, on his disgrace

riod.

in 1587, was granted to George Earl of Huntlies

Tn 1593, an Act of Parliament was passed, declaring the Abbacy of Dunferm-
lin perpetually annexed to the Crown; and another, ratifying the gift of it made to
the Queen for her life in morowing-gift at Upslo 24th November 1589. In 1612,
Parliament ratified an infeftment by the Sovereign, of date 7th March 1593, on the
to the Queen and her

resignation of “ Henry Pitearne of that ilk, as eommendator,
heirs, with all infeftments granted by her?

A meagre list like that now furnished, of the Superiors of a single religions
house, will, it is feared, to most readers, seem eqnally tedious and useless. It will
he acceptable to the few who have groped their way through the obseurer periods of

Seoteh history, without the guides and landmarks which are furnished for such

es; and it will be even more valued by the explor

study in other civilised eountri
of the local antiquities of the distriet, who, in the confusion of a pedign

© OF progress.

1 Upoun the xxix day of Januar [1550], theerle — mayster robert pytearne our suevessour fo the sume, and
of Eglintoun and the abbot of Dunferling past to convent theiruf cheptowrlicyrdtherit,” &e., which is dated

France furth of Dunbar." Diurnal of Uccurrents, Sat Dunferuting, the titi day of Aprit, the wir jM eC
Dempster intimates that he sutfered martyrdom —threesooir thre yeris,"— Vol. Hy fol. 31.

and was canonized, Passus est anno 1561 27 Jan- 2 Spotiswood.ud.an, Pitcairn fled to England, but

uarii: biennio post, beatus ab Apostolica sede renunei- returned and died at Duntermlin, where he was buried

atus, die Ang. 6.°—Dempsteri hist, ecel, in 1584, aged 64. His monument is still to be seen
He seems to have been alive for several years after in the ancient church, A house in the town, which

the date here assigned. He granted charters, or at is said to have helonged to him, has the following

least his name is inserted in charters so late as 1364. scription over the door, :

(5 November 1364, Vol, 11. 0f Regist, Alicn, fut, 45.) SEN VORD 1S THRADL AND THOCHT 15 FRE

A tack of the office of bailiary of the Regality of KEIP WEILL THY TONGE J COINSEIL THE,

Dunfermlin, in favour of David Dury of that ilk, 5 Ratified in parliament 1585, Act purl, TIL, 412.

runs in the following style:—* George be the grace of +1587, Ratified in parliament.

God commendatar of the abbey of Dumferntyng, and 5 Act purl. IV. p. ATA.

b


--- Dunfermline_page24.png ---
xviii PREFACE,
has often longed for something to fix the era of undated charters o
only in connexion with the Abbot of the day.’

Like the other of Scotland, Dunfermlin acquired the great
mass of its property at a very early period of its history; and the acquisition of a
considerable portion may be ascribed to the period immediately succeeding the
restoration of Maleohn HI., when the national convulsion, and the defeat of the
other great party, placed in the power of the Crown a great quantity of disposable
property Tu th it
1. and his successors, so far as they consisted in landed estates, it would appear that
other parties soon aequired a quasi title of possession under the Church.

events recorded

reat monasterie:

possessions, as well as in those heaped on the Abbey by David

Long
before fon-charters were granted, and probably without the solemnity of any written
titles, we find families holding extensive lauds hereditarily under the Abbot, and
vindicating in them some right of property. When disputes occurred, the Abbot, who
had not only the keeping but the framing of his own record, had. of course, the
betters or if in any instances he was unsuccessful, such events were not
find a place in this

ely to
Register.

The palpable temptation to deceit in framing their Registe

and the opportu-
nity for it enjoyed by the only reading and writing elas

of the community, lead us
to examine somewhat critically, the records by whieh a great house like Dunfermiin

lield its possessions. But this is really a more serious enquiry to a Seotehman. We
have here a great Register professing to record, in an uubroken series, Papal privi-
leges, Royal charters, and the deeds of Nobles and Princes, from the beginning of the
12th century down to the Reformation, and reaching back, at least in early na
tive, to transactions of the 11th century.
contempora

1

Of the early part of that period, no other
exist, except such grants and deeds as compose this Register.
Therefore, upon their authority ultimately—by the style of these writs—by the
incidental information afforded by them—by the absence of ull reference to customs,

record:

+ Je must appear strange to the charter scholar, how most earnestly towards the local history and early

historical antiquities could be studied at all, before the
industrious Keith published his lists of Bishops, and
Crawfurd his imperfect Officers of State. But a
Superior of one of the greater monasteries is almost,
as frequent a witness as a Bishop ; and yet nothing
has been done to collect the chronological aids from
this source, Each mariner here must construet his
almanacks and tables for himself, ‘The foundation of
the above list of the Abbots of Dunfermlin, was laid
by a gentleman, who. in his zealous study of Scotch
antiquities and history, still directed his attention

statisties of his native county of Perth, and who w:
fully aware of the importance of the monastic records
in pursuing that study. Among deeper causes of
regret for his untimely death, a friend and fel
labourer may be allowed to deplore that his taste and
industry should have left so few memorials :—
Flere et meminisse relictum est,

“The charters of David L,, show that, of the lands
confirmed by him, the greater part flowed from the
grants of his father and brothers,



--- Dunfermline_page25.png ---
PREFACE. Nix

faws, and institutions. which must hare been mentioned if they existed—imust be settled
some of those great questions of history and constitutional law, and even of national
independence, which have been so long and warmly diseussed in this country.

‘The Ancient Register of Duntermlin has long been preserved in the Advocates
Library at Edinburgh.’ Thongh recently bound, it is otherwise in precisely the
same state as when it formed the subject of the research and labour of the first Earl

of Haddington? more than two centuries ago.

That careful antiquary has left

among his collections

ster, a table of its contents.
both of which have been used for the present work,’ and a great body of extracts
intended to throw light on the ancient tenures and forms of conveyancing of Scotland.

Like all Registers of this kind, the MS, is of very different ages. In truth.
the ancient Record has served as a nucleus, round whieh have been gathered the

a minute description of this Re

Ina few instances, deeds of later date have
been interpolated on blank pages among the more ancient writs ; but these are easily

suecessive decds of the Monastery.
distinguishable by the form of writing as well as the substance. Withont at pre
xent noticing these farther, we may speak of what Haddington calls “ The Auld
Registre,” as ofa methodical compilation, and though not alway:
forming a definite portion of the volume.

It is arranged under heads ;—Charters of the Kings from David to Alex. IL:
the Bishops of Saint Andrews® and Dunkeld ;7 the Chapter of St. Andrews :# the
Earls of Fife’ and Athol; Countesses Ada and Ela;" Charters of Laymen
Covenants and conventions regarding disputed territories and Bulls of Popes.!* The
hand writing of the greater part of the Record now deseribed, may be aseribed, without
much doubt, to the reign of Alexander IT. or the early half of the 13th century,

s placed contiguously,

111 wasin that Library in the time of Bishop Nichol
son (Histor. Libr.) and Dalrymple, xt the end of the
37th century.

2 Mr. Robertson, in his useful “index of charters”
while describing a volume of Haddington’s collections,

SMS, Adv. Libry BA 1 (AL A.W.)
is the volame descrihed by Mr. Robertson. Earl
Haddington does not state where the Register was
deposited when he used it.

* Profixed, under the general title, Tihu'u. All

mentions a part, entitled, « Cletelorue Minute of the

Register of Dunfermeting,” and adds,“ of the fate of
the books to which this part of the volume relates, the
editor is ignorant. Many particnlars contained in it
seem worthy the attention of an antiquary.\—Post-
seript.p. SIvii,. While the worthy gentleman was writ

ing his note, he mnst have been in the very room, and
handling volumes from the very press, if not the same
shelf, which contained the principal of the books to
which this part of the volume relates," and the one
containing all the particulars" Mr, Robertson thought

worthy of altention.

within brackets is supplied by Lord Haddington: the
rest is from the Register itself,
5 Fol, viii, tu fol. xviii,
© Pol, xxii. fo fol, xxvic
7 Fol. Ixxv-
Fol, Inxvi.
° Pol, Ixxx.
1 Fol Axx:
2 Fol, tsxxiii,
% Pol. b oto Sol, Xcii
13 Fol, xeiv, tu fal. xeix,
M4 Fol. i, to fols ex.

bh


--- Dunfermline_page26.png ---
XX PREFACE.

As far as that reign, the Jeading part—the record of Royal Charters—is miform.
and apparently the work of one seribe, With the reign of Alexander TIL, begins
a diff
methodical classification of deeds, nor the rubricated titles and ornamented initial
letters. We find few deeds of the period of the troubles that followed the death of
Alexander IIL.; and if it may be allowed to conjecture, there was probably no
registering during that disturbed time. When order was restored under Robert,

rent hand and far Jess eareful form of registering. There is no longer the

the Reeord has been again brought into use, and the entries of deeds of that period
and subsequently, appear to have been made soon after the date of eaeh writ ;—
not, however, in any regular classifieation, and mixed frequently with others of a
much more ancient date, registered at the same time and in the same hand.
undisguisedly.

It will be observed, the Chartnlary go
of the Monastery by David I. The earlier pai
in question, must have been written in the time of hi:

sno farther back than the remodelling
, Which alone is likely to be ealled

randson, if net even

reat-

sooner; and it happens singularly that the leading Charter of eaeh reign so fits into
that of the preceding, that a fraud is rendered impossible, unless we suppose it
perpetrated by the Sovereign or his Chancellor.

Our Regist
mentioned. In the second volume of the Monasticor, Dugdale has printed a deed
purporting to be the foundation charter of Duntermlin by Malcolm IIT, on the
s Balfonr, who then stood high in estimation, We have been

does not Jose in authority by an omission whieh must now be

authority of Sir Jam
able to trace this to the eopy in Balfour's own hand ;! but nowhere is any indication

se, concordat

given of the source from which he eopied it. He uses indeed the phra
cum autographo ; but that must not go for much with those who know the * Lyone.”
His inaccuracy, for one at all addicted to historical investigation, is beyond all
example. The Charter, however, has been received and eopied by succeeding anti-
guaries2? who have endeavoured to reconcile it with history with indifferent snecess,

UMS. Ade Fibres 8.2.5. (12.29) ‘This vole great work ; and it was presented by Miss Fairfax ot
uine, which contains copies, in Balfour's own hand, — Stretton to Bishop Keith in 1754, who at his desth
of the few Seotch charters contributed to the English _hequeathed it to the Library.
collection, has a note, from which we leam that 2 Futher Hay, dipla col. Ly MS. Ade, Libr. 34.1.1.

Jes Fairfax, “a younger son to the first — Dulzym. col, p. 228, Ruddiman in profit. ad dyplom,
Lord Fairfax,and eosin germane to Sir Thomas Fair Scot., ge. Dalrymple hints that this charter “ would
fax the General, a truly learned antiquary,” had it have more eredit if Sir James had told where he had
from his “noble friende Sir James Balfour, knight it,or if it was to be found in the Register.” But none
and baronett," and sent it “forthe learned antiquary, of these eritics ventures to challenge it as a forgery.
Mr. Roger Dodsworth, to peruse and then retume." It was not popular in Seotland to dispute any proof ot
The volume appears to have been returned, after national antiquity.

having been used by Dodsworth and Dugdale for their

Colonel Ch



--- Dunfermline_page27.png ---
PREFACE.

Maleolin 1V
but as it pretends to be the foundation charter, and to grant the very lands whieh

Sir J. Dalrymple » would rather take it to be a charter by Kir

subsequent confirmatious declare to have been given to the Abbey by Malcolm and
It is hard for a Seotclunan to be
Bat in these sceptical times this charter can

Margaret, it must be of Canmore or a forgery.!

driven from the oldest Scotel writ.

ained ; and with it falls all proof of written title or of writing being

seareely be st
used in Scotland in the reign of Maleohn TIT,

The Register of Dunfennlin stands ou a better foundation; and indeed no
record is throughout freer from suspicion. The antiquity of the handwriting, and
regularity of its carly part, are certainly calenlated to give it great authority, But
it is not wanting in other supports. In the volume of original Bulls eolleeted by Sir
James Balfour,? of four granted to our Monastery, three are found recorded in our
f which one is the first in order as in date of the Roman Bulls In like
manner, the volume of Original Charters* collected by Balfour, has preserved the

Register

originals of three charters? recorded ; and the minute correspondence of the record

with the original writs, in all those eases, furnishes a satisfactory criterion of the

It is printed exactly from Balfour’s MS, in the
Appendix, N. 595, Without entering into a discus-
sion regarding theauthenticity of this apocryphal deed,
‘one or two points may be indicated whieh render it at
least most suspicious. The original hasnever beenscen,
It is not mentioned in the Register. ‘The style af Zs
dens, though adopted in a seal of a succeeding king, is a
Saxon affectation, not likely to have occurred to Mal-
colm Canmore, and very likely to have heen inyented
by some Scotch defender of the inulependence, when
that came into dispute. ‘The Earls and Barons are
too ostentatiously put forward, at a time when it
may be doubted if their respective ranks were quite
ascertained or named, ‘The acquiescence of the poopie
must he spoken of hereafter. Ii this is a torgery, the
phrase has of course been copied from the charters of
David and his successors. ‘The punning translation,
mons infirmorum, of the Celtic descriptive appellation
‘of Dunfermlin is like the trick of a more artificial age.
All the lands derived from Maleolm are heres while it
would seem, from the terms of David's confirmations,
Fothrif came by a separate gift, whether written or
oral, There is reason to suspect that Muselburge
was not a same in the days of Canmore, though the
place was conveyed by the name of Inneresk. ‘The
‘witnesses are remarkable. ‘The deed hears ta be festi-
monio Byiscoporum, &e.; and in subsequent early
charters the Bishops seem alone to have affixed their
crossof subscription, But here there is not one Bishop.
It might be dangerous to give names that would afford

easy tests of genuineness, ‘Then, without dwelling on
Ivo the Culdee Abbot, and Earls M)Duff and Duncan,
names, which might be guessed at any ante-record
period of Seotch history, we have an Earl Araldus,
who is not known ever to have existed, and a person
of the peculiar name of Nes son of William, of whom
we know nothing in Canmore’s time, while a Nes son
of William isa frequent witness about a century later.
Could the writer of the charter have adopted the name
carelessly from a charter of Maleolm IV, which he
may have mistaken for one of Canmore ?

* Adv, Libr. MSS, 15. 1. 9.

> These originals are printed verhatim in the Ap-
pendix. It will be ohserved that N. 597 corresponds
with N, 236, N, 598 with N. 276, and N, 600 with
N. 260,

1 MSS. Adv, Libr, 15.1.8.

5, 596 of the Appendix is the original of N.94,
N. 598, of N. 125,and N. 603,0f N. 298, The charter
of the Church of Kinross by Bishop Lamberton, print-
ed from the original, .tppentiz, N. 604, is not to be
found in the Register. It probably supplies one at
three charters regarding Kinross, which oceupied the
94th leaf when the # Tabill” was prefixed, which leat
~injuriu enjusdam seisoris—as Macfarlan’s copyist
has it, is now wanting. This charter of the Bishop
is evidently the conclusion of the transaction recond-
ed in N.251. It has heen eut out betine the time of
Lonl Haddington.



--- Dunfermline_page28.png ---
xxii PREFACE,

aithfulness and accuracy of the framers of the Register. When we add to this the
unusual linking on, of the great charters of the successive kings after David L., each
confirming the very terms of his predecessor's grant; and the historieal fact, that
under these charters, the Abbey possessed its vast estates for many centuries, and
down toa period quite within the reach of history—it seems really that no record
of any antiquity is established by a greater body of intrin
s that these proofs of the authenticity of this Register

ed, but chiefly from the importance that has been attached to the sty
which the leading charters of David [. and his suecessors run, > Za nomine seanete
ot individue trinitatis, Ego Dauid Dei gratia Rex Scottorum, auctoritate regia ac
potestates Episcoporwm, Comitum Baronamgue regni met confirmatione et testimunio ;
Clero etiam adquiescente et Populo :”—these are very formal terms of sanction, and te

sie and extrinsie evidence.

Tt is not of mere wantonn

ave arre je in

a mind predisposed to admit the theory, readily take the shape of a solemn legista-
tive enactment, by the authority of the King’s most excellent majesty, by and with
the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in Par-
liament assembled.! So reasonable did the inference appear, and yet so adverse to
the sound view of the introduction of our parliamentary constitution, that later en-
quirers have solved the difficulty by denying the authority of the charters founded
on. The palpable objections to the pretended foundation charter of Maleolm have
been extended to the whole; and the most authentic and venerable of our Seotch
records has been brought into question. After all, it is a mere delusion. ‘There is
no mention of parliament or general council in these charters ; no assertion of the
* parliamentary powers of the people ;~ no way has been devised in which they
vould yet express their consent as one of the three estates. If it be regarded with-

out prepossession, the preamble of these writs only sets forth in affected and imonkish
inagniloquence, that the Royal munificencewas bestowed with the general approbationof
If the evidence were much more in point, it is dangerous to build theories
of constitution on a single writ; but, unwamed by the rashness of their predecessors, we

the country

have the same error committed even in the present day, and by historical antiquaries
of uiore research and much higher name than the speculator who, out of an apo-
cryphal charter, constructed a perfect Seotch Parliament in the reign of Maleolin
Canmore?

' Dr. Gilhert Stuart, it is believed, was the first to ment. Glserentions on the Public Law of Scotlund, p.
build his constitutional theory upou the authority of 128,329,361, Well might the authoradopt his motto—
the chartersof Dunfermlin,and he was unlucky enough  Incedo per ignes

to pitch on the apoeryphal ebarter of Maleolm IIL, Supposites einer dotoso.”

while those of David might have served for his argu: 2 It is one advantage that may reasonably be hoped



--- Dunfermline_page29.png ---
PREFACE. xxiii

Nhe
st 189 pages contain what may be most correetly styled the Ancient Register, bezui
prohably early in Alexander 117s reign, and brought down nearly to the end of that
of his sou. Following the arrangement of the original, it is divided under the heads
of the different elasses

It is necessary briefly to explain the arrangement of the present volume,—

of granters. In the elass of Crown grauts,! the only liberty
used is in placing the great confirmatory charter of each reign at its commencement,
which is not always the ease in the Reeord, though it does not pretend to place them
chronologically. The charters of the Bishops? have been only so far altered in ar-
rangement as to place the snecessive Bishops im right order of suceession, Tn the

seetion of eharters of laymen,’ the order of the original has been adhered to; but the
bulls of the Popes? where ascertainable with certainty, have been oceasionally altered
in position to suit chronology.

The remainder of the Register,’ including charters interpolated on the leaves of
the most aneient part, has been arranged, not with reference to the supposed period
of registration, but in conformity with the actual or conjectural date of the varions
instruments. Those of lowest dates, least importanee, and greatest bulk. have been
abridged at the end.* It has heen endeavoured to preserve in every case the exact
operative terms of the original, and all clauses and even expressions unnsual or
other

ise interesting, as well as the names of the witnesses, where these were other
than the members of the convent.

In every book of register like the present, are found writs undated, and evi-
dently designed as styles. These have been collected, and are here placed at the
conclusion of the Abbreviates ;7 and lastly. nine entries, omitted in arranging the
work for the press, are subjoined.*

The only remaining matter of the volume, known under the name of the Char-
tulary of Dunfermlyn, is

~ tabill” of some antiquity, referring to the contents of
the volume before its more recent additions at the beginning and end. This ha~

from the publication of a great body of Scotch diplo- should he found toa court of paramount authority, like
macy, that antiquaries shall no longer he at liberty tothe curiw siptem comitum Scotie—if such a court ever
frame ancient constitutions for Scotland, to suit their existed ? See Documents und records illustrating the

reading of an insulated writ. Among several thou- —Listory uf Scotland, edited by Sir F. Palgrave, 1827.
sands of royal grants and records of transactions with YN. 1-89,
the Crown, from the time of Alexander I. down to 2N, 90-158.

Robert Bruce, if we find no other allusion to the three
estates, or to the representation of the commons in
parliament, we must adopt an interpretation of these
Dunfermlin charters, which shall be consistent with
that state of the evidence. Is it conceivable, that in
the same mass of authentic documents, no allusion



--- Dunfermline_page30.png ---
PREFACE.

been prefixed to the present work, and with the help of tables of the Earl of
Haddington, applicable to the more modern matter, has been made to serve the pur-
pose both of a reference to the ori;

inal, and a table of the contents of the printed
volume.

The contents of the first Appendix, consisting of the Apocryphal charter of
Maleolm II12 and of nine bulls and charters.? printed from the originals in the
Advocates’ Library, have been already referred to.

The Second Appendix, the Rental of the Abbacy, as taken up in 1561 and sue-
cessive years, under the Act appropriating the thirds of benefices to the ininisters of
religion and to the Crown, is printed from a volume of Lord Haddington’s Collee-
tions in the sa

me Library.

hts and other
e Abbots or Commendators of Dunferm-
lin, of the property belonging to, or held under their House; and by Queen Anne of
Denmark, “ Ladie of Dunfermelyn.” The first of these* is now in the possession of the
Marquess of Tweeddale, the heritable Baillie of the Regality of Dunfermlin. On its
first leaf it bears the following inseription;—Noewn rentale seu registrum

The Third Appendix gives the contents of five volumes of feu-
charters and leases granted by the suec

param
ad Regalitatem de Dunfermling spectantiam anno millesimo quingentesimo quingua-
gesino quinto per dominum Joannem oo... monachum professum ejusdem de man-
dato Reverendi Ceir?} Georgit Durie commendutarii Cdicti] monasterié I. Henrisone
chartarius, notarius publicus. ‘The inventory of its contents is from Haddington’s
Colleetions? collated with the original volume. The second volume’ is not now
known to exist. The inventory of its contents is copied from Lord Haddington.
The third,? of which the contents are also described from Lord Haddington
tor

nven-
now in the General Register House, and it has been collated for this work.
The inventories of the contents of the fourth volume,* which is in the pos:

ion of
the Marquess of Tweeddale, and of the fifth.’ which is preserved in the Advocates
Library, are not contained in Lord Haddington’s collections, but have been made
up from the ori,

A
may be found even richer than any of the former published chartularies. ‘These
records are gradually extending over Seotland a net-work of Joeal and charter history,

inals.

a body of ancient statistical and local information, it is hoped this volume

which will save us in future from ignorant guessers, and lay a foundation for that

2

W229)
5.1.9

Aur, Libr., 34.21, (A. 416.)

tile, Libry
We (4.4 . 4. p. 493,
ai 95. p. 496, from MS. Adv, Libr. 34,1. 3

=



--- Dunfermline_page31.png ---
PREFACE. NXV

whieh the civilization of the country demands,—a history of the early settlement
and transmission of land in cach district, Such an object ani
the study of Fami

it be well joined to

y history. It is of infinitely greater utility, and th
somewhat of the same interest that is felt in a long-deseended pedigree
ofa noble name, should uot attach to a well proved descent of

eis no

reason why

jauds.

To trace the history of the buildings of the united Church, Monastery. and
Palace of Duntermlin, would exceed the bounds of a prefatory notice, and could
not be satisfactory or intelligible without aid from drawings. The original Chureh
of Canmore, perhaps not of stone, must have been replaced by a new edifice when it

was dedieated in the reign of David Lt If any part of that structure remain. it
must be little more than the foundations. Age, or the accidents of a rough time. or

the inereasing consequence of the House,

s

ve rise to an enlarged and more magni
cent structure? about the iniddle of the 15th century, The translation of the Saintly
foundress was probably arr: | to give solemnity to the opening of the New Chureh.
Soon after that, Dunfermlin is described by one who was probably an eye-witness of
what he tells,? as of vast extent, inclosi

ng three plough-lands within its preeinets,
and containing palaces of such magnificence, that three kings, with their trains.
might be accommodated in it at once without inconvenience, This sumptuous pile
was destroyed and levelled with the ground, by the soldiers of Edward in 1303,
excepting only the Chnreh and a few dwellings for the monks.

‘The accounts of the Great Chamberlains give us some notices of the expensive
funerals and tomb of Robert Bruce at Dunfermlin, So entirely had the Hero's
tomb disappeared, that its

situation was lately discovered rather by aceideut than
historical deduction, Even local tradition afforded no assis

ance,

On the 28th March, 1561, the Lords of the Congregation * past to Stirling.
and be the way kest doun the Abbey of Dunfermling.”

The Nave of the Church of the thirteenth century remains pretty entire—
valuable specimen of the architecture of that age. ‘The Choir has been taken away
and replaced by a modem Chureh, ‘The tombs and remains of the Kings and Saints
whieh lie erowded round that old High Altar, are now unknown and dishonoured.

1 Anno 1150. Chron. S. Crucis, from all bnt the usual procurations, due at all Epis
% Ecctesia per nobilioris structure fubricum fuerit ang copal visitations, And only two days later, His Io
mentata, From the Bulls of the 7th year of Innocent ness dispensed altogether with consecration of the

1V, (1250,) we may conjecture that a dispute took Church of new, in respect that the walls of th» for
place between the Bishop and the Abbot, respecting mer Church still remained. N. 288

the amount of the dues for dedicating the Church, 3 Muttlew of Westminster, p. 44).

‘The Abbot obtained from the Pope first an exemption * Pitscottie.


--- Dunfermline_page32.png ---
vi PREFACE.

Even the grave of Robert the Bruce, which was lately opened, is not distinguished
xeept that it is said to lie below a vulgar n

nothing remains. The oldest remaining part of the Palace is

in any way oderu pulpit.

Of the C
not of higher antiquity (wnless perhaps the mere foundations) than the Lith century.

‘The greater part of the picturesque ruins is more modern. ‘The Palace must have
been still habitable on the 19th of November 1600, when Charles I. was born there.

Jt was fit that after five centuries, the last princely descendant to be born in
Scotland of the marriage of Malcolm and Saint Margaret, who was to bear to the
Anglo-Saxon throne, the blood of the Confessor, and the misfortunes of all his race,
shonld first see the light within the old walls of Dunfernlin.



--- Dunfermline_page33.png ---
TABULA.


--- Dunfermline_page34.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page35.png ---
TABULA.

Pie rani oF THE AULD REGISPRE VITUL PH TREINE EKODs.

Atheray. vi. 16.] pita
Auldesteill. fol 2a,
Abyrerumbin, je ev. evi, DN. 53. 129. 144. 213. 258,

260.)

Angnillarmm. LN. 6
Atholia, svi, [NL 85.]
Arlory. sss
Ardlethar, Is
Adthar

Beth vecidens. x
Baleristin. vi. et
Beth, xiii. xvii. xviij. Iswwiii, [.N. 66.56.87. 154]
Bethfleming.  Ixxxvi. 177. 178.]
Berwyk. xxi. xxvi. et Tix, 6.120. 461.)
Balandrum, xxi,

Balbard. xxx [N. 431.315. 314]


--- Dunfermline_page36.png ---
XXX TABULA.

Bennathtyn. Ixy, Ixxv. Ixsxxv. et exv. ij carte. [N. 489, 128. 217, 317
318, ]
Balmaemoile.
Balwery.  Ixv
Bumistona. lis. [N. +
Bulla excommunieacionis. Ixxxxvij. [N

[N. 168,]
[Ne

Callello, xxi, LN. 357.]

Cluny. iii, sxvili. exiii. Ix. Ixxi. Ixxii. Lxxiij
6-8.)

Crebarrin, vi. et Ixxxvii. vii carte. [N. 5.181, 182. 183. 184, 185. 186. 187.]
Cragmillor. vi. et Ixsxix, [N. 12, 200.]

‘uria. vi. [N.

B48. 407. 349, 497-504.

Cu
Consuetudines. vij. [N. 18.]
Cane. vij. [N. 27.]

Cummerlache. vii. EN. 32.]
Capita.

Craspes. x.
Clakinannan.

et xlvi, EN. 42. 44]
Comneneth protectio. x.

Confirmaciones Regum. viii. ix. xi. wiiii, xv. xviii, sli, [N
so. 434]

Conuentio inter nos et Priorem de May.

Custuma. xix

Creehtone.

Col

Caskybariane, xxix.

[

carte.

«2.35, 50. 50.

[N. 564.)
Ix. ii carte. Ixi, LN. 346, 369, 363, 394]

eton.

216.]

Coldinghame.
Cless. Ixxx.
Cless, sxx

iii. ii carte. Is

ii, [N. 192. 196, 213.]
Inxxv. [N. 324. 171.)
[N. 199.]
xx. PN. I72.
i. [N. 215.)

Clerbaudistone.
Cauldstanis. 1

Craumund. 1x
Cambnskymieth.
Cambusbarran.

Cupermacultj. xy.


--- Dunfermline_page37.png ---
TABULA.

Coutirmacio Dauid Regis de Regalitate iii" burgorum., bx, |X. 390.]

Confirmaciones omninm ceelesiarum per Episcopos [saneti] Andree, xxii.
xy je Ixxvi. EN. TEE, 141-118]
Confirmacio de seolis. xxii, [.N.96.]

Durnach, vii, [N. 23.]

Duonfermlyn. vii. xlviii. Ixvi, Ixxix. ii carte. [xxxilii, Ixxaviii, vii
26. 121, 122. 446, 161. 196, 396, 424, 454, 569, 595.7]

Dunkeldin 5
132.13

Dolar.

Drumkeppi.

Dingunal.

126, 127. 130,

ix, Inxv, iii carte. ci, [.N

[N. 75. 76. 427. 428.]

Dunniker.
Dundof.
Dereth.
Disart.

Eccles, vic [N. 4]
Elgyn. viii, [N. 34]

Edinburgh. ii. Ixi. et Lsii. 474.)
Edmonstone. 405, 492. 388, 224.]

Eseh. 1x:

Fyt ov
Fotbros.

i. [N. 876. 27. 78. 79. 426.)
LN. 420. 440. 393.]

Pugitini. . 68.)

. BST.

Fynglassy.
Fitkil. xii.
Fenyt

Fordoth
Fothrif. v. vii.

et xiii.
5. 469, 463
EY

BS. 436, 497. $85. #38, 430. ]

Gaseynienelf. [N. 80. 175. 176.]

. PX 4]

Grantinker.

NNNI

xvii

wp

Isl.


--- Dunfermline_page38.png ---
XXNii TABULA.

Gatmylk.  xxxiiii, dix. Ixxix. [N. 424. £55, 3.
Gellald. Ixi. [N. 891.]

Herbertoli. xvi, [N. 832.]
Hadingtomn. vi. x

Ixxniii. Ixxxviii. [N. 11. 51. 73. 159, 191.4
Hoctor como. [vii.

Hucthtor caledouir. x.

evi, evil, Oxi
00, 506, 507.]

x) sv,
3.103. 104, 409. 2
Ixxvi Ixxviii, [N. 1341

. 306]

xxvii. Lox

Inuerkethi 2 u .
[N. 46, 545, 360, 102. 838, 572. 141, 163, 165. 166. 211.

INXNXVI. CY,

[N. 13. 30.)
x. EN. 332. 361]
[N. 134. 185. 187. 306.]

227.)

hicheturphi.

Inneramund, —Ixxvi. Ixx

Inchemartyne, xx [N

Koketa, v. xix. Ix. ii carte. [N. 846. 369, 362.]

evi. DN. 29. 111. 112. 117. 118, 432.

abs

Kirkaldy, vii. xxv.
261. 267.]

Ky

worm, Xi. XNiE. NNIT. xxvi. Iwi. Iii, Ixwxwiii. evi. 9 PN. 55. 61, 97, 99, 119.

. [earet fol.

Ky
Kelling. xi
Kaledouer,

vnnede

LN. 61. 99, 101. 173. 26.
i. [N. 47. 91. 100. 153.]
xix. hoe est officium seriandi. evi. evi. [N. 107.

Kildone. « Ixviil, [N. 307, 880. 457, 494. 495.]
Karal. Ix

Kethsywyn, xxv. Iexavii. [N, 113. 169, 170. 189.]

Karamund. . 172. 202.]



--- Dunfermline_page39.png ---
TABULA.

UN. 341-2-3. 351. caret hodir

Kynross. Ixxxsii. iii carte, Ixxxxiii, iii
fol. 93.]

Loellenin, vide in athangy. Issxxix. [N

2 BOG. BS

Luskirhouioth. xxx B83, 100. 410. ]

Luskir, Ixxxix. [N. 201.]
Lethe. Ixwxvii. [N. ISS.)

xlyj. LN. 443.)
Libertates. vii. x. xii, [N. 31. 49.
De lacticiniis, xxsvi, [N. 433.
Loganraw. xl PN. 441.)

Saneti Lauren

Maistirtone. x. Ix LX. 39, 402. 319.7
Moyoeh. 1
Malyn. xi

[N. 58. 365, 366, 126, 130. 131, 147. 148. 149. 150. 806. 205, 253. 271.]

vii. evi. evil, [N. 77. 114. 460, 264. 256.]

» iii carte. Ixx iiij carte. Ixxviii. Ixxxx, ev, evil.

Munros.

Melgnm, xxvii. LN. dupl: 33#.]

Makearon.

Mailvin. J carte. Ixxxx. Ixxxxi. [N. 299. 158. 159. 160.
203. 206.]

Materia. vii, [N. 21.]
Monketone. 1x [N. 485.]

vi, LN. 3. 24
Hh. 266.)

Nithbern, vi.
Newtone. x. evi.
Newland. 1
Newbotill.
Nanis. vi

Namum.

LN. 827. 453. 165, 204.)
sint mobilia ad nutum abbatis. Inv. [N. 401.)

d

Orok. iii. x!
Quod omnia offic



--- Dunfermline_page40.png ---
NNXIV TABULA.

Pontekyn. cxiiii. [N. 301.]

Pass iti [N. 320. 845. 250. 268. 381.]

Perth. xxx. xxxi. iil, Iwii. Ixxniiii. Ixxvi.
Inxaxiiii. ¢ log, 413, 414, 415. 416, 417. 465,

470, 471.1

140, 212
Petnach. vii. [N

61. B04. 305.)

Protectiones. x. [N. 438. 45. 56.)

Petfurane. [N. 406. 389.]

Pluseardyn. LN. $42. 445. 447.)

Pethbachly. xviii. xlix. exi. cxv.  [N. 448. 449. 450. 339. 316.]

Pettinerefe. Ixxx. [N. 823.]
Petbockin. —Ixx: [X. 179.]
Procuraciones. evi. cix. [N.

2

Petliuer. ]xxxxiiii.

Ut non presumat quis sibi prouisionem a Romaua euria pre quoeunque officic
monasterij impetrare. Ixv. [N. 401.]

Quichtes.  Ixxxxii [X. 213.]

Regalitas. Ix. Ixi. [N. 390. 391.]

Reth. 1x) (N. 476.]

Renfrew. Ixsxiiii. [N. 162.]

De tribus salinis et vna carucata terre. Ixxxiiij. [N. 164]

Streuelin. i. vi. iii carte. xiii, lii. xxx
451. 251. 264.]

Salina in striuelin, vi. [N. 9.]

Siluis. vii. [D ]

Sagimine. x. [N. 38.]

Seruis. xiii, [N. 64.]

De sequela non facienda de terris in atholia. xvii. [N. 85.)

vj Ixxxxiiii. cvi. [N. 847. 4. 6. 8. 72. 466.

Strathardolf. xiii. xiii. Ixxv. iii carte. Ixxviii.

73. 127. 132. 138, 310. 811, 227, 253. 271.)
Smetheton. xvii. ii carte. Ixxxvi. Ixxxviii. [N. 82. 83. 180. 195.]
Sancti Andree. xxii. [N. 95.]

ii carte. Ixxxxvii. cv. evil. [N.



--- Dunfermline_page41.png ---
TABULA. XNNY

Saeristaria. {N. 121. 122. 446.)
Subsidium.
Schanwale. xxxiii. cxxix, [N. 420. 421. 419. 415. 440. 095.)

Spittalfeild.
Seona. evi.
Slebalbe, li.
Shirafhall,
Seolis. x:

[N. 897. 478. 479.]

Talibotheuil.  Ixs
Taxacio. evi. [N

Wythker.v.
Wrehard.
Vuith. xii. xiii. Ixxxv. Ixxx
xxviii evi, [Ne 119.8
Wrwel. _ Ixxxxii. iii earte. a iii carte. [N. 341. 842. 343. caret fol. 92.]
KX EN. 231.

Confirmaciones et prinilegia ae. Gi. usque ad exi. [236. usque ad 298.]

77. 803. 378.]
__[. 88, 408, 404]

167, 213. 249.|
Wymot. xx

Vicecomes. 1x:

rest of the 34 leafs fallowis. Thairefter is fyve seoir xviij leafis of
the same auld registre, quhairof this is the tabill. And last of all
thair is 3

,j leafis of new wreit.

Ix TE BUIK WITH THE AULD TRIF RRODES

‘Vhair is first 3
lynes on the bak

j leiftis of pairehment. On the foreside of the first leiff and fonr
s writtin in text hand twa collectis in latein, And then benethe
on the baksyde of the first Jeife is writin the forme of a commission to replege out
of the iustice aires. [N. 588.]
And ane forme of ane Attornay ont of the eliancellarie, fol. 1. [N. 589.]
Carta resignationis terrarum de Kildwyne. fol. 2. [N. 519.)


--- Dunfermline_page42.png ---
XXXVI TABULA.

Preceptam ejusdem, LN. 520.]

derigenda loco plusearden in Moravia. fol.

ie de Perth, fol

birne. fol. #. [N.

Carta Johannis Ros de terris de stormound. fi
i rum de jakston Logybride Rothylie Bahnavolie Blalak

549]

Commi:

Collatio viearie pension:

Collatio viearie de Ne’

Carta pationis ter

Inchestravie cum piseatione aque de tay. fol. 6. [N
Carta resignationis de Cultirmakeultie. fol. 6,
[N. 539.]
Carta Jacobi Kirkealdie de Grange super terris de fynmont. fol. 7. [N, 540.]
Preceptum ejusiem. fol. 8. [N. 541.)

Carta Edwardj Bronn de erofta prope Clakmanane, fol. 8. [N. 343.]

Carta Helene stewart et sponsi. fol. 9. [N. 54]

Preceptum cjusdem. fol. 9. [N. 545.)

Carta duarum partinm de peteonmerk, fol. 10. [ad finem indie

Preceptum ejasdem, fol. 7

Efter this is contenit the foresed tables of the auld register.

Carta Jacobj Kirkealdie de terris de Fynmouth,
Preceptum ejusdem. fol. 16. [N. 541.

. 15, [N. 340.)

Presentatio de Kynros et Urwell. fol
Donatio sine r
fe

16, [N. 572.
js de Perthe. fol. 16. LN.
fol. 17. PN. 350.)

atio seole grammiati
¢ [de] tervis de Carbar
Preceptum eiusdem, — fi it,
equhilk hen rig sould

a Hugonis

Ane dischairge of v li.
Carta Jo™ ogiluie de terris de bamathy. fol. 18. EN.
Carta Robs 19. EN. 554]

Preeeptum

ie. fol IN. EN,

tj durie de eoden,

Carta Ro" durie de terris de Kynu
Preceptum ejusdem. fol. 21. EN.
Carta de Meluill; non tenet. fol.
Carta confir. Jo" young. fol.
2b

Preveptum eiusdem. fol

Carta de tentismur. fol.

Preceptum magistri Ja® ogiluie. fol.
Preceptum Walter} landy. fol. 26,
Preeeptum Jo betoun. fol.



--- Dunfermline_page43.png ---
TABULA.

Carta magistr) Ja ogiluie de terris de Bennathy. fol. 27. [N. 564.4
fol. [N. 565.]
arau de raitht cum pendienlis et pertinenciis vt in

Preceptuin Jaeohj ozil

ta noue infeodacionis ter

pre Danide Hammilton per for
[N. 568,]
acionis: ye
. £N. 569.7
ignatioun te Jonet erie
vonlty, fol. BL [N. 573.]
Carta Petri Durye de lie

facturam: quondam Johannis meluill de Raithe

reur

commendatarij de Dunferincling commnnitati burg}

Ane a toun of the waird and nouentres of coupermac-

nis de Kyngorne wester.
Carta florent} auchmouttie de terris de Halhill. fol

Preeeptam sasine Petr) Durie de dietis te

Erten rie any nes

ren Sy} Lewers.

The Indentouris betaix James Abbot of Dumfermeling and symoin Kerwor wryt
in the said abbay to repair the same abbay. [« N. 463.)

ne and William Durie to be portaris tor yer

to remaine and wir

The admissionn of walter Ryng:
ymes. [a N.515.]
Ane ehairtour of Chri
Ane chairtour of Jone trott [trotter] sone to Nin
in coldinghame, [3 N.509.]

jane Iummisdene spons to Alex™ Elem, [@ N.505.]

ane trott of ye Tands of variugis

Ane chairtour of helene Iumisden spous to Richard Wardlaw of fou Imsband
lands. [3.N. 510.]

Ane chairtour of george forrester of stratherne,

Carta de elunijs. [y N. 512.]

Ane prevept of seysing of James Crichtoune of eranistounriddell. [y N. 512

a facta u

rie orvok super tertia parte terrarumy de orvok. sellibalbie: et
X50]

ix de perdew cum pertinentiis, [6 N. 514]

[a N.516.]

sanete erncis de Kirkeally. (ZN. 517]

rta dominj de B

Presentatio altaris

principalis littere siue jndenture inter dumine
uewbortill, [2 N. 464.]

atom de Donfermeling et



--- Dunfermline_page44.png ---
XXXViii TABULA.

Ane chairtour of confirmatioun betuix M'. Thomes mairjoribankis aud adame
ottirburne of auldhame of the twa part of ye lands of eisterhaillis and milne yerof.
[ny N. 522.

Ane precept of clare constat of Johne giflerd. [8 N. 521.]

Admissioune to the paroche k of meluill to arehibald hay, [2 N. 527.]

Presentatio de mvlen, [+ N. 528.]

Preceptum Jacobj crichtoun terrarum de elunijs. [/ N. 529.]

‘Carta de sehanvell et fotheris. [+ N. 531.]

Preeeptun Jacobj Kirkealdie de terris supra scriptis. |» N. 5:

Carta Thome scot de abbottishall. {z N. 536.]

Ane precept of seising of Thomas scot de petgorno.  [% N

Carta Jacobj Kirkealdie de terris de shaaivell et Fotheri

537.]
[uw N. 542.)

Ane preeept of sesing of Janet Betoun relict of James Crichtoune of Cranstoun-
riddell. [v No. 548.]

Carta infeodacionis Jonete Betoun de terris de Cluny, [» N. 547.]

Reversio dominj de raithe. [¢ N. 530.]

Quarta pars de lie maynis de orrok.  [§ N. 528.]

Ane precept of confirmation. [o N. 524.]

Preceptum Jacobi Crichtoun de Cranstounriddell de terris de Clny. [» N. 546.]

Ane chairtour of David Auchmoutes. [7 N. 576.)

Preceptum sasine Jonete Giffert de sherrefhall. [zg N. 577.]

Ane assedatioun to George Boswall and his airis of the ouer Westmulne of
Kirkcaldy with the milnes and multe! ie N. 578.]

Thair is fyve seoir and auchtene leiffis in the auld register of Dumfermeling
betuix the new writtis and chartouris on baithe the sydis of the said auld register.]


--- Dunfermline_page45.png ---
REGISTRUM

DE DUNFERMELYN.


--- Dunfermline_page46.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page47.png ---
REGISTRUM

ABBACIE SANCTE TRINITATIS

ET BEATE MARGARETE REGINE

DE DUNFERMELYN.


--- Dunfermline_page48.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page49.png ---
EST MARGARKETE DE DUNFERMLYN LIBER ISTE

Contirmacio Regis Dauid -

1. IN nomine t%e 7 indiuidue Trinitati - Ego Dauid dei gia Rex Scoté
auc" regia ac potettate - Henrici filii mei affenfu - 7 Qatildit Regine uxoris
mee + epoy - Comitii- Baronumg, regni mei ofirmaGGe 7 teftimonio - elero
% adquiefeente 7 poplo + Ecctie fée Trinitatif Dunfimelitane - Pdeceffoy
meoy pietatis ftudio 7 largicdis initiate - offiia fubfe'pta peedo? 7 pace
ppetua ofirmo - Pat'f itaqg, 7 mat's mee dona fubfequencia Ppono - Par-
dufin « Pethnaurela » Petcorthin » Pethachelin - Lauer - Bolgin » Sehyram
de Kirealethin - Inuirete minoré - Dona Duncaii fis mei - Duaf villas noie
Lufke - Dona Edgari fiis mei + Seiyram de Gellald - Dona Ethelredi fi
mei - Hale - Dona + Alexandri Regis tfis mei - Duninad - Schira de Gate-
mile + Petconmarthin » Balekerin - Drumbernin » Keeth - Dona Sjbille
Regine - Beeth - Et hee pdida Pdecefloy meoy dona? ocedo Baty pfate
eee in ppetuum - ct Gib; tuis apendiciis 7 re&is diuifis - Dona deniq, pp'a
fubtecuntur - Difmet cit aq*m in q® eadem ecéa fita eft « Kingorii ci
fuit’- apendiciis | ppinquior eft Dun? - Foeth - Inu'efe maiorem ef molen-
dino 7 pifeinif - Vna manfuram 7 Bowich . Aliam 7 burgo de Edenb -
Terciam 7 burgo de Stuct - Q*rta in burgo Dunfinelitaii - Q'ntam i burgo
de Pth 7 eetain burgi de Perth - 7 redditi + ¢ - folidoy 1 anglia - Oiiia ati
dona pdéa ita Bald 7 glete plate eete geedo J ficut ego traf meat pp'af
poflideo - defenfione regni mei excepta ~ iuftieia regali? fi abbs in euria



--- Dunfermline_page50.png ---
4 REGISTRUM DE [spe Nur.

fua aliq* neggligencia de iufticia - deciderit - Concedo 1 omné oétana pté
de dibs placitif 7 Grelif’ meif de fif 7 de fothif - 7 omné decima toci? mei
Can qd afferetur ad Dun? +7 omné decimam phende q afferet? ibidé de tif +
de foth> « 7 decima dif uenagdnii G ibidem afferentur - 7 medietatem corioy
7 fepoy 7 fagiminif dium beftiay q occidentur ad feftiuitatef’ tenendat’ in
St'uelin 7 int Forth 7 Tey - Et concedo Can vni? nauif liberum 7 quieti :
ubiciiq, in Regno meo applieflit - Concedo % ut habeant in nemorib3 meif’
Sia nectia ad igné 7 ad edificia tua? AE mipi - 7 hGib; coy. fe 7 meif -
Volo deniq, ut ofis obtonef J ad mai? altare ci9dé offerentur ¢ fii calipnia

liBatr habeant - Et de Seliches q' ad Kingorii capientur « poftq* decimat

thine ¢ ocedo ut ofis feptimot Selichef habeant - Salif q° 7

py

Gad op?
inet ad Dunfmet adlata fitint ? omné decima gcedo - Sup"taxata aii Eetam
ci dib; J dei donante clemencia 7 pfenti fit pfenf teftatur ptuilegium
optinet ¢ 77 futuro eadé adg'rere cleficia ualebit : i fiime pacif t*ng'llitate -
zab bi liBrima ta fe@larif’ q" ectattice poteftatis fubiectone 7 exactonis
Iquietudie pmanie denim? excepta fola 7 candica obediencia - q* debet
unaq mat* fue p orbé ecta- Eandem q’ HiBtate in omibs q*m ecta fi
Andree retinet : jure inconcuffo etnatr poffideat - Cui? etiam jura 7 hoc
pPuilegio Bnotata 7 dignitatis p'uilegia imutilata Suare- 7 flabilitate ppetua
firmare - nos q' pfentef fumuf fuecefforibus firis tub hie dine ofirmando
mandan? + 7 mandando pfirmamuf’- ut fig’! ea pturbare uolttit 7 fire
defenfionif flatuta diuellere - minuere - ac uiolare otendit ¢ nd ignoret te

o* ipm mundi faluatoré niti -

> ido m refipttit ¢ etne dampnationis {iiiam
ieurrere - etiq, ds de libro uite deleat - q' cete pfate de gcefle poteftatif
iure : aliq'd abftulerit - Amen - Fiat - + Ego Rob {@i andy ep@ pfirmo -
& Ego Joh Glafgueii ept - oftmo + Ego Cormaccuf Dunkld epz pf'mo -
Ego Gregoriuf worauiens ept ofmo - * Ego acheth Rofmarkenfif
epe oftmo - Hui? ¥ ptuilegii teftes et affertores funt - Ed Coii - Con-
flantin? Coit. Walife Com - Rotheri Cofi - Madeth Cofi - Gillemichel
coae duf - Hebe? Cancett - Hug de woreuitt - Rob Corbet - Rob de wonte
acuto - Vnyet albus - Waldoueni cae ocheth - Yaldoueni de Seona - Gil-
lepatrie ac Impethin « Alwén mae Arkil- Rob Burg - Edward fit Siwardi -
Walelinus CapHs -



--- Dunfermline_page51.png ---
diven fac Ago R68 andzope sfinne.
FH As JA chatgnedt ep.oktia 7 Ago Cov -
mareat Double epe gine. FL Algo Gregounst
cyoudtens ope oft. Ol gearachers Sufnar
Reutepeotine. L pnts punteyiretes et
AMerrones (unre. OS Coit. Waratarered Cote. yal
Ce Coit. Rothenvortt. mpaaetl Cori. 6Mernr
Abel rac out PHBE Camel Bug se arose:
Rob Comet. Rob oe ayarete datto Yuy'er done.
WMalooncnr avec ocd ech. Matavurcrn peteotd.
OMepetq tc are Impey. Gn mac Arka,
RSV Bang. CGas FH Silhards Midas”
cogil.


--- Dunfermline_page52.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page53.png ---
» DAY. DUNFERMELYN. 5

Confirmatio Regit Dauid «

2, LN nomine tte Trinitati Ego Dauid dei gri Rex Seott auctoritate Regia

ac poteftate - Henrici filii fii allentu 7 watildis Regine uxorif mee - Epoy
Comiti - Barontiq, Regni mei ofirmatone 7 teftimonio - elero etia ad-
qefeente q, poplo Ke&e fe Tinitatit’ Dunfmeliii - Pdeeeffoy meoy pietatif’
fiudio 7 largitionif initiate dia fubfe'pta concedo ? 7 pace ppetua pfirmo -
Pat'f itaq, 7 fiiris mee dona fubfequencia ppono - Hee feiliect - Pardutin -
Petnaureha - Pettecorthin + Petbaelachin - Lauar + Bolgin - Sehiram de
Kircaladinit -Intefe minorem -@ Dona Duneat fis mei - Dnaf' uillat noie
Lutehar - @ Dona Eadgari fis mei. Schira de Gellad - @ Dona Ethelredi fis
mei? Halef. @ Dona Alexand' Regif ffis mei - Primrot’. Schiram de Gate-
mile. Peteonmarehin - Balcherin - DrumBnin + Keth - € Dona Sibille Regine
- Beeth - Et hee pdta Pdeeefloy meoy - dona concedo liberaliter pfate ecte
in ppetuai ef dibs thi apendieiil 7 reaif diuifis- @ Dona deniq, ppria? fnb-
fecuntur - € Dunfmelin eit” aqm in qua eadé ecta fita eft - Kingoren ¢
{ { proping'or eft Dun? . Foet Intlefe maiorem - 7 molen-

dint - 7 pifeinam - 7 Smithetun . 7 Crefbarrin «7 cetam de Infrefe - >
Wymet - efi fuif rectis diuifis - Fotherofiux* {tm and - cit fuif rectit dinifit’-
7 Pethenach et fuif retif diuifif’. 7 vnam carueatam tre : Petioker -
Prevea do 7 ocedo aflenfu Henrici Comitis filii mei p falute animari firay
z aiieefloy firoy in ppetua elemofina Nithbren ei fuif apendiciif - 7 Bela-
eriftin et fuif restif diuifis - in p*tif’ 7 pateuif’. excepta reéitudine q'm
Keledei hre debent - ei omib3 reb3 ad eat iufte ptinentibs « fieut date
fucrunt Pdte eeve in dotem die qua dedicata fuit - Pretea do eidé cote
ynam manfura 1 B wich - Alia in Rokefbure - aliam 7 Burgo de Hadigtuii -
aliam jn Edenburg - aliam in linlitheu - Aliam i burgo de Striuelin - 7
in eadem uilla duaf cetaf’- 7 vii carneata tre q adiacet ipi eete - 7 omne
deeim& meoy dominioy «7 frngib3 7 7 aialibs 7 in pifeib3 de pp'if retibs 7
eciam 7 denariif'- 7 decima mei can tociuf caftnfif puincie - 7 mantionef
Rogii prefbri - ita plene fieut ipe fanus 7 incolumis tenuit - 7 vnii rete 7
dimidit - + vn mafioné 7 burgo dunfimelin - 1iBam 7 q'etam 7 omné



--- Dunfermline_page54.png ---
tal siut-

6 REGISTRUM DEI (sec. xi.

decimacioné denarioy firme burgi - 7 decimation® molendini - + de of
dominiif’ meif' de Dun? - ct vnam manfioné i burgo de pt - 7 ectam
ei9dé uille- 7 una miafioné q ptinet ipi ecte- 7 omné decima de dnio
meo - Ofnia aii dona dia ita liBatiter 7 qrete Pfate ecte concedo : fieut
ego Pras meat pp'as poflideo - defenfione regni mei excepta - 7 regali
iufticia - fi abbs 7 curia fua aliq” neggligencia de iufticia deciderit - Con-
eedo % ommé ogtanam ptem de bib; placitif 7 Iucrif’ meif de fif 7 de
fotherif «7 omné decima toci? mei can 7 bratfei de fif 7 de fotherif - ex-
coptif retitadinis 4 q abbie Dunkeld ptinent - 7 decima Gium uenatonum
q capiuntur in? lambremor 7 tay +7 medietaté corioy 7 fepoy 7 fagiminif
dium beftiari  occident® ‘ad feltinitatef tenendas in ft'uelin 7 inter
forth 7 tay - Concedo % ut habeant in nemorib3 meif’ dia neceffaria ad
ign 7 ad cdificia fa: ficut m' ipi- 7 hdibs eoy ¢ fit 7 meif’ - Volo
deniq, vt off’ oblatonef G ad mai? altare ei%dé ecée offerétur ?
fi caliipnia liBatr habeant + 7 de Selichif q* ad kingorii capientur
poftq® decimati fuerint 7 ocedo ut ofis feptimof felichif habeant .
Salis q° 7 fri G ad op? mei ad Dunfmelin allata fuerint /¢ omné
decima occdo - Ptea fr fis 7 fir mea dedunt ecte fee Tnitatif
parochiam toti fothrif - 7 fie ocedo - Deniq, do 7 geedo 7 elemofina i
ppetuii ecée § Tri traéum de Aldeftelle 7 omne qt iufte ei ptinet -
Tra&uf ifte dat? eft {eilicet i in Bwich iB 7 q'etuf - Pre? hee % phibeo
ne aligd nami eapiatur fup tram ut fup hotef fée T'ni® p foriffo ali-
eui?? nt pro pp’o foriffGo illoy - Coneedo ¢ yd infte reddantur ecée fée
Tni® offis Sui fini - g's pat fis 7 fiir mea 7 fief mei? ei dederunt - 7 7 omnef
fui cumerlache a tempore Eagari Regif’ ufq, niic - efi tota pecunia
fua ubicumq, inueniantur - 7 prohibeo fup met foriffEm ne tinfte retine-
antur - Concedo abbi 7 + monachit ut habeat omnef hoies ci omni peciia
eoy in cui%cumq, a fuerint + qui fuerunt in Prif die qua fuerunt oblate
7 date ecte {te T'ni®*- Concedo q? Bfate ec&e decimi de omib; meis
filiribs equabs de fif 7 de fothif . Concedo abbi 7 wdchif’ ut habeant p
totam tra mea theloneum qetum de cun&if reb3 quaf Meati fuerint ad
pp’a coy neceffaria - Preter ifta fup*déa dono 7 concedo abbi 7 méchif' ut
habeant finglif annif - v - w*reafargenti ad welt ifita eoy de p'mis nauibs



--- Dunfermline_page55.png ---
REG. DAV.] -DUNPERMELYN. 7

que ucnient ad f@nelin ut ad Pt. Cdeedo T ecée {Fe Mui" paflaginm 7
naué de Tnnirketh - ficut habui in meo dominio + tali % condiGne Gd
pegrinantet’ 7 nuncij ad me uenientet’ 7a me redeuntef + 7 hoiet’ enrie
mee 7 filij mei t*ufeant Teadem naui fii peio . Et fi ptingat aliq ioy
fine Peio Cufire nd potle 7 abbs inde clamoré audierit - 7 iltd non cmen-
danit : ut ego ipe iltd emendare fii abbis 7 fratram ecctie moleftia poflim -
non refpondeant alieni

chi

Concedo 7 uolo q"tinuf abbs 7 mo™ ecée {Fe tr
calipnianti de hoib; q' fuerunt in tris die q“ oblate 7 date fuerunt cete
{te tri - Concedo ¥ ecte {te tri decima toci? mei Can de clamaii - ABbs

= wo™ ecte tee Tni® citra lamBmor in tota regia poteftate fingut fabbis

in curia habent uni corium - 77 fexto fabbo habent dno coria - 7 dnaf’
stam pellem arietii 7 agnoy + Et pcedo eidem ecte

ptef de fepo 7 fi

dimidiam pt deeimi wei de Ergaithel 7 de Kentir + co feirt anno qii ego

ipe inde recepo Can - Sup*taxata aii eeCam eum Gil
in plenti fieut Pfens teftatur p'uilegiii 7 optinet : 7 in futuro cade adq'rere
elemencia ualebit? i fime paeif t“nquillitate 7 ab di TiBrima tam feen-
larif q*m ectaftice poteftatit {nbiectone 7 exaccdif Tquietudine pmanere
defnimat- exeepta fola 7 canoniea obediencia q* debet unaq*q, mat? fue
featnram apd Pt ita

3 { dei dante cleficia

p orbem ecéa - Concedo ¥ Ppnominate ecée q"nda
liBe 7 q'ete fient meat’ ibi hado » Cniul’ Yi
v inmutilata Suare + 7 ftablitate ppetua firmare - nof q'
reflovib; Gris fub h*e odicone ofirmando mandam? ~

Thoe ptuilegio Pnotata + 7

dignitatif’ p'uile
ptentef fam? fia
mandando ofirmam? - ut fig's ca pt*hare uolitit « 7 tire defenfionif ftatuta
diuclie + iminnere ae uiolare contendit! nd ignorct fe 9% ifm mundi
faluateré niti. 7 ido n refipuit + etne dampnaddif fiiiam Ieurrere - eumq,
ds de libro uite deleat . q' ecte Plate de pcefle poteftatif jure aliq’d
abftulit Amen Fiat - Fiat - Ego RodBt9 (ci andy ep ofmo «+ Ego
+r - Dunkeld epé pftmo -- Ego Andreaf KatinenS epé of'mo . Tui?
% pruilegij teftef + afertoref tint - Waltaf cancett - Duncaii comes -
Hugo de @orenitla » Waltuf de Kindefei - RoBtus Auencl » Walt Ridel -
HerBtut cantar - Nichot clicut’ - Alwynuf fili? arkil - Ewen marefealt -
Gillecolifi mac chimpethin - c@acheth mac torfin - QPouin filiuf Colbain .



--- Dunfermline_page56.png ---
3 REGISTRUM DE (Sec. x.

De Nithbren 7 de Bale‘ftin -

» Danid rex Scottoy epif - abbib3 - Comitib; - Vieccomitib; - Baronib;
- Ppoitif. minitt'’. 7 omibs probis hominib; toci? tre five - franeit’ + Anglicif.
7 feott falé - Sciati’ me 7 Henricum comité filii mei p falute animay
fray 7 antecefloy firoy in ppetua elemofinam dediffe - 7 gcefliffe ecée fee
Trinitatis de Duntmet - 7 abbi 7 frat'b; ibidem deo Quiontibs villam de
Nithbren eum fuis appendiciif 7 Bale*ftin eit fuif reétif diuifif in p*tif’ 7
pafeuif. excepta reétitndine q*m cheledei hre debent - cum omih3 rebus
infte ad cas ptinentibs ficut date fuerunt Pate eete i dotem die q* dedicata
fuit -1iBe 7 quiete ab oii contuetudie 7 Qnio - fieut aliq® domuf religionit’
fre fre tenet aliq'm tram melinf 7 liberiuf’ - Teftib; «Rob efio de f%o
And‘a + 7 HerBto epo de Glefen - 7 €- epo de puncheld - 7 Andrea
epo de Katenef - 7 Edwardo epo de ABdon « 7 Symeone epo de Rof- 7
Ernaldo abbe . de Kelch - 7 Alwyno abbe de edent- 7 WiHo abbe de
ftuclin - 7 Duncaii comit - 7 Garuad comit - 7 Morgund comit - 7 leod
abbe de Breichin - 7 Walto filio Alani - 9 Galfo cancellario Regis - 7
HerBto cafiario «7 Galto de lyndefei - 7 RoBto auenel . 7 Alwyno fit
archil - Ewein marefeatt - 7 Gileolm mae chimbethin- Apud Dunfermelin -

De concordia ecctiay de Ecelef 7 Strinelin -

. Hee eft concordia que féa fuit apd eaftellum puellara coram rege dauid
+ henf filio ci? 7 baronib; eoy. sink R- epm {i Andy - 7 G- abbem de
Dunf - de ceetin parochiali de ecclef' 7 capHa caftelli de ® uclin » Recor-
dati fuerunt barones regif’- 7 in hae recordaone omit’ ocordati {unt - qd ea
die q* Rex AleX fecit capHam dedicare fup*dictam ? donanit 7 conceffit
cidem captte decimaf dominioy fuoy in foca de ft'uelin - G eadem die
fucrunt dominia fua- fine acreQunt fine dectuerunt + Et tea ofiderauerunt
qd ecta pochialif’ de ecelef hre debebat unitifat’ decimaf que proueniunt
de hurdmannif 7 bondif 7 grefinannif cit cetif confuetudinib; q*s debent


--- Dunfermline_page57.png ---
IQUE IPUIIRG Zou Wpod: ing suIQyN
migunTaD oMRsganttaN) ibang anmuym
omnes paw dovsapavd aeiGudtyao ens

“ pOAQYGIUUgIROB gi denbuA,
qnuntoz oo ypIuT9 wads ormmog.ananyn
Qomngenganvan kontinonyayy sara
Aonseunney aynipod pan amp ipod gg doyp
ama goon 1S wysty werkapaqpa
_foo sping :aT pH PUATvAD MEINERS
1 AL SMAY) Ulan aremDTD Daye PITILHAD Ty AED
“SMYNTONNAIG nIpI aNgmy orb TY Hrpafeugae
yon shay arioy muIpDW gy WaT) MALOU TTY
‘anoqpeg Saw Spud nrparpd om
pone oo via, wed yuparrd agri aionman
2 goneorpmagaunysy spt uinouinibs “a0
ange Sh Egret so ya) Eo UIE LNG
“ woyZ qHiMpMgNt294umNMAdaNbypanDe se]

ada

iN

Bryga judy bupauny ging 2-qqransuico ino
qv amu Lag ‘ary prpngse bag Uraiog pays
2pqd sumuoryanp9 samy fqnnatindt ypoqp ame
SII} quo UND aie_aGanG LONPGUIbaMgM.
WA pacha joa odes SBN Iw PO
IaBTY GLSUNQHaddy etry NW HITAGA FA 79 meh ||
— TY Kong og MAM Appr ngPr gH U
ASHRAUA DiI 2GUJHELIIGeg mpinsorn 4
“ap yundt m com doyanany scien apanny |<
Danse aaa ere
‘Avs aoyeyorSay “yonpay(OV/
‘au anna spur sp /
Ame Fyumn-yuyal gen |
“aay Aummmara: Aur09 ‘

“mgt stile tosses aos gUIY
“sp ML BAuyneszapansttasty g| NS dante yY

UIBNYS.2¢1 194} 4h 0," meg Baap)
Se ne



--- Dunfermline_page58.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page59.png ---
ve

. D

REG. DAV.) DUNFERMELYN. 9

ecto +7 qui mortii CUint fine fint de maneipiis dominioy fit de parochia
fup dea
debent bre mortui fecum ad ceZam — a forte flit qd alig’f de burgenfibs
aliquo fubito caf ibi moriatur - Kt fi dominia pottea crenerant ut int
fartis tin fraciura uctif’ tre antea nd culte ¢ decimat’ eoy habeat Pac
capella - Siu" code m° cretinnt @

A arr rr caer - q
corpa coy iaccant in cimitio paroechiali pnoiato ct rebs qs
+ é

alioy hdint pochialii? cea pochiat

decimal coy habeat + Et fi hoief ples g* folebant dudii modo manent
J dominio fupd@o 2 decimat coy «7 omnia hdind q'euma, ill excolitint
dnium habebit capella + 7 ecta pochiat habehit coy corpa G 7 dnio
manent +» Et fi tre q tite nd fuerunt de dnie erent in manfivris hind :
pochiat ceta coy decimaf habehit - Et hii’ omib; Paci homihs ijia cade
omnef rectitudinet xpianitatis ppt fepult’e dignitaté faciet « Liif prentibs
teftibs «G+ epo Dunkelt - A + abbe fe erneif’ » Wo. abbe de tCuct - IT.
pore de coldigh © - plore de Jedi. O- yrore f@e erueif’ « t de laieit’-
Dimeaii comite + Gospatte: comit + N+ conttabl «We de faNluile » Danid
olifard » W. fit Alati- H+ came? « Heurit tif Swani - 7 aliif multis -

De ercharrin -

~ Danid Rex Scott omibs hominis fuif tatt - Seiatis me dediffe 7 - conceflife

cete {Fe Chitatis de Dunt in clemotina Crefbarrin - Tetlibs « Johe epo -
E- cancellario 7 Hugone de rrorenitt aj clhotle -

De decimis de Sitriuclin «

nid Rex feot? Vitino Viecoott + ppoit v minifP thif' de uct Salt -

aciatif’ monachit de Dunf ois

Seiatif’ quia nolo + firmit Peipio qd hire
decimal + reéctitudinet fiat’ ita plenarie tient cif plenins dedi 7 in clo-
mofind ocefli- in ommihs rebs qf iufle debent hee unde pot itif ei
face Et nulluf sup med foritf@m eif detincat - Tett - Johe Epo» Randulph
de Sut + Apud perth +

infticiam



--- Dunfermline_page60.png ---
10 REGISTRUM DE

De decimit’ de Atherai -

. D- Rex Scott vieccomit 7 Ppoitif de Strivelinif Seyra Sat - Sciatif’ me

de® 7 con deo 7 fe Tn" de Dunf> 7 abbi 7 3, eidem loci decimam
tre Brixwald gua tenet i Atherai in efeambio decime tre ili? q™m
eanonici habent in cambutkinel « Teft- - Johe epo + 7 Dun comit 7 Rob

burguillun - Apud ftriuelin -

Dr decimif denarioy de ftuelin -

~ D. Rex feoté vit 7 Ppoitif de uelin falt - Sciatis me ge" deo 7 abbi de

9 we . + 7 wow.
Dunf? decima denarioy de cenfu meo de {'u't- Qvare uolo 7 firmit peipio

ut fine oi defturbacone
de Bruuf. + Hug de worenift - Apd @uelin -

jatif ei eam fire sié denarij venient » F - Rob

De falina -

. D.- Rex feoté GiltDE vico® de Wuelin Sali. Precipio qd abbs de Dunf

habeat unam falinam efi Atif falinif’-ita folam 7 q'etam? fient mee faline

fit - Peipio FT gq hominet’ fui ibi opantef mea firma pacé habeant + F -
ears -_. D Po Sop

Dune cof - 7 waddoc Comite - 7 Hbto cai - Apud St'uelin -

Dr traéu de Aldeftelle -

. Dania dei g¥a rex Scotti omib; pbif hdibs fuif fat - Sciatif me conceffifle

7 dedi in clemotina 7 ppetuii ecte fée Ti de Dif tra&um de
Aldeftelle 7 omne qd iufte ei ptinet -7 uni toftum in Bewich folum et
quiet de oimih; Ruiciif’ - F - Ien¥ filio meo hoe idem concedente « 9
WBto cancel - + Rob de Vinfranitt - 7 Hug bret - 7 Rob freb’n . 7 Hidda -
7 Wito de lamBeun apud Berwieh -


--- Dunfermline_page61.png ---
VW.

13.

. Dauid Rex teoti haronibs - vices

REG. DAY] DUNFERMELYN. a

De tofto de Hadigtun -

Dania Rex teat? - Lif - Abbibs - comitibs - baronibus + vieceo"s . ppditif’-
minitt!. 7 omib; pbif hdibs tocins Tre fue falé - Seiatif me p falute aic
mee 7 antecetloy meoy abbi de Dunf 7 fFibs ibidem deo fernicutihs vnii
plenar

1 toftum 1 burgo meo de Madigtun dedifle - liBe ys quiete ab oii
ofuctudine 7 feruicd « fieut Pes abbf tenct aliqd toftii meliuf 7 liberiut
p burga mea. FG - epo de Dunkeld - 7 Galto canecllario - 7 Dant
com - 7 thoro vieecomit - 7 Alfwynoe - Apud Edenbui

DE cragmilor -

minitt'f. 7 Gibs fidelibs fuif’ tociut’

f+ Sciatif’ me dedifle ecée {te T

laudoni i* de Dunf: in ppetua cle-
mofind vn carneatam tre arablif 7 cragmilor 7 domof in quibuf habitabat
uxor Rogi eafli - Et hoe do 7 pcedo predée ecte p aia mea 7 filii mei +
antecefloy meoy 7 fuccefloy ad tenendam ita libere fieut eadé ce&a meli?
7 libiug tenet fnaf’ aliaf tras - Et q'm din pda uxor uiSit: teneat
hane tram 7 domof de cadem cectia fi uolilit - Si non? remaneat
Pdta tra omino qleta ad op? pd&e cete - P+ Rob epo fi Andy» ~
Johe cpo et cancellario - ¢ Duncaii comit - 7 Edwardo conftabulario -
Apud Scoii -

De rectitudine nanium de Inuirefe -

Danid Rex feott oiibs probit hdibs tocius tre fue fat. Sciatif’ me

dedifle 7 con deo 7 ecée § Tni™ de Dunfiti 7 abbi 7 wo ibidem

deo fernientibs «ut habeant 6s rectitudine! de 3:

3 Fin portu de
Tnuirefe aplicttint - 7 (bi sup tram fuam retinacula fua fixerint - excepto
theloneo meo fi ibi hicatoref nanium ficef faat uendidint «ut aliaf ad


--- Dunfermline_page62.png ---
© Dania ai gia Rex fcott of

. Dauid Res

© Dauid dei gia

- Danid ai gia Rex Scot - Walbride mac congi Salim - S

12 REGISTRUM DE [SEc. x1.

mea ineati flint - P- Hug de moreuiit « Willo de
Thoro fit Swani apud Perth -

defendii fecum 7
oe
fumuil « Herb eafi -

De libertate nauif abit’ -

bs pbif hdibs tuif falé . Seiatif me clamaffe

inf’ eam exiftencia quicta de omni con-

nauem Abbit de Dunf
fuetudine nm’ ptinenti -  - Johe epo apud Perth -

De euria fée Trinitatif’ -

Scott: Epo fei Andy - 7 Comié 7 Sib; probit hoiiihs tuif

tociuf Fif salé- Prohibeo q homines abbif’ de Dunf de Nithbren alicui
non refpodeat de placitif 7 calumpniif unde calipniati fuerit nT euria
fée Titatis + abbis de Dun’ - Et Peipio q index fiis illi? prouincie et
hdihs qui illue placitari nenint ¢ intfit ut placita 7 infticie infte t*@entur-
Ye. epo Dunkeld - 7 Edwardo conftablario - Apud Seon" -

Ur nall? eapiat namit sup tram tée Tnitatit’-

Rex Seoti - oitiihs baronibs fuif 7 fidelihs fuif tatt  Preeipio

aliqd nami fap tram 7 sup homines 1@e Trini de Dunf-

p foriffo alieui?: n' pro prop’o foriffo illoy « Tefte hugoii de Worenitt -

uob ne eay

apud Edenburg -

De decima de Perth -

cial me ocefliffe
e {ee Cnitatif de Dunf omné decima de domo mea de Perth quem

e
ptinet - Tefte Vnict albo ap Seon -



--- Dunfermline_page63.png ---
19,

20,

eh.

REG. DAV.] DUNFERMELYN. 18

Dr Conftantino 7 de confuetudinibuf ecto -

. Dauid dei gta Rex feof - Conftantino 7 offihs ptinentibus ad eetam tte

Tni*tif hominib; Salm - Preeipio q'tinuf off eontuetudinef q's intte
eidé ecte debetis 7 fine eout"digdone reddatit’- 7 opi infiftite qd ibi ieep-
tum eft fine aliq’ dilaGéne - Quod fi contempnitif’ face
Ppdito Sunene ne hoe paciatur + 7 ut fit p'ori in adiutor
eif habeat fieut a meif hominibs habeo « Telte Edwardo eaptto « apud
S‘thirewin in Galwegia -

Byala
Peipio meo

iut ecéa ab

Dr Ragewin 7 Gillepatrie 7 Viehil -

Danid dig". Rex Scott - omibs probit hdihs fnif falt - Sciati’ me deditfe
Ragewin 7 Gillepatte 7 VIehil 7 ppetuum ecée fe trit de dunt? - ficuti
hominef meof pp'os - F - Johe epo - 7 Gillemichel comit - 7 Waldeuo fie
dolfin 7 @aldoueni indice «7 Vnyet albo 7 Rots bégeit’- Ap Daf -

De muliere leuif - 7 {uit fugitinif -

Dania Rex Seoti omibs pbif hdibs tociuf’ fre fae Saltm - Mando nots aty,
preeipio q“tinul wetiq, # leuif potit invenire ali fuoy fugitiuoy q“tinut
ei infte reddantur - 7 ne ulluf ci iniufte eos detineat fup mea defenfioné -
® - Wug de Moreuitt - 7 Edwardo canecH Apud Edenb‘g -

De materia in nemorihs -

Dauid Rex Scoté » Vieeco" - Bpditif’- 7 omibs miniftt fui tlt ~ Peipio

uot q‘tin? eete {te Trini et ad opuf @onachorii pe Dunfmel pmit-
tatif’ hre matiem in nemorih; meif’ ad omia fua neceffaria « 'Telt-


--- Dunfermline_page64.png ---
29.

. Dauid Rex Scott of

14 REGISTRUM DE {SEC. XII.

And‘a epo de Katenet® - 7 Walt cancett - 7 Duncaii comite - Apud
Danfmeb -

De Pethenach .

Dauid Rex Scott - efit - comitihs - baronibs - vicecomis » miniftf - +
omibs fidelibs {nif tociuf regni Scod falt - Sciatif’ me dedifle 7 pceffitle
cote {te Cnitatif de Da Pram de Petheneach in ppetuam elomofina ¢
dibs apendiciif 7 recti€ diuifis fuif + 1Btatibs ad eandé tram ptinentibs -
in aquif 7 p"tif’ 7 pafcuif- 7 in plano 7 nemore abfq, omi uenatu - Tta
libam 7 q'eta tenere: ficut meli? 7 HDiut z honoriticenci? fuaf aliaf traf
tenet 7 ht 7 cum omib; itt LBalitatihs, + phibeo t qd nHs fap mei foriffem
aliqd nami i Pdta Pra ullo m® cape Plumat p altiuf ext'nfecuf foriffZo -
~ hominef 7 tra 7 offis ret’ coy iufte med pacem habeant - Te’ - Hugoit
de moreuilt - Gas Ridel - Edward oflabtat - Alwyn mae arehil - 7 walifio
marefeatt «aj; Dunf: In feby -

De Durnach -

24. Danid Rex Scott Reinwaldo Comit de orchadia . 7 Comiti 7 dib3 probis

hdibs catencif’ 7 orchadie? Salé- Mando uot 7 peipio qa fieut me dili-
gitif- monach® 7 hoics eoy - 7 Ref habitantet’ad Durnach 7 cateneis dili-
gatit’. 7 ubietiq, int uof uenint : manuteneati* - non pmittendo q@ aliquif’
eif iniuriam ut contumeliam faciat - n° fieri pmittat - Teft . Cancett - 7

Es Gy a ae
fferbto caman Ap Abernithi -

De hoor comon -

bs pb hbibs toci? tre fue falé « Seiatif’ me dediffe
se a : ee a ere ee
z eon. A - epo de Natenet: hoor comon - libam ‘t quicti ab di Suiéd -


--- Dunfermline_page65.png ---
a

REG. DAY.] DUNFERMELYN. 15

excepto comuni cXcitu - F ty - efio dunkeld - Duné comit - Gillandret’
de Seou* - Alwyn mae archi} - Apud Seon" -

De tofto de Perth -

- Dania ai gra Rex Scot omihs fidelibs hominis fuif tociul’ feok 7 ppoitit

de Perth falf . Seiatif me de® in clemofina cete fte Trini® de Daf? vu
toft i meo burgo de Perth q'etii de omib? reb;- Ideo mando uot q*tin?
faciatif’ eid@ ceée hre iltd ibidé - q@ Swain faifinit - P - NB cancett - ;
lugofi de oreuitt apud Stuclin -

De decimif de Dunfmet -

Danid di ga Rex feoti - Rob clesto Sti Andy 7 Sib; Comitihs + baronibs

7 oimibs fidelibs fuif Saluté - Sciatis me coneetlifie 7 de* in ppetui in

elemofina pro aia patrif 7 matris mee 7 fratrum 7 antecefloy meoy cece
f&e Tni® de Dunf onmé decimationem de dib3 dominiif meif’ de Dun. -
n' de iH que ad aliaf’ ccéaf ptinent - Ft unam manfura 7 bégo meo de
Dun? HiBam 7 q'etam - 7 aliam in b°go fio T uelin - 7 aliam i bu
meo de Perth - 7 alia in burgo meo de edenetburg - F- Rot eléo t
Andree - 7 HerBto eancett apud Dunf -

De ean de fif 7 fothrif 7 de Clacmanaii -

Dauid di gia Rex Scott - dibs prots hbid; toci? Pre fue fat - Sciatif’ me
de® 7 con® deo 7 ecte tri de Dun? 7 abbi 7 f¥ibs ibid deo Suicntibs
omné decima toci? mei ean de fif 7 de fothrif 7 de Clacmait in farina 7
cafeo 7 phenda 7 brafeo «in porcit’ 7 vaccif in ppetud elemofinam pro
falute aie mee 7 dium pdecefloy + fuceefloy meoy - Q're minift'!’ meif
firmit peipio q“tinuf ci iftd Can recepint ? eif reétam decima fii di


--- Dunfermline_page66.png ---
oO

)

16 REGISTRUM DE

moleftia 7 vexaGone reddant + Et prohibeo fup meam plenariam foriffac-
tura - ne alig's cif inde q'ey*m fabt "here plumat - #- Rob efio fai Andy -
- Johe epo de Glafeu « 7 Gillemichel comit de fif- ¢ Ting de worenilt -
+ Rob corbeth «7 herbto caneett « 7 Philipp cainario - 7 Alwino fit

Archi] - Apud Dunt -

De decima auri -

Dauid Rex teoté « omihs hdibs tuif Salf - Sciatif’ me de 7 con cede fee
tri de Dunf? in clemofina omné decimam de auro yt m* cueniet de fif 7
de fothrif . ¥ - Cancel - 7 Hugo de moreuitt - 7 Johe epo - Ap Elbott -

Der Nirealdin 7 ecctia ei? -

Danid dei gia Rex feott » efis - abbibs - Comi® . Vieceo”* « baronihs -
Ppoitit’ - minif 7 Sib; phis Loih; tociut’ tre fe + francif’ - anglicif’ -
scottit’- Salim - Sciatif me de“ 7 reddiditie deo 7 ecte 1%e tri de dunt -
~ abbi et monachif ibidem deo feruientibs tota feyram de Kirealadin -
qm Conftatinus comes ab eif ui tennit 7 ppetuam elemotinam - ci Gib;
7 fir mea cande ta pro falute

Btatibs 7 dignitatibs eit quibs pr iis
animari fuari 7 pdecefloy 7 tuecetloy fuoy eee dedunt - Videlic’t in

's 7 p"tif 7 patenif - 1 botcho 7 plano 7
(re phibeo ne alicui de heredibs Conftant

ecta 7 molendino 7 in tris 7
in omib; ad ean ptinentibs
vam caliipnianti: inde refpondeant 3 quiete 7 pacifice pdtam ram 7
ppetuii tencant - F- RoBto efio 8 Andree - Johe efo Glafeneii - Cormaceo
epo de Dunkeld - Madeth comit - Walif comit - Head comit - Hug de
coreuit - Herb? eancett - Rob corbet - Edward oftabt » Malotheni vice-
com de Seoi - Alwino mae archil - Apud firiuelitt -



--- Dunfermline_page67.png ---
33.

REG. DAV.] DUNFERMELYN. 17

De cectia de Infrete -

Dania ai g° R- Seot dibs fidelibs fuif falf - Seiatif’ me dedifle in clemo-
fina ec®e te tri de Dunf?? Eetam De Lutrete + poft obitum Nicholai
faedotit . “F - Johe efio apud Dut? -

De Tibertate eaftelloy 7 poueium -

Danid ai gri Rex feoti dihs probit hdibs fhif falé . Sciatif me de* 7 9°
deo 7 eves f%e tri de Dif 7 abbi 7 mona™ i'd8 do fer’ pro aia pris
mei 7 firif mee 7 p aiabs Git alicefioy meoy 7 futfoy - vt hdief fai fint
HB: ab vi opadne cattelloy 7 poneium 7 ditt alioy opum - Quare uolo 7
peipio q“tinut hee UDtaf cif’ in ppetuum eonfeructur inconeufla. P - Joh
ep + 7 Gillemich comit - 7 Rob de brus » 7 lug de woreuitt - ap
ftrathv¥rewen in Galwegia -

De fugitiuif @ uocantur CumBlach -

Dauid Rex Scott dibs fidelibs tuif tociut feod 7 laudoii anny, Peipio
‘tin? cito Cutilach reddant® ecte $ ti" de Dunf 7 onif Bui fui q’s pr
fiis 5 fir mea 7 fFes mei ei dederunt - 7 cumlache fai a tempe Edgari
regif uly, nie ci tota pectiia faa ubicitiq, ucniant® «7 prohibeo ne iniutte
retincantur - Teftibs » H&Bto cancellario 7 Vnvet Apud Dunfermelin +

De Vrehard -

Dauid Rex Scott -epis + abbibs - baronibs + inft . Vie icecdi . + om
feott

zad {Te r

hdibs toci? tre tue francif’. a
of ptentet me ad domuf dei dilatads

rionis propagationem


--- Dunfermline_page68.png ---
18 REGISTRUM DE [sec. XIE.

dediffe . 7 9%» do 7 ecte § tri® de vrehard «7 le mea carta pori 7 {Fibs
ibidem Suientibs confir® Vrchard p fuaf recat diuifaf. 7 duaf’ finfunt’ p
fuaf rectaf dinifat’- 7 fochoper p fuas reétaf diuifaf' - 7 cGmunionem pafeuii
aialibs » 7 vnam pifeariam in {pe - 7 in firma burgi de elgin - xx - fot -
= de dniif hdiby eoy q' funt 7 fochop reéitndiné pifcif q ad thain ptinet -
zy decimi cani de ergaithel de muref 7 placitoy - 7 tociuf luc! ci%dé
ergaithel - Pretea gcedo 7 he mea carta confirmo donagm abbis 7 toci?
con de Dunf - f+ Pethenach iux® Eren p fuaf reétaf diuifat’. 7 fealingat
de fathenechten - 7 offif reétitudinef qs monachi de Dunf- in muref
haBe folebant qs tali odigne ecto de Vit + ffibs ibid= deo Suientibs
LiBas 7 quietaf ab di exacue mea gceflione 7 pfirmaOne yeedunt + ut
oheunte p*: alia de efeébe fratrii 7 de ofilio abbit’ de dunt + affét rei
fi \done? ibid Tu@iat? fubrogetur - fin aut de ceta de Dun? accipiatur -
Hee p™™ fubrogacio imuiolabilit in ppetuti in? eof fit pdém eft osnet® :
Volo ¥ = Peipio qt ecta Pata 7 p'or 7 fief eiufdé loci habeant 7 tencant
ref’ pdéat’ ita libere 7 quiete ficut aliq’ ecta i ‘tra mea habet 7 tenet
quieeint 7 liBiuf’- ¥ - Andrea ejio » 7 filtis aliis .

De xx - folidif de Elgin -

. Danid Rex Seoté - efit - abb;-Comi" - Baro”. Viced’ . ppaitit’. > oiibs
probis hdib; tociuf muref 7 Scoé Salt - Sciatis me i ppetuii dediffe deo
y monachif de Vrehard ibi deo famulantib; dum deuote 7 religiofe te
continuerint - xx + fot - finglis annif’ ad veftimenta eoy de firma Iurgi
mei 7 aquay de Elgin - Quare peipio q ppdituf eiufdé burgi cif ilos
denariof {ii Gi difturbaée faciat hre - # + Iferts cameraé « 7 Alwino fit
archil - Apud Banef -


--- Dunfermline_page69.png ---
REG. MALC. } DUNFERMELYN. 19

Confirmacio Waleolmi Regi’.

Ty note fe Trinitatis Ego Waleolmus dei gracia Rex Seoté auctoritate

regia ac potettate - Epoy - Comitum - baronnmg, regni mei pfimacdne 7
teflimonio- clero % adquieteente 7 pplo - ecte t&e Trinitatis Dunfmelin -
Pdecefloy meoy pietatif’ tludio 7 largicionis iniciate - omia fubfe"pta
geedo? 7 pace ppetua confirmo . Atani itaq, mei Regif Qaleolmi - 7
Regine cintd bone memorie Qargarite dona firbfequencia? Ppono « Hee
teilieet - Pardufin - Petnanrcha - Peteorthin - Pethaliclachin + Iauer -
Bolgin - Seyram de Kirealethin + Infrech minorem - Dona Duneanj regis -
Dnat uillas noie Infker - Dona Edgari Regif’ Se¥ram de Gelland - Dona
Edelredi - Hale - Dona Alexandri regif’- Primros - Scjram de Gatemile -
Pettonmarehi + Balecherin + DrumBnin - Keth « Dona fibille regine -

Beeth - Hee pita paeceffoy meoy dona concedo lBaliter pfate ecte cum
omibs {uit apendiciif t re&if dinifif’. Dona deniq, ani mei execllentiffimi
Regis Danid: tiubfequant? - Dunfmelin - feilicet cit® aq*m + in qua cadem
ecéa fita eft - Kingoren ci tuif apendiciif G ppinquior eft Dunfmet -
Foeth - Infrech maiorem 7 molendinum - 7 pifeinam - 7 Smithebi « 7 Cref-
barri + 7 ec@am de Infrech «7 Wymeth eum fnif rectif diuifif 7 Fotheros
iux* fin Andream ci fuif rectif dinifis -7 Pethenach cit fuif rectis dinifit’-
7 vnam carucatam fre Petioker + Pretea concedo p fatte aie mee 7 ante-
cefloy meoy Nithbren ci fuis apendiciif - 7 Balecriftine ct fuif rectif
diuifif’. in ptif 7 pafenif exeepta redtitudine qm keledei haBe debeut «

et omib; reb3 ad caf infte ptinentih; ficut date fuerunt Pade cet in
dotem ab avo meo rege dd dic qua dedicata fuit - Prebea do cidem cece
yna manfiram 1 B?wich + aliam in rokefbure - aliam 7 burgo de hadig-
tune - alia in cdenb‘e - alia in linlideu - alia 7 burgo de uelin - 7 i eadem
uilla duaf ecGat- 7 wnam carucatam tre que adiacet ipi ecée +7 omné
decima meoy dominioy in frngibs 7 in animalibs - 7 in pifcibs de propif’
retib3 7 eciam 7 denariis - 7 decima mei Can tociuf caftrenfis puincie « 7
mantionet Rogij pfbri- ita plene fieut ife famns 7 incolumis tenuit « 7
vnii rete y dimidia 7 vnam manfioné in burgo Diifmelin 1iBam 5



--- Dunfermline_page70.png ---
20 REGISTRUM DE

quictam + 7 omné decimacioné denarioy firme burgi - 7 decimacioné
molendini » 7 de dih3; dominiis meis de ant’ - 7 vnd manfioné T burgo de
Pt - 7 eetam ciufdé uille - 7 und manfioné q ptinet ipi ecte - 7 omne
deeima de dnie meo - Oihia af dona pdéa ita 1iBaliter 7 quiete Pfate ecte
concedo : ficut ego traf meat’ pp'al’ poflideo + defenfide regni mei ex-
cepta + 7 reg
infticia deciderit - Concedo % omnem o&anam ptem de omib3 placitif 7
luc's fit de fif 7 de fotherif «7 omné decima tocinf mei Can 7 b*fei de
fif 7 de fotherif - exceptif’ reétitndinibus - que abbie Dunkeld ptinent - 7
decima S12 uenationum 4G capiunt® in? Jambremor 7 Tay +7 medictatem
Sium corioy 7 fepoy 7 fagiminif’ did beftiarum que occidentur ad feftini-
tatef tenendaf in {Unelin 7 ind forth 7 Tai - Coneedo Tut habeant in
nemorib; meis oiia nectia ad ignem 7 ad edificia fua fieut ego ipe 7

hoies eoy fieut 7 mei + Volo denig,

ali jufticiay fi abbs in curia faa aliqua negeligencia de

t omnef oblaconef q ad mai? altare
liberatr habeat - Et de Selichif q ad
kingorii capient® poftq® deeimati fine: ocedo ut ofif feptimot felich
habeat - Salif q° 7 fri que ad opuf’ meum ad Dunf> allata faint? omné

ei2dé ecée offerentur fine ealumpnia

decimam conecdo + Prevea ataunt meu’ 7 regina fua dedunt ecte {te
Trinit® - pochii totam fotherif? 7 fic ocedo + Deniq, do 7 concedo in
elemofinam in ppetunm eidé ecte tracti de Aldeftelle 7 omne gd ei iufte
ptinct - Tracut ifte dat eft feiht 7 Bewieo HB y quietuf. P2 hee %
phibeo ne alijjd nam capiatur fup tram fil Sr hoies 1c tnitatis p foriffeo
alicui?? n° p pp’ foriffo iloy - Concedo % qd infte reddantur ecte fe
Trini ofis Sui fai quof attauuf fif 7 aunt’ fit Dauid 7 fFes fui ei dede-
runt +7 omnef fui Cumlelache a tSpore - Edgari regif ufq nune + cit tota
pecunia tua ubieiiq, inneniantur 7 prohibeo fup inca foriffem ne iniutie

retineaut® - Concedo abbi 7 mona“ ut habeant offis hoies et omi pecitia
eoy 7 euivenma, Pra flint « qui fuernnt in tris die q® fueriit oblate 7
date ecte fée Trinitatis - Concedo qe fate ecte decima de dib; meif
filiirihs equabs de fif 7 de fothif « Coneedo abbi 7 mo™* ut habeant p totam
Pram meam thelonenm qetum de eiétif reb3 q's Meati flint ad pp'a cor
nectia - Pret ifta fup“déa dono 7 cedo abbi 7 monachis ut habeat finglis
y+ mreaf argenti ad ueftifita eoy de p'mif nanib; q uenient ad



--- Dunfermline_page71.png ---
REG. MALC. J DUNFERMELY

{uet ut ad Perth « Concedo ¥ ecte § tri paffagiit 7 naué de Inurkethin -
ficut habui in meo dominio - tali condiGone qd peg’nantet’. 7 nuneii ad me
uenientel’7 a me redeuntet’ 7 hoief curie mee t*nfeant in ead@ nani {i
peio- Et fi ptingat aliqim ifloy fii Pei tnfire fi pofle . 7 abbs inde cla-
moré audierit 7 iltd nd emendaiit ut ego ije iltd emendare fii abit 7
fratrum ecée moleftia poffim - Concedo 7 uolo q"tin® abbs 7 @o™ ect

lipnianti de hominibs q' fuertit 7 trif

Trini « Coneedo ¥ eidé ec&e decima

fée tri non refpondeant alicni
die gy" oblate 7 date fueriit cote {te
tociut Mi Can de elaefi -abbs 7 wo" ecte § Trini cit? lab'mor 7 tota
ia poteflate finglif tabbif 1 euria habét uni corium - 7 7 texto fabbo
hut duo eoria - 7 duaf’ ptef de fepo 7 fextam pellem arictum 7 agnoy -
Et pcedo cidé eete dimidia partem decimi mei de Ergeithil 7 Kentir -
co feitt anno qi ego ipe inde reeepo Can + Concedo % Phoiate ecte

q*ndam pifcatwa apud Perth - Ita libe 7 7 y'ete fi@ meat ibi habeo - Ego
quoq, Waleolmut’ Rex Scott ex pp'o dono fup“dée eete peedo p falute
aie aui mei Regif dd y alioy pdecetloy meoy & noe Jedmacduuegil i
ppetuam clemofinam ei fait rectif diuifif fieuti magif? wlrient cemitariuf
ill tenuit - q* in die fepult?e pag aui mei ide ecte donando ocelli -
adeo liBe 7 quiete ficuti alig ceta meli? 7 Bing in tote. tra mea tenet
7 tria ingera fre - 7 Gddam

% eidé® ccée -

fuaf clemofinaf » Dono
p’tum ppe Dunf q{ pul i meo dnio habui - Donando gq? concedo ut
{deungq, cete ex pte Scot applicttit fine captum fiit 1 dnio meo - totii
eapd pe ling"m eidé ecée remaneat - Sup*taxata aii ecCam citi omih; que
di donante clemencia in fenti fieut Plenf teftat® piuilegia 7 optinet - 7
7 fut®o ead@ adq'rere cleficia ualebit? in ftime pacis t*uquillitate «7 ab
di HBrimam tam fecularis q’ ectaftice poteftant fubiecGdne 7 exaccdit”
inq’etudie pmaiie deenimut - excepta fola 7 candica obediencia q'm debet
mnaqueq, mat’ fue p orb’ eeéa + Cni? E inva in hoe ptuilegio pnotata 7
dignitatif p‘uilegia inmutilata feruare - 7 ftabilitate ppetua firmare + nos
q pfentef fum? faceefloribs iris fub hac condiGdne ofirmando mandamus -

7 mandando pfirmam?- ut fiq's ea pt*hare uolilit - 7 fire difinidvis ftatuta
* ipm mundi

divelfe - iminuere - ac uiolare piendit? no ignoret fe o'
faluatorem niti . 7 ideo m” refiptit? etne dipnagdnis fhiam incurrere


--- Dunfermline_page72.png ---
36. CE} + Rex Seoté - Epif - abbibs

Be) REGISTRUM DE [sEc. XIE.

eumq, ds de libro uite deleat + q* ecée pfate de ocefle poteftatif’ iure
aliq'd abftnlit - Amen - > Fiat» Ego Rob {%i and‘e ept pftno - * Ego
HBtul Glafeueii ep& oftmo - ** Ego + Dunkeld ept of'mo - & Ego
WiH moreuen3 epe pftmo . * Ego Andy Catenen’ epé pftmo - > Ego
Xpian? Witnens ep oftmo « Hui? % ptuilegij teftef 7 affertoref fant -
Wali cancellan + Ingo de jorenitt - Waltuf de Iyndefeia + Gilleb de
vinfraui - Walt fit Gillet - Phillipp? de coleuitt - Gotpat'ciuf fit Waldef -
Rot auenel + Nichot clieuf » PP « olifart + Alwyn? fit arkil - Et de
Comitib; + Gotpat'eiuf comes - Ferteth com - Duné Coii - Morgund
Cofit - Meleolmuf com - Comet’ de Aneg? -

De eeta {te Trnitatif de Dunkeld -

Comitibs - baronib? « Jufiiciif’ . Ppoitif -
coinitt'f - cun&ii q, aliif pbis hdihs tociuf S
pot? ime oceflifle 7 h°e Carta mea ofirmaffe Ect

fée Trini® de Dun: -
Trini de Dunkeld ef Tris ad illam ptinetibs - 7 et omibs aliis
reétif ptinenciif fuif’- optinéda in ppetuam elemofinam poft deceffum
Andy Epi de Cateneif’ p falute aiay omit aiicefloy meorum - Uolo itaq,
ut ceca fe Trini de punt » pfati eetam f%e Trini® de Dunkeld poft
memorati deceflium Epi teneat 7 poflideat ci omi lBtate 7 rectitude ct
qb idem ept cam ung“m meli? tenuit «7 dono Regis dd poffedit . T .
Rob abbe de Scofi - 7 Aluredo abbate de St'uelin - Engel eancelt - Nichol
apud Stuclifi -

Ectam {te

De eapitihs pileiti q' uoeat® erefpait’ -

BD M)ale Imuf Rex Seott oiibs probis hdibs tociuf tre fue + clieif 7 laicis -

francif’ 7 Anglicif 7 Seott Salt -+

7 monachis ibidem deo Suienti

abbi de Dun?
7 ppetuam elemofinam p falute aie pde-
cefforif’ mei dd Regif’ capita pifeium q' dicunt® Crefpeif Pe linguam q' i

iatif’ me dedifle 7 gceffill


--- Dunfermline_page73.png ---
REG. MALC. ] DUNFERMELYN. 23

meo dnio ex illa pte Seotwat) applictlint : in qua pte illoy ceéa fita eft -
Test - And‘a epo + Duné comite - Mug + de worenit « Walt fit Alani -
HerBto catlat - Nichot elico « Alwtno mac arkil - ap pi -

De fagimine de cretfpail’-

38. CHF. Rex Scott Inflicie fue de fit 7 vieceofi tho de Dunk 7 vid tuo de
Claemaii 7 aliis prots hominibs fuif Sali - Notum fit uob me de 7 con® deo
7 ec&e Ste Tri de Dat? «7 mo ibidem deo Suientibs in ppetuam elemo-

find p falute aie mee 7 aiiecfivx, meoy dimidii toci? fagiminis mei de
Crefpais q' capiuntur int forth 7 Tai - ad luminaria coram altarib3 Pnoiate
ecte - T. G+ - efo - Dunkt - Andy“ epo Kateneii - Engel cancel - Niehoi

Camla¥ » Wito de Andri- Ranulph manfett - apt Duni> -

De ledmaeduuegil -

39. caag + Rex Seoté Epif - Abbib; - Comis - Baro’ - Vieceo” - Juttia¥ -
minifUl- 7 dibs hSib; toci? fre fue Sali - Sciatif’ me concefliffe 7 de p

yes

falute aui mei Regif dd ecte fee Ti" - de Dunf’ 7 monachis ibi

deo

Us maistertun Suientibs - ledmaedunegil - 7 ppetuam elemofinam ei fiif rectis dinifit
fieuti magr Ailricus cementariut illam tenuit 7 habuit liBe 7 qhete + ficuti
aliq*® eeta meli? 7 liBins 7 tota tra mea tenet clemofinas nat’ pdecet-
foref’ mei pro falute aiay tay ei dederunt - F. Rob ep - de 3 Anda. ~
HBto cf de Glatiu . 7 Gt
W . abbe de {Ga e’ee - 7 Osbto pore de Jedd . 7 W + cancel - 7 Hug de
moreuiH +7 W - fit Alait- 7 W-de lyndeS «7 Neif fit Wit - 7 Conftan-
tino ffe fuo . 7 W - de Ridale - Ap eattet puellay -

.¢p Dunkeld «7 Mrnaldo abbe-de Keleh . ~

De eeta de Pt 7 de Capella cum pertinentiif -

40 Hy + Rex Seoté + Epif + Abbibs » Comi"’ - Vieeco"’ + bare" « Ppo" «mir


--- Dunfermline_page74.png ---
ot REGISTRUM DE [sec. xt.

z aliif dibs Tre fue pb hdibs ta clicif q® laicif tam fut®if qtm prefentibs
lé + Sciant omnet me de* *t con 7 hac mea carta confirmaffe ecte {Fe
Tni** de Dunf’ i ppetuam elemofina Eetam de Pt 7 eapHam de caftello -
cum omihs ad eaf infte ptinentiby - videliect Torfoppin - Baleglinen -
jaffin » Baleblari - Tullilum - 7 alind Tullili - Balegillnrs -
1 Petultin - 7 cct@am de Kellin « 7 Capella de ABerumbi cf Bibs ad eat’
iuite ptinent

fieut alique pofleflionef’ ectaftice LiBie aut meli? in toto meo regno haben-
tur 7 tenentur- Teftibs hiif- Wito efo de muref - €&- ep - de Dunkeld -
Anda efo de Katenet’ - Emald abbe de Kelch - OsBto abbe de Jedd -
Wil abbe de f%a ernce - Gofpatte comit - Ferteth comite - Gilb coi de
Anegus + elcolii maceth - Wali fit Alaii- Rob de Brut’. Rig de worenitt -
Gilt de vinf"fi - DB. olifard - Wilt de Suiluitt . Neif fit Wiki - Comit
Dung - werlefwain - Apud Edenburg -

gein + Bales

ad tenendit de me 7 de heredibs meis - Ita liBe 7 quiete +

De decimif ecée de Pt +

H.-R. Rex Scott. Epif » Abbih; - Comi’ - bare!’ « Jn tid « Vieeeo" «
Ppo + mini’ + cunctify, aliif pi hoihs toci? fre tie elicit 7 laicif Salt -
Sciant pfentet 7 pofti me ecte {ti Johis bapte de Pt i dotem dediffe - 7
huni? carte mee munimic ofirmaffe totam decima pifeinm q' eapientur 7

dibs aquif_a balmackennedi ufq, tnniramun - deilfit’ Critorium nille de

Pt- 7 pmanentem clemofinam - Q*re nolo 7 precipio ut Pd@a eta decima

pnoiatam ita liBe y quiete optineat? fient ead& ccta vt aliq® alia ecéa i

tota tra mea aliq's decimas libiat 5 qeti? eptinet FY WiK worauiend

epo - fedif aptice legato - Arnald efio de {Co Andy » Edwardo efo de aber-
don + Laur efo de dunblain - Johe abb de Keleh - Of Bto abbe de Jedd -

Wali pore de fo Andy - Itaae p'ore de Scoii + Qatho archid » Apud Pt -

Ge tofto de clacmaii -

1. CEP + Rex Seoti » Omibs hbihs tock? tre fue Salé - Seiatif me oceffifle +


--- Dunfermline_page75.png ---
3. CO Rex

REG, MALC DUNPFERMELYN. Qi

dediffe abbi de Dunf 7 monach ibidem deo Suientibs » Vand plenarium
toftum © Crofto in uilla mea de claemaii libe 7 quiete 7 honorifice ficut
ipi libiut’ + quieciuf 7 honorificenci? aliq’m clemofinam 7 tra mea habent
7 poflident «Tf. Walto eancet - Rit de moreuill » Randulph de Sut -
Apud clacmaii -

De proteeGoue -

alé - Mando

uob 7 firmit Peipio q‘tin? monachos de Dunf 7 omia fua protegatil’ 7

Seot? Waleoliit comif de Rot 7 omibs mini’ Luis

manutencatif’ 7 iura fua bre {aciatif’- in tris 7 aquif’- fieut ung’m meliut +
pleniuf habucrunt tempe aui mei da regif- Et prohibeo ne aliq'f inva fia
detineat «nec eif fo
efo de fo Andrea + Epo de Dunkeld - Caneellat » Apud Clacmaii -

‘iat - fup met plenarium foriffém . # - Arnaldo

De cea de Neutun pfirmac -

» CH: Rex Scot? omihs probit hdihs tociuf fue tre Sat. Seiat ds tom

faturi q* plentel’ me conceflifle 7 h"e mea earta ofirmaffe donagom ecto
de Neutun q*m Elwin? Renner 7 Eda uxor ei? in ppetuam dedunt ele-
b3 ibidé deo Suientibs - Quare

mofinam eeée {%e Trinitatis de Dunt 7 fi
uolo ut habeant pdidti ectam - 7 teneant eam ita HiBe 7 quicte fie ecterat’
potleflionet!’ cetafticat q's Pdeceflore! mei p tatte animay fuarum ci
dedunt - Tefte Walto Cancel - Apud Dunfermelin -

De protecédne de Conneueth -

HY - Rex Scott. Comii Dunt 7 Milefwain + Hugoni filio Gillemichel ~
G+ imac tloclac «> Neif tilio Wiki. 7 Alun - 7 Gibs probit hoibs tociuf fir
Salé- Peipio uot q“tinuf manutencatif 7 cuftodiatif monachof de Duni

D



--- Dunfermline_page76.png ---
46.

ts.

26 REGISTRUM DE [sEc. xi.

7 Prat tas 7 abbaciam ubi corp9 aui mei tt Regif in deo requiefeit - ita
qd null? uém eat fup hoies eoy 7 Prat’ in Coneueth - neq, hoief ufof [uti -]
fap meum plenarium foriffém - De hoc qd eif tanta iniuriam contuliftif inde
multi doleo . T. Efio de Katenef’- 7 Hugoti de woreuitt - Apud Edenb -

De capella de Inuirketh - 7 de duobs toftif’ -

Sciatif me deditle
* de Dun?’ 7 abbi
ibidé deo fernientibs eapellam de Inuirketi q eft de Parochia eoy
in ppetuam elemofina - 7 duof toft in eadé uilla » vnwm q¢é adiacet capelle
7 altum 7 burgagio - Qre nolo 7 firmit Peipio ut ifa adeo KBe 7 quiete
teneant : ficut aliaf polfeffionet’ in tra mea tenent 7 poflident I. Aernaldo
cpio 1ti andy - 4% - efo de Diiket - Andrea efo Katiti - Gefpat'S comit -
Nichot Cancel - Mllefwain - BD: - olifard - apud Dun? -

wy - Rex Seott dib3 probis hdibs tociuf tre fire salute
~ oceflifle 7 hac mea Carta ofirmat® deo 7 ecte fte Trini

his

7 mo

De Ecetia de huchterealedouir contirii’ -

: Hy + Rex Seott dibz phis hdibs toci? fue tre falf - Sciant tam fut4i g"m

pfentef me gceffiffe 7 hac mea Carta pfirmafie donaéom cece de Init?
kaledoti q'm Comet’ puneait i ppetuam dedit elemofinam ecée de Dunf: -
~ fFib3 ibidem do Suientibs -Qre volo ut habeant Pd@am ectam 7 teneant
vam ita Tie 7 quiete ficut ceteraf podeilionet ecéattical’ q"s aficefforet’
mei donanerunt ecée de Dunit > ofirmatunt - 7 ita eam habeant ut Carta
Comit Duné pteftat? - ¥ - HBto efo de Glaf® - Walt cancel . DB olif’ -
Rob Auenel - Afid Edenb?g -

De tofto de Edenburg -

HF - Rex Scot - Vice? - Rob de Edenburé 7 dibs fait’ pbis hbibs fat -


--- Dunfermline_page77.png ---
+9.

REG. MALC.] DUNFERMELYN. QF

S

if me dedifle abbi de Dun? 7 ffi; ei2%dem loci vuii tof qd pofledit
priuf Roti de londoniis - Q‘ve uolo 7 peipio q"tin® toft iltd ita WBe 7
quiete poffideant: vt Bint’ t quicei? cetaf elemofinat poflident 7 tota
mea tra. F. I- de moreuitt - 7 Walt fit Alaii - 7 Witto de lindefei - 7
Waltero de lindet

De libtate opif poncinm 7 eaftelloy -

CH - Rex Sed - Bibs pb hdihs tociuf tre fue fat
ii pdecetloy meoy 7 fueceffoy ec

wie peel + p aia
reg dd 7 p ath; 8 Tui de Daf ut
hdief ci? fint HBi ab oi opatone ponciti 7 cattelloy 7 dit alioy - Q*re
phibeo ne ab if exigatur n* fpontanea uoliitate illud face
noliint - TA - com ngel® cancel - Comit cofpat't - Cofi Dune -
Witt de aldri. Wit fit hBti catar . Philippo obifard -apud fem Andream -

chi

ubbs 7 mo’



--- Dunfermline_page78.png ---
50.

28 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xu.

Contirmacio Witmi Regis -

IN nomine {te Trinitatis ego Witmus di gia Rex Scottoy - auctoritate
regia ac poteftate - choy - Comitum baronumq, regni mei confenta atq,
teflimonio - clero etiam adquicteente 7 poplo - cete {te Trinitatis Dun-
fmet - Pdeceffoy meoy pietatis ftudio 7 largitionis iniciate ¢ omia fubfepta
concedo + 7 pace ppetua ofirmo - Attaui itaq, nci Regif Walcolni 7 Regine
cinfd® bone memorie Qargarite dona fublequencia Ppono - Hee feitt -
Pardufin . Pethnaureha - Petbachlin - Petheorthin - Latt « Bolgin - Seh(ram
de Kirealethin - Intefé minorem » BDOna Duncani Regis: duaf' uillaf noie
luikar - De dono Edgari Regis - Seh¥ram de Gellald . DE dono Ethelredi -
Halef - De dono Alexandri Regis - Primros - Schyram de Gatemile -
Peteonmarehin « Balekerin » DrumBnin - Keth - De dono Sibille regine +
Beeth - Hee dda Pdecetfoy meoy dona concedo HBali? Brute eee eum
omihs apendieiif fuis 7 reétis diuifis - DE dono aui mei exeellentiffimi
R

cu fis apendic

Dauid Duntmelin citra aq‘m -7 qua eadem ecéa fita eft - Kingoy +

que ppinquior ef Dunf - Foct - Innirefeh maiorem -

7 molendinum 7 piitinam - 7 Smithebi + 7 Crebarrin - 7 eetam de Inuir-
ele. We ém Andrea eum toil
rectit diuifis - > Pethenach - eum fuif rectif dinitit’- 7 vnam carueatam tre
Petioker » 7 Nithbren eum fuis apendieiit’ - 7 Baleriftine ci fuit retit’
diuifis + in pratis 7 pateuis - exeepta rectitudine q* keledi inde hre debent -
cum omibs reb; iufte ad eaf ptinentibs - fieut date fuerunt pile ecée in

met et fis rectif diuifif > Pothros it

dotem ab ano meo rege Dauid: die qua dedieata fuit - Et pea: ynam
manfuram 7 Bwich - alia in Roketburg

+ aliam in hadigtui - aliam in
Edenburg - aliam 7 linlitheu + aliam in St‘uclin - 7 in eadé uilla duat™

OL. & ad sew A
eetas » 7 unam earucatam tre q adiacet ipi ecte - 7 ommem decimam

meoy dnioy i f*gihs; 7 Taialibs - 7 in pitcibs de ppriif retib; ~ etiam in
denariis + 7 decima Mi Can toci? eaft*nfis prouincie - 7 manfiones Rogerii
prefbri - ita plene fieut ipe fanuf 7 incolumif tenuit - 7 unum rete 7 dimi-
dium» > Vnam manfioné in Burgo Dunfmet - Bam 7 qetam - 7 omné

dceimationé firme Burgi + 7 decimatione molendini 7 de omnib3 dniif meit’


--- Dunfermline_page79.png ---
wit.) DUNPERMELYN., 20

R

de Dunt? + 7 vynam manfionem 7 burgo de Perth - 7 ee@ain ciusdem uille -
3 apendiciis utrinig, - Kt vnam manfionen

7 capellam de caftello ei omi
q ptinet ipi cete «7 omné decima de dnio mee - Et oun octauam ptem
de fotherif - 7 omne deeimam de

de omibs; placitis 7 Inerif’ meif’ de fiif
7

Can 7 b‘fei de fif 7 de foth - execptif’ rectitudinibs 4 abbie Dunkeld

ptinent - Et decima omit uenaGonum 4 capiunt® int lamBmor 7 Tay E

auro qd miehi cucnict de tif 7 de fotherif - 7 omne decimam toci? mei

medictatem dium corioy 7 fepoy 7 fagifiis Gium hettiari 7 oceident? ad
feftinitatef’ tenendaf in St'uelin 7 in? forth 7 Tay . Et ut habcant in

jua [ficut] ego ipe- 7

nemorih3 meif oMia necéia ad ignem 7 ad edifice

homines eo» ficut 7 mei - Et ut onmnet’ oblagnes Fad mai? alta
~ 7 . ee), > Seas

ceée offerentur? sine ealumpnia libair habeant - Et de Sclichis que ad

eitdent

Kingorii capient® poftg® decimati fiint / ofis feptimof Selichif’ habeant -

Salis quoq, 7 ferri q ad opnf wei apd Dun?’ allata fiint  omnem decima
concedo - Et parochiam totam fothrif . Et 7 Browick trata de Ablet:
telle «7 omne qd ei infte ptinct - Phibeo ¥ ne alijd naam eapiatur tap
terram il fap hoict {te Trinitatif p foritfacto alice? n’ p pp'o forffFo Hoy -
Conecedo t Gd infte reddantur ecée fee Trini? ofits Qui fui: quef attauul
Ms 7 auus is PD. 7 f¥es tui? ei dederunt - 7 omnef fi Cuiillachet’ a
tempore Edgari Regis ufq, nune - ci tota peeunia tia ubiewmg, inueni-

antur - 7 phibeo sup meii foriffem : ne ininfte retincantur + 7 ut ha ubeant

omnet hoies ei oi pecitia coy T eni%q, tra fuerint « qui fucriit in Pris

die q" fueriit oblate 7 date eeée Trini® - Et decimam de dibs meif filtirihs
equahs de fif 7 de fothr - we ut pabeane p totam Pram mea theloneum

q's Meati tint ad pp'a coy nectia + Et patla

q'etuin de cundtis rebz ;
nauem de Inuirket - fieut habui 7 dnio meo - tali edditone Gd pegrinantes
7 nuneij ad me uenicntef 7 a me redeuntet’- 7 hoief curie mee t*nfeant i
cadem naui fi Peio - Et fi otingat aliq’m iftoy fine peo t“nfire non pofle «
7 abbs inde clamor’ audierit 7 illud non emendarit ego ipe illud emen-
dabo fi abbis 7 fratrum eete molettia » Et abbs 7 @onachi eccée & Trini
non refpondeant alicui ealumpnianti de hoibs q fucrit 7 tris die q" oblate

7 date fuerunt ecte {te Trini" « Conecdo % cidem ec&e decim

Can de clacii - Et ut cit® lambermor in tota regia potettate finGlis fabbit

toci? mei



--- Dunfermline_page80.png ---
30 REGISTRUM DE (sre. Si.

in curia habeant uni corifi - 7 7 Sexto fabbo duo coria - Et duat’ ptef de
fepo - 7 Sextam pellé arictum 7 agnoy - 7 dimidia partem decimi_mei
de Ergaithel 7 Kentir » Et q‘nda pifeaturam apud Pth - ita liBe 7
quicte? fient meaf i? habeo - De dono Regif Maleolmi fiis mei Ledmac-

duvegil et fuis rectis diuifis - fieut magifter Hlricus ceititariuf ili tenuit :

q'm in dic fepulture Padi ani mei eid’ ec&e obtulit - 7+ xx"in" + iugera fre.
3 ddam pttum ppe Dunf* - que priufT dominio fuo habuit - Et qdeumq
cete ex parte Scocie applicuit - fine eaptum filit? tot capd pe ling*m
cid® ccée remaneat - 7 dimidietatem tociuf fagiminis mei di cetui que
capiuntur int forth 7 thay ad luminaria cora altarib? ec&e - Et offis hominet
coy fint WBi ab omi opatone poncium 7 caftelloy - 7 dium alioy opum -
Et ¢
aliif reais ptinenciif fuif’- optinendam in ppetuam elemofinam poft de-

m fe Trinitatis de Dunkeld : et Prif'ad illa ptinentibs - 7 ef omibs

ceffum Andree efi KatinenS - pro falute aie mee - 7 omit predeceffory

meoy + ct Gi libtate 7 rectitudine ci q'hy idem epé eam ung* melius
tenuit ¢ et dono Regis BD? poffedit . Et vnii Toft in Edenburg - qt Rob
de londoniif huit - Et voum plenarium toft cit croft in villa de Clacmaii -
Et ecéam de Kellin - Et capellam de ABerumbi - cum omib3 ad caf’ infte
ptinentib; - Ex dono u’ meo pp’os Redditi: Centii folidoy de firma Burgi
de Edéburg - quos dedi in die excquiay f¥is mei Regif Waleolini - Et - xx -
acraf tre - Et mum toft in Dun? - q’s Waltut dapif fis peeffione mea
dedit cidé cete? die fepulture Regis pdt - Omiia att fieut Puotata funt -
qa bonif aieefforibs meif teilicet Rege Maleot’ - 7 Regina eiufde bone
memorie Margarita - Diicano Rege - Mdgaro rege - Ethelredo f¥e ei? -

Alexandro Rege + Sibilla regina einfdem - Dauid Rege excellentitfimo -
tis

Malcolmo Rege - cc&e Trini’ - de Dunf data - concefla funt 7 ofirmata -
fieut Tantenticif coy fe'ptif eoutinetur - ci omi ila plenitudine 7 integ*tate
regia auctoritate - ofilio phoy hdinum meoy - dee ecée 7 ftibs ibide
deo Suientils? ocedo. 7 7 ppetuii integ® 7 illabata oferuanda ofirmo -
Testibs hiis . DD - ffe Regis - Nich cancel - Duncad comite «DBD - olift -
Philip} + de Valloi - Rié de Warewich - Wi de la haya - Netio fit
Witt - Rob de Qnei + Jordano Ridel - Radnlph de Cler - Rad mal chacl -
Gillett mac Samuel - Galf'do de Qaleuitt - Walto de Berkelai - Apud
fem Andream -


--- Dunfermline_page81.png ---
z

REG. WIL] DUNFERMELYN. 31

De trib; mareis de hadigtui -

Wtmaf di gia Rex Scoti . efit’. abbatibs - Comit - Barott - Juttié -
Vice « Prepditif’. minit't’. 7 dibs phis hdibs tocin£ Pre fae clicif’ + laicif
Salim
ofirmaffe deo 7 ect
‘Tref mareaf' de firma burgi mei de hadigtofi ad luminare ptate ec&e in
ppetni - Q*re uolo 7 firmit Beipio ut Pati wo Mal’. 111» m“reas finglif
annis de firma Pnotati burgi de hadigtuii habeant 7 teneant 7 Bam by
quictam 7 ppetuam elemofinam - Ita libere 7 quiete - plenarie + honori-
fice? fi@ alia’ elemofinat’ faat’ lidiut’ - quieciuf pleni? 7 honorificencint’

Sei

ant pfentet’ 7 fut?i me dedifle 7 gcefliffe 7 h*e carta mea
“e tnitatif de Dun? 7 monachis ibidem deo Suientibs

tenent 7 poflident - feitt - xx - fot ad feft (61 wartini - 7 xx - fot - ad Pen-
tecoft - # + Hug ciceH meo - Symone Arch de Teuidat » Rob 7 Rad
captinis meif- A - dapifo meo « Qaleolii tit Comit Duneaii - GeruaS auencl -
Witt Cum. Walt corbet » Wil de hay® « Rit de phenda + clico meo + A
de {¥reif - Euftach papedi - Philipp mareteatt - Apud Seletehirche -

B -c¢- fot pe Edenburg -

. Witt Rex Scot? - e'

minift't’. cetis , probis héib; fuit unitif fat « Seiant clici 7 laici plentet
7 potti me in libam elemofinam ocefliffe 7 ofir - deo 7 ecte ste Tri de
Dunf 7 monachis ibidem do Suientibs diuifam illa gm Rex Waleolin? tr
Mis eidem ecte fecit + 1. redditii . C - folidoy + habendum s* fingulif annit
+ qnonfy, eundem redditii pfate cege

is - abb3 - Comi’s - Baro®s - Juftid - viceeo” « ppoitit’-

de firma burgi mei de Edeubur;
aliunde reddendum oftituam - Pretea ocedo vide ecte p aia f
*s re- 7 vnum toft i Dunit -1iBaf’ + quietas fienti cet’as pofleffionef tual
i fit Alani dapif fis pate ee®e dedit ca
die qua Rex Waleolmuf’ fr dem fepultuf fuit -T- Andr efo de
Kat » Matho arehidiat - Rié capptto - Walto fit Alaii . BD - olifard «
Philippi de vallofi - Berti filio Blani - Walt de Bkela .
Rob fit Saut - Apud Kingort -

mei + xx -

liBint + quieciuf tenet - g's V

7 Rob de berk:


--- Dunfermline_page82.png ---
32 REGISTRUM DE

Confirmaé ccete d Abercrumbi +

Vvithnut dei gra Rex Seoté - dibs phis hdib; toci? terre fue clicif t laicit
falim . Sciant pfentet’ 7 futti me céceflifle 7 h*e carta me contirmatfe
don:

%m ila q'm Waleolm? comet de fif fecit deo 7 cee x? de Du

> abbi 7 wochif ibidem deo Suientibs de Ecta de Abercrombiii - Tenen-
dam eit tris 7 omibs aliif inttif ptinenciif fais «7 1iBam 7 pura 7 ppetua
clemofinam » Ita liBe 7 quiete? ficut carta Bazi Qalcolmi comit de fif +
teftatur - Test» WiH de Boteh cancel meo - Ph de valloti / came¥ meo -
Rob de londot filio moo» Wit Cumin Juftié Seoe « Rig fit hug - HBto
de camera + Ri Reuel - Afid - fiuedi - ix - die O&oby -

Qvieta clamacd operum +

Viuiils dei gra Rex Scot « dihg phif hdib; toci? tre fue Sali» Sciatif’ qd
qndo firmare feed eaftella mea in Ros? héief abbis 7 monachoy de Dunf
ad peticionem mea de bona uoluntate tua opati ft enm aliif phi’ hoibs
mei ad eadem eaftella firmanda + Quare volo 7 peipio q“tinut hoe qd
illa uice ad petiGom meam inde fecerunt ? non tShatur T exempli q‘re
aliud in poftum 7 talib wwe debeant ¢ q® fecerunt tempe meo 7 tempibs
anectloy meoy + T. Wido de Bofeh cancett meo + Ph de Valloi + camer
moo. Apud dinar + xviii die Augutt -

De tofto de Kingorit -

Vill Rex Scott omibs prot hdibs tociut’ tre fue clericit’ 7 laicif’ Salt -
Seiant Plentef 7 fut?i me dediffe 7 conf 7 h*e carta mea confirmatle deo
t ec&e tte trinitatis de Dunf t mo’ ibidem deo uientibs uni plenaritt
toftum in burge meo de Kingorii - Quare uolo *t firmiter Peipio ut Pdicti
monachi Pnojatum tolt teneant 71iBam clemofinam - ita liBe % quiete

houorifice - fic aliat clemofinas fuat tenét in regno meo-T +. Matto Archid


--- Dunfermline_page83.png ---
. Wit di gia Rex Scott dibs probif hdibs tociut tre su

REG, WIL] DUNFERMELYVN. 33

Sand» Walt fit at Dapo» Neill fit Wii - Rid clico - Wali de B ket -
Apud Duntermet -

Dx proteecone -

i. Witt Rex Scott - Comiti Duneaii 7 Jufticiif’ + vieocom" fail de fit 7

7

fotherif Salim - Preeipio firmit ut ceta 1% wi de Dunt 7 abbs 7 cov’
eifMé loci habeant ds traf tual’ p café dinifat’- p quaf tenucrant téporil;
Regif dd ani mei - forte eal’ ut uendiderint ut donauerint t cSmun-
tattint - Et phibco firmiten ne quif cif de trif thif’ liq’ iniufte veeindat
fp meum foriffém » 1. Niehot eancetl - oatho Archit ~ Wali fit Alaii
dapio + RIE Cumin» Apud Edenburg +

De Vueth -

Witt dei gia Rex Scot. dibs probis hdihs toci? tre tae elicit’ + laicif
fal - Seiant pre‘ 7 fu" me conceffifle 7 he carta mea confirmafle RoBto
de londoniit filio meo *%t hedibs fais in foreftum: forcftam meum de
Vueth - ficut iMud habui 7 forefium die gq" ilnd ei dedi» Qvare phibeo
firmiter ne quif'in forefto illo tine ey licencia: tecet ant uenetur + fap
meam plenaria foriffacturam «x + libray + Test - Philipp de Valloi - cana?
inco + Witto de Boteti clieo meo » AleX vic® mco de Stuet - Rid fit Hue -
Herbé de cama + Ap Stuet viij + die Juljj -

De ecéa de colin cum ptinentiif +

clicil’ 7 laicis

falfm - Seiant tam plentet’ q'm futuri me ocefliffe 7 he carta mea ofir-

mafle donationem illam qm Comet’ Q)- etholie me Plente dedit ccte x

de Dunt 7 monachif ibidem do ternientih; in libam 7 ppetna elemofi-
E


--- Dunfermline_page84.png ---
34 REGISTRUM DE (sec. NIL.
nam - KeGam teitt de molin et bib; ptinenciis fui’ 7 tref carucatas tre -
Petduuedi - Petmalduith - Balecunene - Petmacduucgile « tenendaf adeo
libere 7 q'ete + honorifice ¢ ficuti donaGnef Pdecefloy meoy
tenent 7 poflident - 7 fieut carta pd@i Comit teftatur 7 plirmat -
lino Gla epo «J. dunk [epo] - H+ cancett meo - Comite Duneaii - Gilb
Comite de Sthen - Wit de lindes - Alex filio W filij thoraldi - Hugofi de
caledoure . Apd Sttuelin +

7 meat

+ Joce-

De controtitia de Baleriftin «

Wit Rex Scott dibs probif hdibs toci? tre fae 8

alt + Seiatis qd contro-
ifia q ffabatur in? monachof de Dun? 7 Candico? de {Go Andrea fup tra
de Baleriftin in qua condici de fto Andrea inf clamabaut p keledeot de
tempe Regif 44 aui mei in prefencia mea Pminat
Pram ili habeant - falua clemofina ipif eandicis ab ipif monachif de Du:
q® keledei habuerunt de tra illa tempe Regif dd. T - Nich cancel - Rié
de morenii ofiabt - Walt fit Mlaii dajo- DD olifard juft- Hug Ridel- Math
archid - Nefio fit Witt - Rob de B kei - Galflo de @aleui#t - Apud Ki

eft - Ita qd monachi

{tem confirmacio de ecéa de colin -

60. Wit dei g* . Rex Scot dibs pb hbibs tociut Pre fue cle. 7 lac fat «
Sciant pre‘ + 7 fu" - ine con’ «7 hr ta Mia ofir’ - ecte § Tri de Dunt
7 wbdchis ibid do Suientibs donacom ili q*m - QO . Comef de Atholia eif
fecit de ecta de @olin & dibs iuftif ptinenciif fuis 7 ca tb; carneatif’ tre -
f+ Petduucdi - Petmalduit - Baleunene - Petmacduuegile - in libam 7
ppetuam elemo™ - Te” eif de pfato eomite . OD. 7 hedibs fuif’- Ita liBe 7
qiete plenarie 7 honorifice ficut carta ipiuf comitif teflatur 7 ofirmat -
T.J- cp» Dunkeld - R- ef mora - R + abbe de Seo - Comite - G-
iutticia - Cofi Duné - Comite wauriéd de meneteth . Witlo de IyndeS -
WiHo de haia - Apud Pert -



--- Dunfermline_page85.png ---
ol,

62

63.

REG. WIL. J DUNFERMELYN. 35

Dr decimif de Kingorti + de Kellin -

Wit Rex Seoti dibs phs hdibs toei? Pre fire salt - Sei
hae carta mea contir® - deo 7 ecte {te Tri
Suientibs t ppetua clemoti
brateo +

is me oeeflitic 7
de Dunt: 7 mBehis ibidem deo
" totam decimam redditut mei de frumento 7
ri 7 de Kellin- Tentd 7 hnd ita liBe 7 ple-
narie ficut aliat’ clomofinaf fuat’ pleni? 7 liBinf tenent . F- DD - fic
mmeo - Nich caneett - R.de woreuit conftabt - A). archid - andi -
Walt fit at - papo . DD. olif iuftit - Neflio fit Witt. Walé olif . Wik
de qortimn - Ap St'uelin -

phenda de Ki

De

ij - folid 7 itii d - de fitkil - p decima brafei 7 prebende -

2. Witt dei ga Rex Scot - epif abbihs - Comi® . haro® - Juftie - vie!s
g i ;

mini. + dibs ph hdihs toci? tre tue elicit’ 7 Jaicif {alk - Sciant pfontet’
7 futuri me dedifle 7 eon 7 hae earta mea pfir® deo 7 ee&e {te Trini™ de
Dunf + méehis ibidé deo Suientihs de firma mea de fithkil finglif annis -
fot. > iiij d+ p decima bratei 7 pbende q"m de eadem tra hre
folebant - volo ati 7 preeipio ut pdtof dena in liBam 7 ppetud clemofi-
nam habeant 7 poflideant - 7 phibeo firmit ne quit’ eos inde difturbet -
F. DD. fre meo - Q)- ep - de aBdon « And¥ of de Katei « Rit de
moreuilt oft - Hug eaptto - Walto de berket - Galfrid de Waluit « Apnd

Kingo¥ -

De deeimis anguillarum -

Wit - Rex Seoté dibs probit hdibs tociuf tre fue falf - ado 7 firmit
Beipio ut monaehi de Dun plenarie habeant deeimam anguillarum q*s
Douenald? de forether reddit m* p anni fé habuerunt de eateo qmndiu
inde eafed hui - Et fi forte redditum ali? mutari contigit ? uolo ut femper


--- Dunfermline_page86.png ---
36 REGISTRUM DE [sec. XII.

deeima reddituf falua tit monaehis .'T + Nit caneet » Walt fit At dajio -

BB olif infti - Apd Dunf -

De feruit’-

t- Sciant
tte Tri

naw

re fue clicit’ 7 lait

G4. Witt di gia Rex - Seot . dibs pb - ho" toci
ae carta Ma conti

© deo 7 ect

pre 7 fume de®. 7 con®
Je Dun?’ 7 abbi 7 cdchis ibidem deo Suicntib; i HiBum 7 ppet elemo
Gillandrea mae futhen 7 ci? liBos 7 illof eif quictof clamaffe de me 7
hedihs meif’ in ppetuum .T. Walt de hid - cancett . W- fit al dafio -
Rob auc - Gillex” Rentio . Wit thorald - Apud Sttuct .

De hadigtun ad luminare -

salt» Preeipio uoh

65. Wil di efa Rex Seot - Vice" 7 ppoitif’ fait de hadigt
qt?» de fma burei de hadigtuii faciatif hre annuati Mrehet ‘abbi de
Danf - tij - or ad luminare eete xt de Dun? -f. xx + fot ad feft 3 -
cartini » 7 xx - fot ad Pented - fieut carta mea teftatur - 7.11. cancett
meo - Rob eapHno meo Apud Seletk +

De Beeth q*m teicriuf de Quinei dedit .

66. WiH dei gia Rex Scot - dibs proty hii’ « toi? tre tue clieif 7
Sciant ptentef 7 fut*i me pcefliffe 7 he Carta mea pfir’ deo 7 ecte
‘Tri de Dun? 7 méchis ibi deo Suientibs tot Cram de Beeth q'm feieriuf de
(nei eif dedit 7 ppetua elemofinam - f- tram illam de Beeth q® Waldenu?
tenuit  Tenendam in KBam 7 ppetua elemofina le liBe 74 fete plenarie
7 honori®’? ficut carta Btati fe ij teftat® - Saluo Suite meo- TF. Rig de
pbend clico meo - Comit Duné juftié Rob de Quinci - Witto Cumi - Wit
d ueti ponte - Witt de valiby - BB. de hava Ap Pt - xx - die August -



--- Dunfermline_page87.png ---
Os,

69.

REG. WIL. ] DUNPFERMELYN, 37

De fugitiuit’-

7. Witt dei gia Rex Seott dibs pb hdihs toci? Tre fue faluté- Mando 7

firmit Beipio q'tinut ubieaq, abbs de Dun? ant ei? Suientef inueitint
fugitiuof de Tra $ Tri" de DaP ? cof ed teeta faa infle habeant - 7 phibeo
firmit ne q's eis q'mg" ex it iniufte detineat fap mea plenarid foriffae.
turd: fi ex dnia inca inuenti fucrint «7. Walf de Bid cauect! « W - tit

alaii dafio » Ap Stuelin -

Dr fagitinif q' uocant cuilachet -

Wit Rex Scott dib; phis hdibs toci? tre tne ali. Peipio firmitex ut

ubieniq, odchi de Dun? aut Suientef coy ewmbat 7 eumlachof tuos inuenive
potint eof i%te habeant - 7 phibco firmit’ ne q's eif q'mq" de iH ai
peetiam coy inte detineat : fF mei plenarit foriffactum . "F - Nich

cancel - Galfdo de walanit - Ap fm Andream .

De toff de Qunrot’-
Witt dei gia Rex Seot? dibs pt hdibs toci? tre fue el

Seiat pre“ + fut*i me de* 7 geet 7 le carta mea ofir’ dev

is 7 laicif falt -

eco’ & Tri-

ni de Dunt y codechis ibidé deo Suientib; : ynii plenarii tofti T burgo meo
de munrot’. ‘Tenend in Bam 7 purd 7 ppetud elemo"- Ita libe + ytete -
plenat - + honorif': fi@ alia clemofina? fuat’- liBint’- q'eti? + plenari? . =
hone tenét - Test Hug eanectt meo - Philipp de Valloii ? eatlat fio -
Wito de haia - Witte Cumi. Wilt Giffard - Eufiach papedi - Ap cunrot’-
xiij" - die Januar -



--- Dunfermline_page88.png ---
- Wik ai gia Rex Scott - Jui

. Wits Re

38 REGISTRUM DE [Sec. Xu.

De protectone 7 firma pace +

+ Viceco”’ . 7 dib3 minift'it’ {uit S
Seiatis me 7 pteetone mea 7 7 firma pace infte cepiffe abbiam de Dunf .é
dib3 poflloibs 7 WSib; fail di abbs mecii pficifeit? 1 Anglia - Et phibeo
fini? ne yf patam abbiam aut hoief aut poflionef’ ili? intim iniufte
¢ pfumat - fup mea plenaria foriffacturam -}. Ri Cumin - Bnardo
Bani ap Pt -

vex:

De Vueth - Confirmaco -

» Wik di gia Rex Scott epis « abbibs - comitibs - baro’’ « Juftit « vieeco™ -.

Ppoitif - minifUL - 7 dib3 probis hdibs toci? tre fue clicif z lait falt -

iant pfentet’ 7 fut“? me coneel™ 7 h*e Carta mea confirmatle deo 7
cede f%e Trini” de Dunt 7 @onachis ibide deo Ruientibs donaéom_ illam
qm Rob de londoniif filiuf iis eif fecit de Vueht - Tenend in libera 7
param 7 ppetuam clemofinam p re@af dinifil p quaf? illam dedi Bdéo
Rot - cum iuftif’ ptinenciis fuif 7 libertatih; 7 aifiamentif - Ita libere 7
quicte plenarie 7 honorifice : ficut Carta Pdti Rob eif’ ide f%a ¢ teftatur
Saluo Suido meo - I. Olinero captno meo- Wito de Bofeh clico meo -
HerBto de Cahia » Rid Renei - Thott de haya + @agro martino medico -
Witt filio Orm- DD de hafting - watho clico - Apnd forfar « xxix die
febF -

De efeambio tre de Striuelin -

bz pb hoibs toci? tre fue clic’ 7 Nai t+ Sciatis
me geeflifie 7 dediffe 7 hae Carta mea pfir* deo 7 ec%e {ée Trinitatis de
conachif ibidem deo Suientibs 7 capelle caftelli mei de Striuet in
eseambidi tre fue q’m p'mit clanfi in parco meo qi pared’ met p'mi



--- Dunfermline_page89.png ---
REG, WIL. ] DUNFERMELYN. 39

lauft «tram q ett ind te
Kirketun - 7 ex alia parte ‘fram que eft ind Cambsbarun tram pet’ de
Strivelin 7 Tri Rogi filij odofi - fieut magna ftrata uadit ad Cuilte-
donenald - fieut Rié de woreuit oftabtr «7 Rob auenel ju +7 Rad
vié + 7 Petr? de Stuet pambulatunt + Tenend in ppetuam elemofind + Ita
liBe = qete? fieut alias clemofinas fnas tenent -T- Rit de oornitt oft
Rob auencl juftié - Alaii fit dapi- Ada fi Thoth - Ro& de Valoi . Rad
vit de ftuet - Petro de Sttuet - Walt de B?kelai - Rit clieo apud ftuet -

n fuam g™ hnt ex pared 7 diuitat tre de

De eeéa de S*thardoll -

. Wit dei gt - R. Scot - dibs pb hol® - toci? tre fuc - clicif’ 7 laicis {at -

Tri de Dunf 7 @onachit ibidé do Suienti

vihy dimodis

7 deeimis 7 eclemotinif 7 obla
s

7 et omib aliif’ reétitudinihs
m7 ppetua elemofina - [ta libe 7

qrete + plenaric

thei - Rob de

ard - AleX de sto cartino

ceneiuf tenét - T. Comit Duneaii Juftit - Gilleb Comit $
Qnei - Ph de Valloii - Walt olifard . Hug
Ph de Setun - Apud hadigtuii -



--- Dunfermline_page90.png ---
. IN nomine fée Trinitatif’ Ego

19 REGISTRUM DE [Sec. NSTI

Confirmatio Regis Alexandr -

Alexander di gia Rex Scott auctoritate
Regia ac poteftate - Eport - Comitum + baronumq, Regni mei confentiu
atq, teftimonio - Clero etiam aquiefcente et poplo? ecte f%e Trini de
Dunf Pdeceffoy meoy pictatif ftudio +» 7 largitionif’ iniciate # omia fub-
{e'pta concedo - 7 pace ppetna confirmo - Proaui itaq, mei Regif’ Walcolmi -
7 Regine eiufem bone memoric Wargarite + dona fubtequencia . Ppono -
Hee feitt . Pardufin - Petnaurcha - Petbachlakin - Petcorthin - Lauer -
Bolgin » Sebyram de kireallethin - Inuirefe minoré - Dona Duneani
Regis? duaf’ uillaf noie Iufk » DE dono Edgari Regis? Sehyram de
Gellalt - DE dono Ethelredi ? Hales - Di dono AleX Regif': Primrot’-
Sehyram de Gatemile » Petconmarthin « Balekerin » DrumBuin - Keeth -
DE pono Sibille Regine: Beeth » NEe predi&ta Pdecefloy meoy dona
concedo liberatr pfate eete eum oitih; appendictis fuis 7 rectif’ diuifit -
DE Dono Attaui mei exccllentifiimi Regis BD? Dunfmelin ecitra aq® -
in qua ecta fita eft eadem - Kingorfi? ci {nif appendiciis G proping’or &
Dunf . Focth - Innirefe maiorem 7 molendinii 7 pifeina » Et Smithebi -
Nt Crebarrin - 7 Eetam de Inv'efe - Et Wymet cum fuif reétis dinifis «7
Fotheros iux" fém Andream - ei fuif r'tis divifif - Et Pethenach - cum
{nif r'tis divifi’- Et vnam carucatam tre? Petioker » Et Nithbren eft uit
appendiciis - Et Balceriftin ci fuis rectif dinifit 7 p'tif’ 7 pafeuit’- excepta
rectitudine qua keledei inde hre debent - ci omib3 reb3 infte ad eat
ptinentibs + fieut date fuerunt Pde ecte Tdotem ab attano meo Rege
DP? dic y‘ dedieata fait Et pretea vnam manfur’d 7 Bwich « aliam 7
Rokefb - alia T hadigtuii - aliam 7 Edenb- aliam 7 linlitq" - alia in (uelin +
Et in eadé uilla duat’ ec@af’. Et vn carneata Pre q adiacct ipi cete - 7

omné decimi meoy dnioy i frngihs 7 7 aialihs - 77 pifcibs de pptis retib3 -
7 Tin denariis « Et deeima mei Can tocinf’ caftrenfif’ prouineie - 7 man-
fiones Rogii Pftri- ita plene ficut ipe fanuf’ 7 ieolumif’ tenuit - Et vnii
rete > dimidia » Et vnam manfioné i Burgo de Dunf? - 1iBam ~ quieta - 7
omnem decimacom firme Burgi - 7 decimacionem molendini - Et omibs
dominiis meif de Dunf - Et vnam manfion? 7 Burgo de Pth . Et ecéam


--- Dunfermline_page91.png ---
REG. ALEX. 11] DUNFERMELYN. 41

ei%dé uille- Et capellam de Caftetlo - enm dibs appendiciif nt'uty, - Et
wna manfioné 4 ptinet ipi eete ~ Et omné decimam de dnie meo - Et
omné ottanam pte de dibs placitif’ 7 Incrif meif de fif 7 de fothr - Et

ommem decimam de auro qd m' euenict de fif 7 de fothr - Et omné

deci tociut mei Can 7 brafei de fit 7 de fothr + ex" recitudinibhs q abbie
Dunkeld ptinent - Et decima dif uenatonum q capiuntur in? lam Bmor
z that. Et medictaté 610 corioy 7 fepoy 7 fagiminif dit hettiay | ocei-
dent? ad teftiuitatet tenendaf in {tuet 7 int forth 7 thay - Kt ut habeant
Tnemoribs meif omia necefle

ad ignem 7 ad edificia fua - fi ego ipe -
+ hominef coy: fient ~ mei + Et ut ofis oblatonet’ G ad mai? altare
ciedem eete offerentur : fii calupnia TBalit habeant » Et de felichef q ad
Kingorii capientur : poftg™ decimati tuint ¢ ofis feptimot Sclich habeant -
Salif qe 7 ferri que ad op? met ad Dunf allata fuint : ome decimam
concedo + Et parochiam Totam Nothrif- Et in B?wich traétum de Alde-
ftelle - 7 omne qd inite ei ptinct - Prohibeo % ne alijd nam eapiatur fuper

tis

fram uf fap hoief fee Trini pro foriffto alieni? zu p pp'o forifeo coy -
Concedo F qd inte reddant® cote S Trini ois Sui fai ¥ quol pamu? fis -
y atauuf tis DD 7 tres fui ei dedunt - et offif fui Cumelache - a tempore
Edgari Regif ufq, fic - eum tota peetia fia ubiciq, Tucniant® - 7 phibeo 1¥
met foriffem : ue iniafte retineantur - 7 ut habeant ofis homines ef di
peetiia eoy 7 cni2eigq, Tra fuerint - q' fuertt in Pris die q* fuerunt oblate
7 date cove {8e Trini « Et decimam de offi meif’ filutibs equabuf': de
tif 7 de fotbr . Et ut habeant p totam t

i mea theloncum q'etum de

eunétis reb3 quaf Meati fucrint ad pp'a coy uegeia . Et paflagii +
naué de Inv'k: fit hui in dnio meo - Tali odieSe % peg'nantef +
nuncij ad me nenientef 7 a me redeuntel 7 hoief curie mee t*nteant
T eadem nani fi peio - Et fi ptingat
potfe » y abbs inde clamorem audierit 7 iltd non emendanit : ego

iq'm iftoy fi Peio tofire non

ipe iltd emendabo 17 abbis 7 fratrum ccée moleftia - Et abbat’ 7 co"

ecée {Ge Trini® non refpondeant alicni calipnianti de hoi!

q) fuerunt

i tris die q® oblate 7 date fuerunt ecte 8 Trini® + Concedo % eidem ecto

decimam toci? mei Can de Clacmait . Et ut cit’ lamBmor 7 tota regia

poteftate finglis fabbis in curia habeat vuum eorium - 7 7 fexto fabbo duo
Y


--- Dunfermline_page92.png ---
42 REGISTRUM DEI (sec. xm.

coria + Et duaf ptef de fepo . Et fextam pellem arietii 7 agnoy - Et
dimidia ptem decimi mei de Ergaithel 7 de Kentir - Et q*ndam pifeatu-
ram apud Pth - Ita libere 7 quiete fieut meaf ibi habco - De dono Regis -
Waleolni patrui mei ledmacduuegil ci fuif reétit dinifif - ficut magr
Elvicuf com@tarius iam tenuit « q"m in die fepulture Paci atani mei
eidem eete optulit - Et - xx". 7 jij + ingera terre 7 Gddam p*tum ppe
Dunf - que priuf in dnio fuo huit - Et Gdeumg, cete ex pte Scocie appli-
etlit ut captum fait! totum capud pe ling*m eidem ecée remaneat - Et
dimidietaté tociut’ fagiminif mei omniii cetuum 4 capiunt? int forth 7
Tay - ad luminaria cord altarib3 ecte - Et offis hoies eoy fint HDi ab omi
opatone ponciti 7 caftelloy 7 Sit alioy opum - Et ecclefiam {te Trinitatif’
de Dunkeld ef Prif'ad iam ptinentibs - 7 ¢ aliif’ ptinenciif fuif optinen-
dam in ppetuam elemofinam - poft deceffum Andree Epi Katinen’ - p
falute aie mee 7 omit Pdecefioy fioy + ci Si liBtate 7 rectitudie ci q'b3
idé ep& cam ung meli? tenuit 7 dono Reg BD pofledit . Et vnii toft
in Edenb’g qd Rob de londoniit habuit - Et vnii plenarium toff cum
Crofto 7 villa de Clacii - Et ecGam de Kellin « Et capellam de ABeromhi -
eum Sib; ad eat iuite ptinentib; . Ex dono u° patris mei Regis Witt ¢
Redditum - ¢- folidoy de firma Bur
arum fri

de Edenb’g + q’s dedit in die exequi-
fui Regif Maleolmi - Et xx" - ac‘s tre. Et vnii toft in Dun? -
q's Waltut’ dapifer dedit conceflione patris mei die fepulture Pdi Regis
MaleolM . Gia Zu fieut Pnoiuta funt que a bonis aitectloribs meif’ feitt
Rege » Malcolmo + 7 Regina ei2dé bone memorie Wargarita - Dyneano
Rege - Edgaro - Rege « Ethelredo fre ei- AleX Rege » Sjbilla Regin” cide.
Dauid Rege excellentiffimo - Malcolii Reg - Wito Rege  ecte 8 Trini-
tatif’ de Dun? data concefia ff 7 ofirmata - ficut 7 autenticif’ coy fe'ptif
otinetur - cit of

lla plenitudie 7 integ*tate - Regia auctori® confilio phoy
hdini meoy Pde cete 7 fribs ibid’ dco Ruientihs ocedo + 7 in ppetuum
integ® 7 iNibata oSuanda ofirmo « Tettihs hiif - agro athco Cancett
Scot. Wit Cumin Com de Buch Juftid Scot « Henrig de Baillot eahiat
Scot - Bno Rots abbe de Scon* - Bno Radulph capHno fro - Bno [ng
de mortno mari - @agro Petro de Rames - Bnit’- Rot del haia - Andrea
ctico - Galf'do - Greg « cticif firis - Bno Rad de Tony - BB - de Kudes -


--- Dunfermline_page93.png ---
76.

U

SPERMEL

4:3

ALEX. HJ D

Walt Cumi - Walt Béteth » Maleolii Byfeth - AleX de St'uelin - Dat -
Apud Seon® p mani noftram pp'am Anno Regni iri Pein deeimo mente
September .

De Dolar -

Alexander dei gia Rex Scott - Oiib; phis hominib; tociut’ fre tue
Salim Sciant pfentef y fut?i nof in exeambium clemofinarum q*s @onachi
de Dunfinet peipe confacttant in dniis firis de Kingori 7 de Karel - tam
in frumento - farina anene - brateo : phenda - qm in denariis » 7 fumitr in
exeambiit - dium reétitudint q"s_ peipe ofvetiunt in coquinif firis - 7
Regine fponfe n¥e - earitatif intnitu dediffe - oeeffiffe - 7 he Carta nia
ofirmafle deo 7 ecte & Trinitatif de Dunfmet 7 conachif ibidem deo
Rnientibs + in ppetui Suituris / totam terram nfam de Dolar - in feudo
de Claemaii + Tenendain 7 budam cifilem monachis in HiBam 7 ppetuam
elemofii

am - p cafdem rectas diuifas - 7 reétitudinef': p quaf firmarij dri
candem tram die huinf collatonif tenverunt de nobis - Hie - qrete +
plenat - 7 honorifice - faciendo forinfeeum Buiciii 7 Gd ptinet ad déam tram
de Dolan - Tefé - Pato Comite de Dunbar » Walto fit Alaii Sencfeatt ¢
Inftie Sco® - Waldo Cumi Comit de weneth . Walto olifard Jufticiag
Landonie - Alano hoftiat - Walto Byfet - Bernardo frafer - Apud Striue-

lin + x + die dectb? - Anno Regni Bni Regif’- xx'iii’ -

De forefto de Dolar -

Alexand di gia Rex Seott - Oimib; prot hoih; tocint fre fue Saltm -
Sciant qd conceflimus abbi 7 Conuentui de Dunf- vt tram fram de Dolar
in ppetuii habeat in libum forettii - Qvare firmiter phibemus - ne q's fine
coy licencia in déa fra fecet aut venetur super nfam plenariam foriffuc-
turam - decem libray - Teft) . Walto fit Alafi fencteaH Juttié Seot . W

Cumi Cofi de cecneth - Walto Oley Juftit laodoh - Apud Seoii - xx -
die Octob - Anno Regni dni Reg’



--- Dunfermline_page94.png ---
79.

44 REGISTRUM DE [src. xin.

De Warenna de Mutkilburg -

Ale dei gia Rex Scott - omihs probis hoth; toei? fre fue Salim - Sciatit
qd conceffimul abbi 7 Coniintui de Dont. ut habeant 7 teneant feodum
fui de wutkilburg ci tris ad dém feodum fp*tantibs q*s de noth tenent in
eapite in Bam warennam + Quare firmiter phibemus ne quif’ infra dém
feodii aut tras prenotatas fine licencia coydem abbis 7 Conuentus fecet aut
uenctur : fup nfam plenariam foriffaduram : decem libray » Teft « Walt
Byfeth - Johe de St'uclin - Rid Giffard - Nich Corbeth - Thoiti de Bofcho
- 7 Bnardo de Rippeley - Ap Sttuclin - xij? die Jannan - Anno Regni
dii Regis xxx°v" +

De luerif diti Regis de fif-

AleX dei gia Rex Scott - vicecomit fuo de fif Saltm - Qandamuf’ uob +
firmiter Peipimuf'- qtin? abbi de Dunf> faciatis hre o&auam ptem qj eum
f. Et in
huiuf rei teftimonia - has littas firaf patentef uob mittimus - Teft Vagro
watho cancel - Wit Cumiii Comit de Buch Juft? Scot - AP Clacmai -
x*vii’ « die Auguft> - Anno Regni firi Tereiodecimo -

otingit de luerif 7 finibs que ad epuf ni in baillia tua adquire

DE odaua parte finif Comit « de fif -

Alex dei gia Rex Scott - 0). Comit 7 Balliuif’ fuis de fif Salfm . Q)an-
damuf nots q“tinus abbi de Dun? bre faciatif oftauam ptem de fine qué
nobeum feciftis: p Comitatu de fif - Teft> - Walto fit Alaii Senefeatt -
Johe de wakefwelt cattat - Apud BOwich - pino die Junij - Anno Regni
domini Regis xvii’? -


--- Dunfermline_page95.png ---
REG. ALEX. 11.) DUNFERMELYN. 1

Contirmatio de Gatevnienclt -

Ale& dei Gia Rex Seott omibs probis hoibs toci? terre tie Clicif’ + laicit
Salim - Sciant plentet’ 7 futuri not’ peeffitle 7 he Carta nfa coutirmatt-
donationem ila qm wichael Scotut’ 7 wargarcta eins fponta de contontn
Duneani hedif tui focctt deo 7 cete {te Trinitatis de Dunf 7 conachit’
ibid deo Suientibs 7 Suiturif de tota tra de Gafeynient iux” Vaeth -
Tenend 7 hada eifa@ conachit’ p ecatdem dinitas - p q's Thomas plbiter
cam de pdzif’ Miehacle Seot? 7 Margareta Sponta tia tenuit - In HiBam

param - 7 ppetnam clemofina - + ei Sibs aefiamentif’: ad candem tram

& « (ponte
fue inde pleniaf confecta déis monachit’ jufte teftatur . Saluo Suie nie

Teft A) - Comite de Aneg? » Ph de oub"y - Laur de Abirnethi » Henrico
fit Comitis - BB - de hava - Rad de Campania - Th filio Rand. BD -

de St'uet » Apud Seoii - xx°ii’ - die Aprit - Anno Regni

ptinentib;- [ta libere + quicte - ficut Carta eoydem wich 7 Wa

Cumiii - Ale
dni Regif’. xvii’ -



--- Dunfermline_page96.png ---
SL.

16 REGISTRUM DE (sec. Sin.

Confirmaéd dni Re

Ix noie fanéte t'nitatis Ego AleX dei gfa Rey Scottoy fili? Alexandri
illuttris Re& Scott anctoritate regia ac poteftate epoy Comitum baroniq,
regni mei cient atq, teftimonio - clero ettiam adq'eleéte t poplo: Ecte
tnitatis de Dunimelyii Paccetloy meoy pietatif ttudio t largiGonif
initiate - Omia fhfc'pta ocedo t pace ppetua céfirmo - Attaui itaq, mei
Reg Maleolmi t Regine ei’ bone memorie Wargarite dona fhfeqntia
Ppono + Hee feilics

+ pardufin - petnarcha - pethbachlakin - peteorthin -
lauer - bolgin « feiram de kercalcdin - Inuirefe minoré - dona diicani Reg
duas uillas nomine Luteher - de dono Edgari re& - fciram de gelland « de
dono Etheldredi + hales «de dono Alexandri reg « primros - feiram de gat-
milk + petcdmarthin + belecherin - drunbernin - Cleth - de dono Sybille
& + beth + hee Pdig&ta puleceiloy meoy dona cdeedo liBali? ptate ecée ci

appendiciis fuis t vectif diuifis - de dono abaui mei excellentiffimi
reg dauid + difmel¥ cit” aq'm in q” ecéa fita eft cadé + kyngorn ci fuit’
appendiciif q pping'or ett dif - focth » Inuirefk maioré t molendina t
pifeinam * finetheby -t Crebarrin * cetam de Inuirefk * Wymeth ei fais
rectif’ dinifis  Fothros juxta Stm Andream cit fuis rectis diuifis t peth-
enac ef rectif’ fuis diuifis t und carucatam terre petiocher+ et Nithebren ef
tuis appendiciis t baleriftyn ct fuis reaif dinifis in p*tif * pafcuis excepta
rectitudine q"m keledei inde habere debent - cf omib3 reb3 infte ad eam
ptinentihs fient date fuertt piiée eege in dotem ab abavo meo Rege danid
die q* dedicata fuit « Et Pterea una mafuram in herwyeh - Aliam in Rokef=
burg Aliam in hadigton - Aliam in Edinburg - Aliam in Linchitheu - Aliam
in ftuelyn -‘t in ead uilla duas ecéas -t unam carneatam tre q adiacet ipi
ecto +t omné decima meoy dominioy in frugibs t in aialibs et in pifleib;
de pp'is retibs t ettiam in denariif’. et decimam mei Can tociu? caftrens
puicie t mantiones Rogi pfbiti - Ita plene sit ipe san? t incolumis
tenuit - Et unt Rete t dimidii t una wanfioné in burgo de Dunfermely

wD. 4 a ane Aue a
libam *t q'etam - t ome decimadoné firme burgi - t decimaéoné molen-
dini-t de omibs dniis meis de Diifermel¥ -* una mafioné in burgo de


--- Dunfermline_page97.png ---
REG. ALEX. i11.] DUNFERMELY

AT

Perth t ecéam cied uille teapella de eaftello ei oti;
%t unam mantioné g ptinet ipi eceletie -t omnd decima de dominio meo -
tomne odaud pte de dibs placitift luc's meis de fyf 7 de fotherif t
omnem decimam de auro gq m eucnict de fyf t de fotheryf + omné
decima tociu? mei Can. t brafei de fyf %t de fotheryf exeeptif recitu-
dinibs q

appendiciis ut'ueq,

Dbathie de dunkeldyn ptinent » Et decimam ominm uenaconii
q eapint® in? Lambirmor % thaci - t medietatem ominm corioy “t fepoy
giminif omium heftiay 7 occident® ad feftinitates tenendas in fCuel¥ .t
int forth. thaie .t ut habeant 7 nemorih; meis of nec“ia ad igné tad
edificia faa fieut ego ipe t hoines coy sieut t mei. t ut otis oblaGones |
ad mai? altare ciufit cede offerent? {i ealipnia HBatr fant - "t de felyhes
Gad k¥gorn eapiat® pq decimati fuerint ofis feptios felyhes haut - fat
q’q, t terri Gad op? mei ad difermel¥ allata fuerit omné deeima peedo -
% pochiam tota fotheref .t in berwyé tradi de aldftel - t offic Gd ci iutte
iat’ fup tram ut sup hdines {Ge t'ni-

ptinet - phibeo ettia

ne aligd nam e

tatif’ p foriffto alicui? mp ppto foriff@o coy - Coneedo % yd iufle reddanté

eeée Sée t'nitatit’ offis

ni sui quos attau? me? * abau? me? david t fires

fui ei dederunt ‘t ofis fui Cumelahe a tempe Edgari Re& 19q, nie ef tota
pe Mids 3S

preunia sua ubieiq, inuéiant®. Et phibeo fup mei foriffaéti ne iniufte

retineant® » Et ut habeant ofis hdinet et omi pennia coy In cuiveung,
Fra fucrint q' fueriit in terrif die q* tWiit oblate t date cede Ste Cnitatis -
3 meif filuettrib; ey“h3 de fif ct de fotherif - Et ut

hant p totam tram meam thelonei q'ctit de ciitis 1

Et decima de oii

fo Shes pe
5 g"s Meati fuerint

ad pptia coy nee‘a - Et paflagiii * naué de Inuirkethin fic! hui 7 dominio
meo tali condone q peg*nantes t nicii ad me uenicntes ta me redeuntet
> mee t*ntedt in cat

% LGinef euri

ti 1h PED -"t fi otingat aliqué iftoy
tabb clamoré inde andier' + ille 16 emédatlit exo

{i peio t*nfive nd pele

ipe id emédabo fi abhatis t fim ce?

moleftia - t abb 7 monachi ecte

Ste tnitatif fi refpondedt alic' calfipniati de hoihs qui filunt in tris die q
obl
mei can de eclaemai +t ut cit’ Lambirn

s a EAD) (a) Yaw Ao aan
ct date fiunt cete {7c tnitatif’- Concedo ¥ eid eete deci’ tocin?

in tota regin Pftate tinglis
fabbis in curia hant uni eorit t in fexto fabb duo coria t duas ptef de
fepo - t fextam pellé arietii t

n0y t dimidiam pté decimi mei de erga-


--- Dunfermline_page98.png ---
48 REGISTRUM DE {sec. Xn.

thyl t de kétyr -%t quand pifeatura apd perth ita libe t q'ete fient meas
ibi heo- De dono Re& Maleolmi patrui patris mei Lethmachdunegil ct
fuis rectif diuifis fie’ wagr ecilricuf cemétariu? ill tenuit q'm in die
fepulture pdidi abaui mei cid cete obtulit - Et viginti t ta inga Pret
(dda p‘ti ppe dunt %] p'u? in doninio fuo uit - %t Gdetiq, cete ex pte

gua eid ecte remaneat -

feocie applicuit feu captii fuer’ Cott eapd pt
dimidictat® tocin? fangiminis mei dium cetud | capiat® int forth % thay

ad luminaria cora altarih; ecée - t ofis hdinef coy tit libi ab omi opatone
potiti ct cattelloy t oi alioy opi. Et ecéim {te Cnitatis de dikeld¥

ch

is ad ila ptinentibs t ci aliis rtif’ ptinenciis fuis optinenda in ppetua

elemotina ¢ p? decetlti andree epi catinenfis p salute aie mee % omit

) . ee ee ee ane ee
pdecetlorum meoy ei omi libtate t rtitudine ct q'hs idé ept eam Tig"m

meliu® tenuit t dono Re& dauid p%edit-t uni tofth in Edinburg qd
RoBeus de Londoniis huit -% unt plenarit tofth ei erofto in uilla de
um de kellyn *t capella de Abyre
ix dono to aui mei Re& Wiki redditi centi folidoy de
firma burgi de Edinburg quos dedit in die exeq'ay fiis fui Reg al-
colmi - % uiginti acras tre %t unit tofth 7 dufmely quas Waltne dapifer
dedit geeffione ani mei die sepultare Pdiei Re& Waleolmi. Omia auté
ficut Pudinata fit que a bonis aficeflorihs meis feils Rege Waleolmo *t
Regina ei%d bone memorie Wargarita - Dicano Re
Ethelredo f¥e eius + Alexandro Rege - Sybilla Regina eiuld - dauid ex-
cellentifiimo - Malcolmo Rege « Witlo Rege - Alexandro Rege - ecée Ste
Unitatif de difmely data + Concefla fit t cdfirmata sic! in audéticis coy
se'ptis otinet® ci offi i}la plenitudine t integ'tate auctoritate regia cdfilia
phoy hain meoy pdicte ecte t Trat"h; ibid Suientibus concede % in
Oferuanda confirmo - Teftib; Wito abbe de
Abirbroth . Johe pore Sci Andree . @agiftro WiHo fra:

clacmaii + Et ce: obin cit oii; ad eas

iufte ptinétihs -

ep + Edgaro Rege -

ppetui integ* t illibata

* cancellario
no + dauid de Loucho¥ - Johe de Lambirtoi - henrico de Dundemor -
Wito Byfet - Thi de Clenhift - Eduardo de pethglaflyn - apd Cupir in
fyf decimo die mareii - amo Regni noftri uivelime oétauo -


--- Dunfermline_page99.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page100.png ---
my

, Altexanpen : Rex Hilt:

rr, 3) ererra De Smpchectan.
Wet gta Rex Sunt orale pron has
\S) of naan Ae thay
i \ _lenet weeps oo ut
“| Anno get. co Lath, dierent py

~ an fefhiy f CA thome awl apPatrean
Cocamanoe tat Hide Smjehecrit



--- Dunfermline_page101.png ---
| ALEX. TL] DUNFERMELYN. 40

De terra de Smythetun -

A.- Dei gia Rex Scot oth; probit hdihs toe? Pre fue - plontihs +
tut®if'ad quot’ pfentet’ litte puenint Salf -
Lif? Die Men® px" afi fetta thonie apli apd St'uclin Emma filia 7
hes q’ndam Gilb de Smythetuii . vidua 7 7 tua poteftate liBa 7 ligia pitti
tuta? in prefencia tira 7 magnatum de iro ofilio ipente Peoenenit q ‘tr
de Smythetuit 7 feodo de contkel ei plinenelif + qm aiicefforef fui aliq’
tempe temerant de domo de Dun? - 7 q' ™m ipa petierat p littaf regiat’ de
morte aiicetforis ¢ fuit 7 ee debuit pp'a tra monattii de DaP za déo
monaftio alienata injulte + tang" fra ] data fuit 7 1iBam 7 ppetud elemo-

if qd anno ge - w+ ce" -

> . ns ~ o ~ . . .
finam cidem monaftio - ab aiiectlore firo clare memorie Rege Dauid eui?
Cartam exinde ofetam olpexim? - 7 74 Su fecimuf in pfeneia tira legi

7

hnt pfirmagonet’ aiieeffoy troy -

de q* abbs 7 Confint? ei¢de monafit
Vide déa Emma pro fe y hedihs fuis 7 ppetnii reniicianit cori nob +
iq’ tépe habueriit t

SdiAif magnatib; jiris toti iuri 7 clamio q ipa ub fui
hre potuerunt 7 eadé tra. 7 dém jus tale q'le fuit p fe 7 hedib; {uit p
fufti 7 baculii totatr not ad opuf dei monaftij - reddidit - refignauit - 7
q'eti claman' - pmittenf fidety qd tup déa tra ipa aut heredes fui o* dém
monaftinm nto tempe 4Yonem mouebunt - Nof' afi ti ex oteftione Adve
Emme q® ex tenore dari cartay aiiceffoy frog iuf dé monatti i Tdéa
tra de Smithetuti liq’de ppendentet’s eam cit ptinenciif déo monaftio de
Dunf ad exempli: aficefloy troy duxim? ofirmandam - _Preeepim? sand
4 monaftii de Dunf: -

fei ad fuam ae

gpacientet Tedie d&e mulicris abbi 7 Conimtuj d
finglif annif’ q'h3 dé mulier wisi oxx". o'r

pfoluant + Ita qd ipa defunéa ? hedef {ui nichil inris in ipif’- xx" « oreis
valeant uendicare - Et hoe iidem abbs 7 Coit? taliter fave? fideli? manu
cepunt - Teft - venabli pre - C . epo Dunblafi - Rié abbe de Cambskiit -
Walto eumi Comit de encth » Alex Cumi Comit de Buch Juftid Seo8 -
Ho Comit de car Cailak - AleX fenefeatt . Roti de Ros » Nich de
foulis - BD. de Graha . wagro Gamellit - Wilmo capHno 7 AleX
Correbrié clicis fri’. Johe blundo - 7 Johe Saluain - ap Sttuelin - xvii
die Decembi -

de

Anno Regni firi: v’-


--- Dunfermline_page102.png ---
83.

50 REGISTRUM DE (see. suit

Confenfus * teftimonii - magnati de confilio dni Regis! fup Carta
precedente -

Clement dei gta Epé Dunblaii - Rid eadé - g* - abbs de Camb3kih - Walt
Cumi Coffi de meneth - AleX Cumi Cofi de Bueh inftié Seot - Witt
cof de wat CahlaF - AleX Senefeatt- Rots de Ros» Niet de fat. DB -
de Gtham - oagr Gamet - Wits eapHs - t AleX de correb'é clici dni
Regit’- Johef blunduf t Joh Saluain militef . omfihs haf’ littas vifuris t
audit?is ctnam in dno Salt» Nowitif vii qd anno gfe - a+ ee®- P Hii - die
Meurii px" afi fefé § th® apli ap {uct Emma filia t hes q’nda Gilleb de
Smyth - uidua 7 7 fua potettate WBa 7 ligia ofti «7 Pfentia tira cor dno
Rege t ofilio fuo {ponte recognouit - q - f - de Smyé - I feod de coufkilb -
@ pticiis fis - q* aticet™ fui aliq’ t@pe tentant de domo de Daf - *t q*
ipa petierat p littaf regiaf de morte afiect™ +: fuit 7 fe debuit pp'a t dnica
tra mottii de Daf - 7a déo moftio alionata Titte « tang" tra q data fuit
iB: 7 ppe™ elemo™ eid @dttio a clare me" Re& dd - Cni? carta exinde
ofecta: ibidé uidim? - t q* dis Rex 7 pfeneia tua cora not legi fecit - 7

tus

de q* abbs 7 9'™ eit wo™ hnt confiréénes noblii regi Scot defictoy -
Vnde déa Eia p fe 7 here’ fuif’ 7 ppe* renticianit cora dno rege 7 not
toti Juri 7 clamio q ifia t aiicef™® fui aliq’ tépe huerit - t ipa t hedef’ tui
aliqh hre potuerit i cad tra 7 d&m J? tale q‘le fuit p fe t hedibs fais
dibs p fufti t baculii totatr t ii aliq? retenefito dno regi ad op? dt
a@o™ reddid' - refig™ - 7 q'etii claman' 7 ppe* + pmittéf fide q {F d@a tra
ip™ aut hedef tui o% dém qo" fillo tépe gdm moucbt - Diif u® rex ta ex
oteflide dée Eiic qm ex tenore déay eartay aiiceffoy fnoy J? d@i wo™ in
déa tra de Smyt - liq'de ppendés 7 ea cit ptinéciif tuif do wo" de Dunt
ad exempli aficefluy fuoy duX pfir“ : fit i rotut dni regif’7 calla tua
pleni? otinetur - Preeepit ifup pacient inedie dée mulierif’ abbi 7 Con™
A@ monaftij de Dunf ut finglif annif q'b; da mulier nisit / xx - o*reaf
ei ad {ua fuftétagom ptoluant - Ita q ipa defunaa ¢ hedef fui nich juris i
ipis - xx - mré valeant uendicare - Et hoe ijd3 abb 7 Coniimt? tatr face
coram dno Rege % nots fidelit’ mann cepunt - In h? rei teftimdia pfenti
fe'pto figilla ira apposninims -



--- Dunfermline_page103.png ---
Sh

ut] DUNFERMELYN. 51

Vet null? eapiat namos firos ut homint Sroy manentiii in tra jira? p alli-
eui? debito - foriffacto vt plegiagio? nifi pro eoydé pp'o debito - forilGo -

vt plegiagio -

A « dei gia Rex Scott - Omiihs phis hdibs toci? Pre fac Salé - Seiatif’ gat
conceflim? abbi 7 Con™ de Dun? - ut utts namof fuos ut hdinii fiey
mati in tra fia de Dunduf - ut in aliis Pri this? capiat p alieui? -
debito « foriffSo - vt plegiagio! n' pro eoydé pp'o dehito - foriffto - Tt -
pleg’ -? faluif burgis iris - Quare firmit phibemus ne quis cont* hance
oceflion® fram cos vexave Plumat iinfte fup fram plenariam foriffactu-
ram + Teft’ . W- Cunt Comif de wefith - Alex Cumi Comit de Buch
IuttiE Seot - 7 Rots de Ros apna eaft® pucllay - iiij? + die februat - Anno
Regni fri. v’-

Tranfe'pti quite clamacdis dni re& de fegjla non facienda -
I s i

Anno Gie willefimo - ce" + quing‘gefimo - quinto - cum d@ de Lo"cho¥ tune
uicccomes de pth - peticrat ab abbe 7 onentu de dunfermlin  q*tuor
Meas ad op? dni re;

tris this de Fordout « de Cupmacultin - de Bendhantiii - de kethekerbeg
Inchet
dis Rex fecit inq'icom fieri - Coram Alexand’ Cumi Comite de Buehai -

p defGu feqnele ad euriam vicecomitat? de pth - de

= . =
n+ 7 diumnech - taudem ad inftancia cor

ndé abbis 7 ouent? -

ssut%m de ciflem tri
deberet de Jure «nel non + fta ptea diligen? 7 fideli? tip hoe déa ing’
LiGbe - Gilebert? de hata miles q' Age ing'iedi faciende intfuit in pleno
colloquio dni regis hito apud stam erneé - uicefima die natat dni anfi
ei¢dé pniciauit q ueredém baroniay fuit - q uideriit aliqi hoies de tris
pdéis ucnire ad déam Curiam -
p qd diis Rex ifm abbem 7 conuenti 7 eoy hoies in pleno colloq’o Bago
p pmune cdfilid magnati fuoy ibidé exiftenciii - omnino q'etos clamauit
in ppetuii de fata feqjla facienda -

tiie JuftiG Seot p plures baronia:

da fequela fieri

3 niiq'm ibidé uenerit fieut fequelator

bee sup Bieta tia
in Capellad - regi
3+ invotula
recogni
conis



--- Dunfermline_page104.png ---
86.

52 REGISTRUM DE

Qeta clamaéd Johannis de Strathechyii de beeth Waldef -

Omibs hoc fe'ptii vifu¥ ut auditui Johes de Strathechyii filin? et heres
quonda dni Ranulph de Strathechyi militis satm in dno fempi?nam .
Nowlit vnitifitas tira me die Sabati px p? feftum St dunitani archiepi in
wenfe aio anno gfe m+ cc’ + Ixx® ofauo afd caftri puellay de Eden-
bur& in canta dni Re& coram dno Wito de Séo claro tune vicecom de
Edenburg - dno Jote de Linde’ tiie camario dni Re& - dno Ricardo de
Stratuii - pattcio de Lemetoii clieo de HBadne + oagro Johe de Q)%kyl-
bur elico de Pbenda - Qagro Witlo de Caramund clico de Warderoba
dni Re& - dno Wito byfeth » Witto clico conttabularii caftri de Eden-
bur - WiHo de Ramefia - Johe de Ramefia - Simone de Efkendy -

Symone de Letcel¥
2
de Walchof - Witlo de @orania - Wito de maifttuii - Thott de Logyit -

Randino de Warderoba - AleX de wmelgedrofi - Alano

Alano de Catia et aliis fidedignis : reddidiffe t refignaffe p me ‘t hidibs
meis p fuftam et bacut in manu dni AleX illuttris Re Scot in ppetuum :
totam tram mean de heth Waldef ci omihs hdinih; 7 Cotariis eod dic
in cad ta manentibs ct cum tota p%teritate coy in ppetud t cum omibs
ptinentiis t rectitudinib; cum q*b3 eand terram de dno Rege Seoé tenui
ut tene de iure debut - In hui? rei tettimonid sigillum mei pfenti se'pto
appofui - Dat die anno - *t loco paiétis - Et ad inftantiam * supplicagonem
mean diis AleX Rex Seog illufiris huie se’pto sigilli sui appotuit -

Carta dni regif de fra de heeth Waldef -

. AleX dei gfa Rex Seottoy omih; pt hoib; tociu’ terre suc satm + Sciant

pfentes t futuri nos deditle cdceffiffe . t hae carta fia confirmatle deo t
conafterio He wargarite Regine de dunfermel¥ t @onach ibid deo fer-
uientib; t in ppetut Quituk totam illam medictatem te de beth Waldef
que quond fuit Johanis de ftrathechyii filii t hered quond Ratulph de
Strathechy® milit q‘m de nob t pgenitoribuf noftris + Idem Johs % pde-


--- Dunfermline_page105.png ---
SS.

REG, ALEX. HI. ] DUNFERMELYN. 53

ceffores fui inre hiditario tenuerdt cum omfih; hominihs ligiis ad diétam
terram ptinentib; t cum ofib3 ptinentiis t re@itudinibs ad eand terram
ptinentib; - Q°m quid medictatem terre de heth Waldef idem Johs de
Strathechyii not die Sabbi px" p? feflum Sti dunftani archiefi in mente
qaio - anno gfe @”. ce? - Ixx°+ otano apd caftrum puellay de Edenburg in
cata fira q dr cama be wargarite regine p fuftum *t baculii p se t hFdibs
fuis reddidit - refignauit - t q'etam clamauit - t oMi iuri t clamio qd
huit ut hre potuit in ppetud renuneiauit cora Witto de St&o claro tie
vicecoii de Edenburg - Johe de Lindes camario fire - Rid de Strata -
Wito byfeth - pat*eio de lemetoti clico fire de liBagone - a@agro Johe de
MWuxilburg clico fro de phend - Witto de caraumund cfieo de Warde-
roba » Wito clico tite gftabulat caftri de Edenburg - Johe de Ramee -
Symone de efkendi- Symone de lefell¥ - Randino de Warderoba - AleX de
welgedra » Alano de Walchoup » Wito de @orauia - Wito de qaifttuii -
Thin de Logyh - Alano de catia «"t aliis fidedig Tenddam * findam citi
monachis in Bam et ppetuam elemofinam liBe « q'cte + plenarie *t honori-
fice p eafa dinifas t rtindinef’ p quas Idem Johs *t afieeffores fui eandem
Pram tenuerdt ut tene debuerit faciendo forinfect [fervitium] q*nti
ad dicam tram ptinet - Et fi alique carte seu ettiam aliq® inft"menta
volum? t deeernim? qd

+ = 2~ Qa: © 0). ~
inuéiant® | Pdiétis onach nove potunt ut obec

ofiino uiribs eareant in ppetui caffa fint - invita - t uacua - t de ccvo
nulliu? ualoris exiftant - teft agro Witto Fra8_eancelat fro - Johe de
LindeS catiario fire. Wito efo Sti Andree - Robto epifeopo Glafeuenk -
Ale& euiii comit de buch « Pat'cio cofi de dunbar - RoBto Conti de Cart -
Wito de Suly$ - Dauid de Loucho¥ - Witte Cuiii de kylbrid - Symone Fra’.

Witt de Séo claro - Pat'cio de Graii et multis aliis apd Rokefburé « fdo

die O&obF # Anno regni firi trieefimo -

Confirmacio illuft's regis Alexandri tereij de tra de doler.

AleX di gia Rex Scott filiu? AleX illuftris Reg Seoté Omibs pt hdih;
tocin? tre fue salt. Seiant Plentes ‘t futuri nos gceffiffe t hac plenti


--- Dunfermline_page106.png ---
89.

BA REGISTRUM DE (sec. Nui.

Carta jira ofirmaffe deo % ecte Ste t'nitatis de Dnnfermely % monach ibid
deo Suientibs ‘t in ppetuir Suituk - donadoné illam q*m pie memorie Alex
Rex Scott pat dr cifit feeit de tra de dolaf in feodo de Claemanai in
excambiii clemofinay quas Bdiai wonachi de dun? peipe confueneriit in
dominiis iris de kyngorni ‘t de karal tam in frnmento « farina auene -

brafeo . Phéda q* in denariis * simfr in excambii r‘titudind quas peipe
pfueuerit in coq'’nis frist Regine {ponte tire - tenend t hnd eif monach
in HBam *t ppetuam clemofina p eafd reéas diuifas t edfuetudines p quas
diate pat ir cofdem monachot de dita tra de dolar infeodauit - LiBe -
q‘ete- plenarie  honorifice ¢ faciendo forinfecd Suicium qd ptinet ad di&am
fram de dolar - Teftih; WiHo abbe de Abyrbroth - Johe p'ore Sti Andree -
Dauid de Louchot - Jotie de Lambyrtoi - Henrico de didemo¥ « Thon de
Clenhilt - Willo byfeth militibs - apd Cupyr in fyf deeimo die marcii -
anno regni noft" vicelimo ocauo +

Coufirmacd dni regis de becth ceeidentali -

AleX dei gia Rex Scott filia? Alexandri illuft's Re& Seott - OMibs pb
hominibs toci? fre fine satm - Seiant Plentes *t fut®i not’ cdceffiffe * h*e
pfenti carta jira confirmatle deo et ecte Ste tnitatis de difermely *
@onachis ibid do feruientib; t in ppetuit Quitu¥ donagoné iam qm
Malcolm? de Morauia miles eifd fecit de fra de bethi occidentali - q*m de
AleX de Q)orauia milite tenuit b¥dita¥ - Tendd * tind eifd conach de Dun
in liam ppetua elemotinam ci omib; afiamétis *t inftis ptinéetiis KB.
tatibs ad dictam ‘tram ptinetib; / adeo liBe qrete et plenarie t honorifice
sieut carta Pdidti Walcohni wilit cif @onach inde confeéta? pleninf tefta-
tur iufte t pportat - Teftibg WiHo abbe de abirbrott - Johe pore Sd
Andree - danid de Loucho? - Joe de Lambyrtoi - henrico de diidemoF -
Thii de Clenhilt - Witto byfeth militib; - Apd Cupyr in fyf - decimo die
O)'reii - Ano regni viceS octauo +



--- Dunfermline_page107.png ---
90.

91,

92,

EPISC. 8. ANDR. J DUNFERMELY

Contirmago de Eeéa Gi leonardi de Pth -

Rob di gia ect £81 andé Epd- omibs fee matris ecte filiit salt - 7 epalem
biidiegonem - Nota fit dibs tam Pfentib; q*m futuris nos dedifle 7 plenti
monimic ofirmaffe cefam 1ti Leonardi de Pth - ecée fée Trini® de Dunit
in ppetuam elemofinam - ut menbrii ecée {ti Johis baptifte eiufdem uille -
¥. Andrea efo de Katencf - WMatho arch f¢i andi. Wagro NB. Johe
nepote epi + 7 Rad de Boilefé - Adam capHo epi 7 Ricardo -

ee - ¢ *
Confirmato ectay de Kaledot 7 de Neutun -
¥

Rob ai gia {di andree ep& omihs fSe Aris ecte filiif Sat. Sciant unitifi
nof oceffile 7 pfenti_ carta ofirmaffe cede fee Trini de Dun? 7 abbi 7
conachif ibidem deo Suientibs ecéam de Kaledure Comi «qm Comet’ Dun-
canus pdée ec&e T ppetuad elemofinam dedit +7 Ectam de Neutui timitr -
quam Elwynus Renner 7 Ede uxor ci? cid@ ecée in clemofinam ppetuam
dederunt - cum omib; eifdem ec@iif adjacentib; ita 1iBe 7 quicte ficut
aliq® ceta uBiut 7 quietiuf in diocefi tira cetat’ fuas poffidet - Uolumut
itaq, 7 Peipimuf q“tinuf cas liBe teneant - 7 abq, omi exac@one faluo jure
epali? quicte poflideant - F hiis -'T- ave - Q)- are « A - deeano - Suano
pi'bro - Wag? Andrea. Nigel eapt” . G - de Leffwade » Wag? Herb «A -

de Dunbar - 5 + ptore de Coldigham -W =. monacho de Keleh . Johane
nepote epi. 7 Radulph -

is

Confirmato RoBi epi? de ecetiis -

Unitiis f%e iris cede filiis Rot dei gia minifter humit ecée Sti Andy
Sat 7 efalé@ Biidicd - Qi ad officii nfm fp*tare nouimut'i ceéa dei editi-
care + 7 4 edificata funt i meli? emendare - digni daximus ut ea q in
ceva Dunimelen’ ofirmada exftitant carta fira q‘ntii ad nos ptinet pfir-


--- Dunfermline_page108.png ---
56 REGISTRUM DE

arétur » Dominica g' moniti 7 freti auc® tam abfentibs q‘m Brentihs
Tnotefeimus - nos ocefliffe 7 carta jira ofirm™ - ut Plata ecta Sia illa | st in
elemofina data funt - ita libere 7 quiete ab di Suido 7 exactone feculari
poffideat - ficuti aliq’ eca meli? 7 liBie poffeffiones fuas tencre debet - 7
maxime ca qj ad epalia iura ptinent - Videt ecéam de Pth- 7 ill de Suet -
7 feolas 7 ceta Gia ad eas ptinentia - 7 cec™ de Nitby - 7 eect de Kil-
glafliii - 7 ece™ de Kirealethin - 7 eaplli de Inuirket - 7 ece* de Inuirefe -
z eapllam de Couflid . 7 decimat' de Keeth - 7 ecc* de Wymet 7 ecc™
Ilala - & ibs apendiciif’. faluo inre epali 7 ofuctudine - Huie carte fiquit
inflimulagone diabolica agitatus obuiallit . 7 ex hiifaliq’d pife diminuit -
n' ad ogruam fatiffagédm inde uenit ? ab co dis miam fram auferat - 7

de

ipm de libro uiuentium deleat « F- abbe W - de f%a eruce - 7 KR - p'ore
de = andrea + 7 F-arch de laudonia - 7 .Q)- arch de $ and‘a+ 7 A de-
eano - 7 W. capito - agro Thom" . 7 Magre Hi -

Confirmato Acrnaldi epi de ecéliis « de Hales -

Unitifis £20 iris cee filiis - Arnald? dei gia aninif? Inunilif’ ccte (ti
AndF Salim - 7 epalem biidicéom - Nouit 7 plenf etas 7 fut?a poftitas nof
concefliffe 7 Carta jira pfirmafle ecte {te Trini de Dunt - 7 conachit
iB deo Suientibs - offis poffSnet’ 7 oMia alia q s' i elemofinam data funt -
q*tinuf ea ita libe 7 quiete poflidcat - fieut aliq” ec%a lBiut z quietius

poflefiiones fuas tenere debet - 7 max* ca que ad epalia iura ptinét . Scit

7 illam de St'uclin - citi cape 7 Scolis - 7 cetis omibs ad
eas ptinentibs «7 cetam de Nithby - 7 ceGam de Kilglaffin - 7 eeéam 7
Kirealthin - 7 ec@am de Kingorit oceidentali - 7 Caplilam de Tnnirketh -
Eeéam de Tnuirete : efi Capella de Coufland . 7 decimaf de Keeth «7 ec@am
de Wymet + 7 illam de Hala - eit dib3 appenditiif’- faluo jure epali : ? Huie

Carte fiq't obuianerit iil ex hiis pufe diminGit ? de libro ninentifi deleatur -

amen - £- W.- Prore de fo Andi 7 Matho 7 Thof archit - 7 aigulfo
deeaii - H- capHno . H - Tort collo- W - Pann -

ectam de Pth -


--- Dunfermline_page109.png ---
94,

EPISC. 8. ANDR.] DUNFERMELYN.

a
<2

Confirmaéo Ricardi epi de eectiis -

Rlcardns di gfa Kete 1% And? humilis minift - Vnitlfit’ fte mattl ceze
filiis clicis 7 laicis Salf - 2m ad officiii nim nouimus fp'tare T eeta di
edificare - 7 que edificata fit in melinf emendare 7 dignii duximus ea q in
eeta Duntmilen’ ofirmanda erant - {ub pacis fire t*nq'llitate fateipe « 7
carta jira pfirmare - Ditiea g* moniti 7 freti ane tam abtentib; q®m pfen-
tis notifieamus not conceflifle 7 carta iira confirmatle «ut Pfata ccga
ectas 7 cay poileflionet 7 - oftiia ectattiea biificia q cidé largiciene Regum -
pontified - 7 alioy fidelium in elemofinam largita fiint? Ita LBe 7 hono-

rifiee 7 quicte ab Gi Suivo 7 exacene poflideat - fienti aliq’ ecta meli? 7
ficentiut + Bint 7 quietiuf pofleffidet’ fuaf i toto epatu iro tenct -
7 poflidet - Videt eectiam de Pth . 7 Seolam ei%dem uille - 7 eapellam de
a de St'uct
7 Scolam ci%dé ville - 7 capella de cattello 7 cetera q infte ad eaf ptinent -
7

hone

eaftello - > ecGam {Gi Leonardi - 7 cet de villa Glifien - 7 eed

ceca de Kelliti - 7 eeéi de Abirerumbi - 7 ecta de Nithbren - 7 ect de
Kilglaflii - 7 capellam de Inuirketh » 7 ceGam de Inuireteh «7 capella de
coulland - 7 deeimaf de Keeth - 7 ectam de Wymet - 7 ectam de Hala
ci dibs apenditiif fuis «7 ece™ de Neutune 7 ece™ de Wet? ealedoure -
faluo jure efali 7 confuctudine - Teftibs hiif'- G .efo de Dikeld . W
abbe de {@a cruce - W. ptore de {to Andrea - Q) - archid - A arehid
Laudoii - Ajulfo decano - Joh nepote R- epi - Rot fit Sewat - Waéro
HNBto A. capHno - cagiftro Bartolofi - agro Temp - Madre Abrah -
Symone capHno archidiaconj -

De tofto in {@0 Andrea -

Ricard? di gta Eeve f%i And? humilis minift . Vnitfi f&e atiris Kote

filiis clicif 7 laicis Sat - Sciant ti potti q'm pfentes nos dediffe - 7 con-

ceflitle + pfenti Carta confirmafle cete {Ze Trinitatis de Dunt: . 7 onachis

Tea deo Suientibs ynii Toftum i Burgo firo de Séo Andrea + Quare uolu-
H


--- Dunfermline_page110.png ---
96.

58 REGISTRUM DE (see. xu.

muf ut iltd teneant 7 poffideant adeo liBe 7 q'ete ab omi Ruido 7 oluetu-
dine - fieut alijd alind toftum in toto Burgo pnoiato - IBins 7 q'etinf ab
aliquo poflidetur . Teft - Andrea Epo Katenen$ - Watho arehidiacoii de
{%o and? - Rob de Perth - Yagro Walto de Rokefburgia - agro herBto -
AleX capHno - Ganfrido clico pe Tinigham « Hngofi pincna - Witto Waref-
calt - Gamett hottiaa -

Contirmago de Scolis -

rardus di Sra eete fei And? humilif’ minif? Gib; {te mat'f eece filiit
Sai- Et Prnam biidiitioné - Nollit finitas fra nof dedifle 7 concefliffe ecte
{%e Trinitatis de Dun® Seolam de Perth - 7 Scolam de Strinelin + 7 oftis
feolas { Plate eete ptinent - Wat 7 quietas fine oi calijpnia 7 e9
in ppetuam elemofinam - volumut'q, deo auxiliante Tminutum Suari - PB -
Tho¥ areh Landoii - 7 Watho arch Sti And¥ - 7 Wagro Thoma medico -

econe

Confirmaéo de eeéa de kingorii -

» RE dei gia cete bi And? humit minifter - vnitifif’ {@e mat's cede filiif

Sat - Sciant tam potti qm pfentet’ nos de* «7 con’ 7 he earta fira con-
fir’ deo 7 ecte f%e Trini de Dunf 7 cdchis ibidé deo Suientibs 7 Sui-
turis Ectam de kingorii oceidentali in libam 7 ppetuam elemofinam cum
omibs eid@ ecte iufte ptinétib; - In decimif - f+ 7 oblaéoibs » 7 cetif
biificiis ectatticis  Qre uolumus 7 ane efali Peipimus ut Pdi wonachi
pPd@am ectam adeo liBe teneant - q'ete 7 honorifice poffideant « fieut
libiut - quietins 7 honorificenci® ceteras eccaf fuas tenent » 7 poflidét -
faluif epalib3 - Hiis teft - And? arch laudoi - Walto archid fei Andi -
Joh nepote Rob epi- Rob fil Seolfi de Pth - AleX 7 Wito capHnis epi -
Galfrido dapifero epi - agro Abraham + Odone dapifo - Hugoii pincerna
WiHo camfario » Gwydone marefeaH - GameH hoftian - Aldano coco -
Walto nepote arch de {@o Andrea - Et aliif q’mplib3 boni teftimonij v



--- Dunfermline_page111.png ---
os.

99.

EPISC. 8. ANDR DUNFERMELYN. 59

Confirmaéones Hygonis epi {ti Andree - De Ecetiis -

Hygo dei gia eeée fi and¥ hiit minift - vnillfis fe Airis cove filiis
clicis 7 laicis toci? diot fue Sat. €m ad officium ném {ptare nouimus i
ecta dei cdificare - 7 que cdificata funt in meliuf emendare ? dignum
duximus ut ca que in cectia Dunfimelenfi ofirmanda exftitint Carta fra
q'ntum ad nof ptinet ofirmarentur - Ditica gt moniti 7 Ireti auc tam
abfentihs q*m ptentib; inotLeteJere volunmf. nos ocet™ yz h*e Carta fra
a Dia ila q s' 7 elemofinam data f€ ita 1iBe 7 q'ete ab
meli? + Hibiat’ poffet:

ut plata ec
Oi Suito 7 exacédne feculari poflideat ¢ fi aliq® cc

confir

fiones fuas tencre debct - 7 @axime ea G ad epalia iura ptinent - videt
Ee@am de Pth - ¢ illam de St'uet 7 Seolas 7 cet'a Sia ad caf’ ptinentia - 7
ectam de Nithbren - 7 Eetam de Kinglatl - 7 ee@i de Kirealedin -
capellam de Inuirket - 7 ect de Inuirefe - 7 capellam de Coutland - 7
decimas de Keeth » 7 eeGam de Wymet + 7 Eceam de Tala « @ dibs; ap-
penditiif faluo iure efali 7 ofuetudie - Huie carte fiquif inflimulagone
diabolica agitatus obuiallit - 7 ex hiif aliq’d pte dimintis « n' ad ogruam

fatiffaccom uenit ab eo dis miam fuam auferat + 7 ipm de libro uiuen-
cium deleat - P . Walt arch {ti and? - Jocelino areh Dunkeld - Walt
capHo f¥e epi. AleX capH - Joh eapt - Rogo de liftun . Hen¥ fencfeat -
Andi fre epi - Rob de Kolet’- Ri filio Rot de Congertun » Gamet hoft -

Confirmaéo ei¢dem de ectiis de kingorii 7 de kellin : In pp'os ufus -

Hygo dei gia Ecée £ti And? minif{t lumit - dib3 {te matris ecte filiis

Sat - €m piculofim eft 7 ualde verendum religiofos uiros ing'etare + 7
a t"nq'llitate mentis G Suif dei neeéia eft aliq’ temporal emolumenti

cecafione pturbare / oportet reéoref ecéari ea | denocio fidelium pro
redempédne aiay fuarum ad fuftentagim coy qui ibi morantur dare
ofueuit ¢ tang® diuina primonia i detenfioné ecce fufeipe - Attendentef g'
qa illo remedio fe aii tbunal x‘ munire potit q' a religiofif’ animabs ad


--- Dunfermline_page112.png ---
Ps

100.

60 REGISTRUM DE [sec. xu.

fuftentaédm paupi dereli@a difpgit ? Eetam {@e Trini de Dunf: ei dih3
pofleffionib; fuis in tuitionem bi And? apti 7 noftram patne fufeipimus +
Confidantef’ ita q‘liter 7 opih; caritatif’ 7 hofpitalitatis ceéa cad’ nimiif’
g*uetur expenfif: in pp'ol ufuf monachoy ibidé deo Ruientia + eetam de
kellin ct ci? fru&ib; 7 obuenGnih3 7 Gib3 aliif inflis ptinenciif - Et
ectai de parna kingorii - de biifite firo difpentiun? - oeedimus 7 afliguamus
7 Plentis fe'pti munimie faluis epalib;? ppetuo pfirmamuf . 7 hoe in
pottium iuiolabiliter obSuari epali auc fanecim?  ¥- Walto pore 7 Wali
arch de f%o And - Jocet arch de Dunk! . Pat’to decano - AleX capt -
Magro Wilko « Andrea f¥e epi - Stepho canla - Rob de Enerwich -

Confirmato ei%dé de ecéiis de Walleuill 7 de Kaledoure -

Tv dei gta ete fi And? hiit minif? . @ibs Sée firif cede filiis Sat -
iant t& pofti q’m Pfentes nos concef* 7 Ptentis fe'pti munimie ofir’
Eete § Trini®® de Dunf» 7 monaehis ibid? deo uientibs ectam de Maleuitt
efi dibs ad eam iufte ptinentib; - q°m Galf'd? de waleuiit cif dedit oceffit
7 ofirmauit » Conceflimus 1 7 plentif fe'pti munimie ofirmauim? eifdem

wdechis ectam de Kaledoure ci dib3 ad ea iufte ptinentihy . q*m Comet
Duni cif dedit » oceflit - 7 ofir - Mat aii pfe'ptas - n°nd 7 offis alias ec@as
fuas ci dibs iuftis cay ptinentiis pfentif fe'pti munimie ofmam? eifllé
f¥iby - monachif’- {- Dunfimeline’i - Q"re uolum? 7 epali anec® flatuim? ut
iid’ wdchi Ss eetaf fras adeo lie teneant q'ete 7 honorif* poflideant ¢ fié
aliq’ uiri religiofi T toto epatu lint tense - q'cti? 7 honorificenti? poffi-
dent - Statuentef ut ds eay fructus 7 obuenGnes ufib3 7 fuftentacdi illoy
itegre 7 ppetutl osuentur? faluis epalibs -F- Walf p'ore de & - and# -
Jocelino arch ? dunkeld - AleX capt’ epi- And¥ de Tinigh 7 magro WiHo
clicis epi - 7 oultif aliif boni teftimonij viris -


--- Dunfermline_page113.png ---
101,

102.

EPISC

NDR. ] DUNFERMUELYN. 61

Contirmacéonef Wiki Epi ti And? + De eeéa de Kellin in pp'of ufuf -

Withnut dei ga £01 Andi opt - Omiibs fe matris ecce filiis eCnam 7 dno

Salé + Licet dibs fire juritdieedi fubiectis in fait iuttif’ poftulaconibs adée

debeamus ? illoy tn puifionem procurare tenem* {pecialius 7 profectum ¢

q’ fpontaneam fub religionif jugo feruituté o
faftentacdi 7 hofpiti fufeopedi dedicatlunt - Eappt dilectoy filioy noftroy
Abbis 7 Confint? de Dun? fapplieagdib; patno odefeendentet’ affectu

igente? - Gia fua paupum

Ee®am de Kellin ei Gib; ad cf infle ptinentibs cifd® peedimul 7 Plenti
carta fira. ptirmam? + hndam ppetno 7 pp'os ufus fief ad fham 7 paupi
fuftention® « adeo TiBe + q'ete « plenarie 7 honorifice 7 fit aliq” abbia i
dio Hira aliq’ cedam TiDint . qeci? - pleniut 7 honorificenei? tenet 7 poffi-
det - faluis efalib; - pdéi uw’ abbs 7 Coniintuf’ nob 7 fuecefforihs firis

ariit ppetut ad eandé ectam plentabiit - qui nob de tPualibs ilif re-
fpondeat de temporalibs - Tiis P - And¥ eandieo de sto And - Qagro
Laur - And¥ de c@orauia - Wagro Stepho - Petro 7 Edward capttnis -
Dionifio clieo - Ri& catlaé - Symone de Nuifi - Petro Buuenel . Et
multis aliis -

Confirmaco ei9dé de Eeéa de Inuirkethin -

Wit migazone diuina Eeée fei Andt minift humit » oib3 hat littas vifu-
ris ut audituris etnam In dno Salim - Ad vnitfitatis tre noticia volumus
puenire - nof coneef* 7 h* ¢ carta Tira pfir’ - deo - 7 be Qargarite - de
Dunf. 7 @dehis ibidem deo Suientib; - offis decimas Garbay ptinentef’ ad
Eeéam de Inuirk - Tenendaf 7 poffidendaf i ppetuum - 7 1iBam - 7 puram.
z ppetuam clemofinam - ad pp*ot fuos ufuf zy pauperi fuftentagom Ita
Ibe 7 qete - plene 7 honorif ? fi@ aliy® Elemotina 7 toto Regno Seot -
HBiuf aut meli? - pleni? aut honorificenci? 7 tenctur aut poffidetur - Sicut
1 Carta Ph de Wubty? plenius ptinetur - Hiis F - Stmoit pore de =
And - Rog P'ore de infula - Qath 7 Hen? Candicif’ - Rot de Sto


--- Dunfermline_page114.png ---
103.

104,

62 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xu.

mano + Geruad de Niaff . oagro Wit filio Roland - @agro Steph - de
Lilliffeline . And¥ de qorania - Petro eapHno firo - Rit Cama¥ firo -
Nichot de Coldigh - Ricardo de - Twiford - Et multis Aliis -

De Eecetia de hat - Confirmaco cintdé -

WHE pmiffide dinina Ecte Sti And? mini? Iumit - Gib; has littas
vifut ut auditu¥ etnam i dno Saluté - Ad vnitlitatif tre notitiam volum?
pucnire - nos dinine Caritatif’ intuitu ad fuftentacom paupii 7 peg'noy de
aflenfi 7 voluntate Capituli noft! pce» 7 plenti Carta fiva confir abbi 7
coonachis de Dunf ibidé deo Snientibs ” Sniturif? Eectiam de hat» et
inftif ptinenciif fnis - 7 uff pp'os hnda 7 ppetuum - Salua nots 7 fueeet-
torih; iris libera poteftate conferendi vicariam Bite Eete de Halif ci

ptinenciif tuit’. fedm qd in coy autentico feripto ptinetur? Hiit Teft -
agro Lanrené Arch Sti And¥ - oagro AleX de feo cartino - wagro -
H . de celleburne - agro Edwardo de corauia » S¢ Capto dni Epi -
Petro Buchard candico - Witt clieo d@o de couceard - Rit de Kelch « Et
multif aliis -

Conceflio Priori 7 Conuentus Sti Andree de Eeéa de Halif in pp'of utis
habenda -

Unittit t&e mat cece filiif’ haf littas vifuF vt andituris - Hen¥ di gta
Por ectée & And? apti i Scot + 7 eiutdé loci Confint? hiit Etnam i dno
Salt Volum? vnitGtaté tram p €to tenere nof unanimi affenta 7 uolun-
tate ratam 7 grata hre oceffionem 7 ofirmacom yenablis pat'f tri Witti
di gia Epi (ti And? - Q‘mm fecit virif’ yenabilibs +7 nob in x° diltis
WiHo abbi de Dunf> - 7 wonachif ibidem deo Suientibs q Ruitnris ¢ fup
ecta de halis 7 laudonia ci fuis ptinentiif ad fuftentacom panpum 7 peg"-
noy Tuff pptof habenda in ppetud - Salna Bato pri iio 7 ei? fuccefforils
i ppetuii lia poteftate pPendi vieariam ecte de Hat -@ fuif ptinentiif . 6¢


--- Dunfermline_page115.png ---
105.

106,

AND, | DUNFERMELYN. 63

in pdéoy abbis 7 Conimt? antentico inft*mento otinet® - Et ne q abtit hee
ira rati habitio ali oceafione alieni i dubiit poflit denenire y cam plentit
pagine teftimonio - 7 autentici figilli eapifli Tri appone + digni: duxim?

corroborare + Tefte Capiflo tre -

Colentis pfirmaddis p'orif 7 connentus {ti And? de Eezit’ -

Odomibs fee mat's Ecce filiif' ad q’s plenf fe'pti pucnerit «8. dei gta por
And? «7 ciufilem loci Cofit? hiit etiam 7 dno Sat. Nohit unitdital’
fra nof unanimi? 7 peorditer pbuiffe allenfam 7 potenti concefliont 7
olirmacdi q* Wits Epé {@i And? fecit Ecte fee Trini’ de Dunf « 7 abbi
+ Conuontui vi9dd loci + fap ceetiis  pofleflionihs 7 omihs bilficiif’ eecle-
fiatticis - 4 d&a ceéa de Dunt tenet 7 poflidet in epatu {i and? y ficut 7
Carta déi epi pleniul otinetur - Et ad hui? dri ofenfut ppetua firmitatem :
plenti pagine figillii ném appofuimns - F - eapiito -

Contirmaéo Capituli (ti And? de Eee

Onin; {Ze matt cee filiif ad q's Plonf fe'pta pnenit » H- di gta por {zi
Ande - 7 ci9dé loci ofint? humilis Et i i

vnanimit 5 ocordit Pbuiff atlenfi 7 con™ gectlidi 7 ofirmadi q’ Wilts
ept § » Andé fecit cete fe Trini™ de Dunf . 7 abbi 7 conuentui eigdé
loci - fap ecdiis 7 poffSihs 7 dibs biific

is ectatticit’ | d&a ecta de Dun?
tenet 7 poflidet 7 efatu 1@i And? fie i Carta dé epi pleniut’ ptinet® -
Videt ectam de Pth + 7 Scola ci2dé ville - 7 eapellam de Cattello - Et
eetam de villa de Glinen - 7 Eetam f@i Leonardi + 7 Ectam de St'uet - +
Seolam ci%é uille - 7 capellam de caftello - 7 cota jad eam iufte pti-

nent - 7 Ectam de Kellin - 7 Eeéam de Abireriibi -

Ecéam de Nithby -
Et ectam de Kinglaflin - Et eccam de oceidentali Kingorit - Et eapllam
de Inuirket - 7 Ecéam de Inuirefch ci eaplla de Coufland - 7 Decimas
de Keeth . 7 Ecéam de Wymeth - 7 ectam de hala - ei dibs ptinenciis

1 dno Salim - Novit vni ira not’

st frevetun


--- Dunfermline_page116.png ---
107.

108.

Ot REGISTRUM DE sec. xm.

7 Eetam de WefPealedoure - Et ectam de
ealeuitt 2 Saluo iure efiali 7 ofnetudie - Et ad hui? fri ofenfus ppetuam

firmitaté / pfenti pagine figillum nfm appotuimus - Tefte toto eapiflo tire -

fuis 7 Ectam de Neutui -

De Eectia de Kinglaflin .

Omiibs Pens fe'pta vifuris t andit’if’. W- di gia Epi fei And? Etnam
7 dno Salfm - Nohit vniuer™ tra nof concef* 7 contuliffe 7 de uolun-
tate 7 affenfi. capitli {ti And# lac Pfenti carta Sra pfirmaffe Ecée f&e
Trini® de Dun 7 wdchis ibidem deo uientibs 7 7 ppetui Quituris :
decimat’ bladi fp‘tantet’ ad ectam de kinglaffin - 7 puram 7 ppetuam ele-
mofina «ad fuftétagm ecoydem - 7 recepGom panpum 7 peg*ney 7 hofpi-
tum + Quare uolum? 7 gcedim? ut iidem monachi habeant - tencant 7
poflideant 7 ppetut das - x™~ Ita lie 7 qtete « plenarie 7 honorif -
ficut aliq' uiri religiofi 7 toto epatu firo aliq’s decimat liie - pleni? - 7
honorificenci? 7 pp'of ufuf tenent - 7 poffident - Et ad lini? gceffionif me-
moria: pfenti fe'pto figillum nim appofuim? . Ihif #- De Lund 7 de
Cup* abbibs - agro Laur archid ft And? - wagris PD de Bernham - 7
Edwardo de morauia - Walto de ortuo mari 7 Duncano medico - clicif
vis - Et fiiltis aliis - Acf ati fuit iftd anno g* w° - ce’ - xxx°iiij’. ap
Bucetii - Dnica px“ aii purificacom be v'ginif -

de Pth -

Confirmato Witi Epi £ti And? de vicaria c+

Ovnibs h fe'pti uifut ut anditu® - Witt pmiffide diuina Ecte fti Andr
a af eine = pon pe oe

minift iit ctua tT dno Salim Noueritis qd ci fredqnt fF ftatu vicarie
de Pth int abbem 7 Confintit de Dunf: - 7 vicariof ecte de Pth orirent®
difeordie - volentef tam nicariif q*m religioni 7 t*nquillitati dée dom?
puidere: tatr de déa vicaria duxim? ordinandii - Statuentef de confilio
uirort p'dentii ofidatif facultatibs d&e ee&e - ut vicarij qui p tempe filint
= ~, > ~ oe — + a. a 7 ow, .

ieeta de Pth- q' tde epalibs 7 omil3 onib; ad dtam Ectam fp'tantibs


--- Dunfermline_page117.png ---
109,

Ho.

EPISC. 8. ANDR.] DUNFERMELYN. 65

refpondebi
tuitis obuenire potunt «7 Ss dee
Reddendo ex hiis annuati in ppetuai domui de Dun Q'nq“ginta wre -
Retiduum s* noie viearic retinendo - Dei u® abbs 7 Coniint? offis aliot’
puent? ei%dem ecée 7 pptof uful ottent +7de hiif p voluntate faa dit-
uliq’tenut poflit dubitari ? Pfenti fe'pto

? peipient ofis obfones 7 dia teltamenta 7 dia 4 eafibus for-
o,
tia nuniata ofiftentes -

2 xd. 7 pee

ponent ? Et net pet um fup hoc

a

figilli nfm apponi fecimus - Hiis
cano p* de Cuneueth - Walto de wortuo mari elicit’ firis « Duis Rots de
wethfen » Rob de Liftona eapHnis iris. RiZ de Keleh - Wito de Innir-
ket - 7 aliif’- oe aati fuit anno ab iear™

+ Magris AleX de f€o martino - Dun-

dni w+ ce? « xxx°vij’- vi? NE
Januar -

Confirmaée Captli S Andy fup eeéa de Pth -
Oconib; {%e firis eete filiit Pfentef littas vituris t audituris «J - di gia

por S Andi 7 ei%dem loci Contint? hiilif Etna 7 dno Sat - Noititif
unitfi nof ordinaedm venerabilis pat'f firi- W . di gia Epi 8 And? fap

viearia ec&e de Pth féam ? infpexifle - eui? tenoré pfentibs duxim? inte-
rendi - Omibs hoe fe'ptum uifnt t auditu® WiHs pmiflide diuina Eero
S And? init? hiit etna 7 do Sat. Not @ & freq? fF fkatu - 4% - cum
tota Carta peedente « ufy,- vi? ki Januan . Nos y° ordinacdim pdictam
ratam hntet'? cam auétoritate capiili iri otirmam? - Tefte capitulo -

Contirmaéo Wiki Epi ti And¥ {de} ccetiis -

Te ee Do Da, see ms © segs) me .
Wits diuina miSa@e Kete (@i And¥ humit iinit? - 6ibs » S - ma.

Ecte filiif ta Pfentib; q® fur’if etna T dno Salt - Notlit vnit® tra not

carta fira ofir’ - deo 7 eete S Trini de Dun? - 7 abbi
as 7 polftnet- 7 dia bite:
ee@attien J eidé eete de Dunt - Regi - Pontitied 7 alioy fidelinm muniti-

pect . 5 prefer

7 Conuentui - ibic

i

deo suientibs 7 Suitis ce

a _— Pn RO) qn e , ra
cencia 7 elemofina largita fit - Ita liBe - honovif: - plenat 7 g'ete ab di
I


--- Dunfermline_page118.png ---
+ frevetun -

66 REGISTRUM DE (sec. Xu.

Snicd 7 exacébue ? ficuti aliq’ eeta meli? 7 honorificenci? 1iBie 7 7 qeti? +
polfeltionet fuaf i toto Epatu firo tenet 7 potlidt + videliet cctam de Pth
7 Scola ei9dem ville - 7 capa de caftett 7 ceta de villa de Glinen - 7
Eeéa § Leonardi - Et Eetam de Stuet - 7 Scola ei¢dé ville «7 capha
de Caftello - 7 cetera q infte ad eam ptinét - 7 Ectam de Kellin - 7
cota de ABerumb - zectam de Nithby - 7 ecta
vecidentali kingorii - 7 CapHam de Imirk « 7

de Nilglass - 7 ect&i de
“A de Intiefe » Et capha

de Confland «7 decimaf de Keeth - 7 Eetam de Wymeth - 7 ectam de

Tala ef ibs ptin

tif init. 7 Ecta de Neutuii - 7 ceci de Weftercaledoure -
zecta de waleuitt - faluo jure epali 7 ofactudie + Tefts . Hen? abbe de
ABbroth - Reinaldo abbe de Scona + 'T . pore de $ Andfa - Wagris
Ranuph - 7 Joh de {to Anda 7 Laodonia arehd - oagris Laurent - wich -
Stepho - Andrea de @orania - Petro Baillard clicit’ firis - Symoi de Q'nei
7 Gillet clicis dni Reif - Rob de Taya - Pet? capHno - Riz Camera¥ - Et
multis aliis -

Controttiia Int ectaf de Difard 7 de Kircald ¢ [ta conquieuit -

Onithit haf littas vitnris ut audit?if Abrahi di gia Epé Dunblancii . >
Gille’d ei9dé loci archid - 7 Witt abbs Seofi Etnam In dno Salt - Man-

dati dni pp in hee iba fafeepim? - Honori? epe Shut Snoy di venabili
fii: - Epo- 7 dilectif fii. + areh Dunblaneii. 7 + abbi de Scon* -
diod fei Andi Salt - 7 aplit Hn - Querela dilé filij Syinonif de Noifiaco
rectoris ee&e de Ditard reeepim? ptinent® qd abbs 7 Con" de Dunt> diot
foi And¥ fuper Capha de Nireald? ad eandem ectam de iure fp*tante :
iniuriantur eidem - Ideo q, diferecdi Fre p aplica fe'pta mandam? quan?
ptibs ouocatis ? andiatis ciim - 7 appHone remota - fine debito t'minctis
faciontes qd deeretitif p centuram ectattica firmiter obSuari + Teftef aii
q' faint nojati fi fe gia + odio ut timore fubt‘xerint ? p cenfiram eandé
cefiante apptone cogatis titati teftimouia phibe + € fi non offis hiif
vottitit intée: Tu ea frat Efe ci coy alto niebomin? exe-
q‘tis - Dat Vitbij vij? Ld? feb - Pontifieat? firi anno Q"rto - Cum g* he

exequendis



--- Dunfermline_page119.png ---
EPISC. 8S. ANDR. ] DUNFERMELYN. 07

auc mandati aliq'ndiu inter partes. f+ Symoné de Novfiaé ex vna pte- 7
abbem 7 Con de Dun? ex alta coram nob Get altcatum ? Tandé poft
ples citagines «7 miffione 7 poffeifion’ canta rei Snande a not {tam ¢
ptet Bdge mnanimi? gfenterit 7 dim Laur arch ti And? - 7 wagim
Steph de Lillifeline « 7 diim Sfmoné capttm dni Epi in hie mod - Videt
ut ipi tang"m iudicef delegati de Pla canta appHone remota cognofee-
rent « ut amicablid 7 legitime cdponcrét inter partes - Ci aii coram Pdéo
Arch 7 fuif collegif’ de p'd@a ta Get aliq‘ndiu agitatum? ptet’ pfate
iterato de comuni affenfu unanimit fe frbiceerunt ordinaédi fire 7 pdtoy
el@oy fide media firmit? pmittentef’ qd rath 7 e“tum 7 ppetua hrent -
qeq'd nof una ct arch 7 collegit’ tis duvemuf ordinandai . Nof ani de
ofentir 7 auc® venablis Pris fri Wiki epi {ti And loci dioeefani - 7 patroni
ecée de difard - habito uiroy p"dentum ofilio - in? cetam de difart 7
ecéam de Kireald fie ordinauim? 7 ftatuim? 7 ppetui phono pacis obs-
uandum - f- qd ceta de Kireald finglit annis cece de difart « Centii fot
ft'lingoy pfoluet pro firma pace finda int déas cetat’ «ad duof tminos + f-
medictat® ad feftum § cartini 7 med ad Pented - Statuim? % 7 firmit
phibemus ne ecta de difart aliq'd iurit’ in ecta de Kirealt pe ++ fot
Pddof de ectero s' poflit uendicare « Siq'd uw’ ab aliq” parti’ 6” bane iiram
ordinagom aliq’® tempore flit impetratum 7 uiribs ¢: at qd
ata folug . ¢- folidoy fis Pminis fiat ecte de ditart : q' p tépe fhit ope

‘eat T ppetud

And? puidebit - 7 fi neéee fit fi appellaGdne 7 o“diccdne p centuram

aftica PdZam ectam de kircald ut q' cam tenttit eSpellet «co excepto
qg'ndiu magr Wit de Grenlan tentit pata cetam : abbs 7 Con™ de
Dunf Pdéos folid pfoluent . Nt ut hee fe'ptura 7 modi e¢rog*phi gcepta -
cuiuf una ps ci figillo capitli de Dunt? remancbit penes diim Efim =
Andi alta uw’ efi figillo dni efi $ and¥ pene? monachof de Dunf  rebur
ppetue firmitatis optineat  nof eam figitt iiris ¥a ct figitt PlZoy archid -
zalioy ci co eléoy? roborauim® « Iiis Teft - @agro Th de Tynemue -
wag’ Rig de doure + @agro wich - Pet® captlo - Wito de Golin + Ric
canta - Witt de cunfort + Hug de Nid. Rig de Lidet - mag’ Pat'Go de
tto And¥ - Wit de Nid - Et multis aliis -


--- Dunfermline_page120.png ---
Ih.

68 REGISTRUM DE

———— a sees ae pen Qae mt
Confirmad porif 7 ouent? ft AndF fup Pdiéta edpoficone - 7 otrotfia
int’ eetam de Difart 7 ec¢am de Kircaldin ? amicabiliter sopita -

Vnitifis (Ze fiiris Ecte filiif Pfons fetpti uifut t auditut - HL. di gta p'or
fi And? - 7 ei¢dem loci hit Con tat i dno - Via notit vniner qd nos
amicabilé cOpofiGom int ecam de kireald 7 ectam de difart initam coram
venabli patre ADha Dunblanefi Efio - 7 giudieib; fui - 7 «a
S Andé 7 collegif fuis - intueniente venablis pats - W-di gta Epi iri
affenfi? g“tam hemuf 7 appbata - Cui? compoficonit’ tenor ad maioré
ut'nlg, eete feeuritaté ¢ tbo ad tbum huie fe'pto duxim? inferendum - in
hee uerba » Vaniufif haf littat' vilaris ut andituris - AbTh - dei gta Dun-
blaneii Epé - 7 G - ei?dé loci archid - 7 Wits abbs de Si

iro L- areh

pat) 5
oi Etnam 7 dhe
lim - Mandati dni Pp in hee tha fifeepimut’- Honorj? Epe 7é + fieut
pMeribitur tbo ad bum in e6pone afife'pta p econfenfa dni Wiiti Epi 1%

Andt - 7 A- Efi Dunblancii - 7 cid’ conindied 7 Pdéa fa vna efi dno
Laun arch {ti And? 7 ei? collegif’. Mae extrema claufula in tine Lithay
p pore t conuentu fi Andi resuata + ane g* compoticion® vnanimi
affenfu firo 7 auc'* ofirmam? - 7 cam cOmunit’ sigilli iri impreflione robo-
ramus + Tefte toto Capitto iiro -

De finita lite de Keeth 7 de Creichtun -

Ofmihs spi fidelihs ad q's Plens fe’ptii pucnit - I - di gta abbs de Jedde-
arth -7 L- archidt Glas Salt In dno - Noilit vnitfitas tra q Séa Cet nob

delegata a dno Pp* Innocend Ttio fup decimis 7 jure parochiali addockif
Ket 7 Siwtnis ket - 7 captte jbidem conftitute int? Alani pfonam de
igelli: cl
in Plentia iira oftitutis 7 jure in hune modi int cos amicablit
oucnit + Videlieet gd pdée Keet 7 capella ci dibz ex eis Jure pochiali
puenientib; fp*tabunt ad ectam de Creichtun 7 ppetuit - faluo Jure Nigelli

é
Creicitii ex va pte - 7 abbem 7 monachot’ de Dunf: 7 } ex

alfa - ptib

clici_ q‘mdiu vixerit - Et pdea ecta de Creichtun foluet annuati de cif


--- Dunfermline_page121.png ---
11s.

EPISC. S. ANDR. J DUNFERMELYN. 09

dem monaftio de Dun? in tminis fais p? pfati N+ deecfli una ay" rea
argenti - medict - {+ 1+ fefto bi wartini - 5 aliam medictaté 7 feflo peu-
tecott: - pdés ati N «7 succeflores fai pott cum preftabiit apud Dun-
fermet Sac*mentii de fidelitate

ci%dem loci clici - Et ut hee compo

ppetua in poftum firmitaté optineat / e@ auc not cOmifla vna ei Tris 7

peitt sigitt roborauimus -

De Viearia de outkilburg -

Oftiiihs § wat’ cee’ fit. P . felp - vid. ul andl © W - dig «ep. 3 Andi -
et? ido - fat Noue® Vii fira q @ cord nob in? Rid vieari® de cutkils
agentem + 7 @dchos de Dunf? ex pte rei oftitutos fF taxanda viearia ecto
de @ikils diuei? Get alteatum: tandé de oi peiii uolun® 7 aflenti -
Rtn an ; Bye ae Fae

phabito uiroy pitoy ofilio - pdéam viearia ta
moda - f- qd ipe R- peipict Ss obuéedes 7 minntaf decimat’ ptinentes

5 ORR TG
nimus pdéo Ris 7 hune

ad

altaragiun ecée de utk> excepto oii genere pifciti + 7 ex" decima dit
molendinoy | pp'e funt pdtoy wdehoy Reddendo ex puéis - x - are
minuatim pfatis cochit ad duof tmios - videt . vi" - ore ad fetta §
@iehaclis » 7 y+ ore ad patch » Et fi plat? Rid o* hane ordinagdm iran
uenire attemptatlit + fine reclamando fifi non tolnendo - fiue alio q’cumg,
modo fpontanea uoluntate fia te fubiecit poteftati fire five fuccefloris
Bri ut ipm fii o“diecdne fine appHone compellere poffim? ad hui? ordi-

amie 9 A a SG ap aa
nacébdis fire obSuanciam + p q'meniq, cenfura g*m ad hoe magif uiderim?
expedire + Suftinebit %
fufficient’ 7 honefte faciet desuiri - Nos u’ in hui? rei teftimdia huic

fe'pto figillum nfm ef figit dni - W- de Botch - 7 «:

platut Ri Gia cpifeopalia - 7 eete de couikilb

‘oy Laurent
archidiaconoy Laudonie - 7 f@i Andi - wna ei figillo plati Rie vieat
feeimuf apponi + Valt -

Dr ptentaéde Pett Baalard ad cet de Neutuii -

Wits pmifiione dinina - 72 -


--- Dunfermline_page122.png ---
116,

118,

. Omid; fee Ai

70 REGISTRUM DE (sec. x1.

Der quicta clamaéone Ecée de Abirerumbi in fif -

Onmibs Plenf fe'ptum vifaris ut aud - 72 -
3 P' i 7

Confirmatéo dauid epi fi And¥ de KEeéa de Kirealdin in propriof ntus
habenda -

ecée filiif hoe fe'ptii vfut iil andit?is BB pmiffise diuina -
cede £8 And® minif? hnit etnam In dno Salém- Licet dibs fire iurif.
dicddi fubiecis in fuis inftis poflulagdibs ad&e debeamus: illoy in pui-
fiont peurare tenemur fpecialius 7 pfectii: y' {pdtaneam fub religionis
iugo Suituté eligentef ofia faa paupuin fiftentaddi 7 hofpiti: fufeepedi
depmtarunt + Eappe diléoy filioy iirey abbif 7 coniimtus de Dunf- tuppli-

ead

5 Prna condescendentef’ afftu : cet de Kirealedin ef Sib ad cam
iufte ptinentihs cifdem dam?- ocedimus 7 plenti carta ofirmamas - hndam
T ppetno 7 pptof ufus ad fuam 7 paupii fuftentatoné . adeo 1iBe « quicte -
7 honorif® - ficut aliqua abbia 1 dio@ fira aliq’ cefam + libie . qreti? - pleni?
7 honorificenci® - tent 7 poffidet » faluis not 7 fuecefforibs fris efalibs -
Padi un’ abbs 7 pit? nob 7 freceflori

firis vieariof ppetuof ad eandem
m pfentabunt « q' onera ecée faftinebt - pr qm hofpitii: Epi de quo
d@i abbs 7 con refpddebt - Et fi contingat aliqd ex‘ordinarit anxiliti ab
ecta peti ut puta dni pp - legati  t efi ut pfimile ¢ ad on? Pdgoy mona-
choy fimitr ptinebit - In ¢? rei teftimonium ptenti fe'pto figilli n?m
fecimul apponi + Hiis # - P - abb de kamb3kii « Wit wagro @onialiit de
NorthBwich - Rob de wethfen capo » magro AleX de 3 mar™ - wag*ftro
W - de mortuo mari. wag'ttro AleX de Edent . Gilb 7 Wal eficis . Et
aliif’. Dat - ap Inchemurthoe vi? 1d? Nouemb¥ - Anno gfe m° - ec? xI° -

ee

Confirmaco p'orif 7 candicoy ft And? de cadem Eeetia de Kirealdin -

Omiins {Ze firis cove filiis Pfentet littas vitht nt audi. 1. di gia p'or


--- Dunfermline_page123.png ---
119.

EPISC, 8. ANDR. J DUNFERMELY val

tif vnitli nos

fi And# 7 ei9dé loci Con™ hait ctham In dno Sat» Notti
geeflionem verlablis pris firi PD di gra Epis Andi fap eeta de kircald
@onachis pe Dunf {fam intpexifle » Cuius tenoré ptentibs duximut
inferendum - Oinib3 {Ge firis cece filiif’. 7 - Tota Carta pximo peedent':
hie legatur - Et in fine p? tetfief'? hee clanfula fubfequens - Nos g* ocet=
fiont PdZam déis monachis fam ratam hntes? eam anétori® Capitli fri
confirmamus Tefte Capitlo -

Confirmaé} DD . Epi {ti Andree de Ecetiif de Wymet - 7 de parua
Kingorn -

Unitiis f%e matris Kete filiis pleut feptum vifuris vel audituk . DD -
pmiffide dinina ft Andé minit’? hait etna 7 dno Sali» Cum ex iniunéo
nob offigo inctibat fubditoy Hroy neéeitatibs g*

eoy ftudiofins c6moda peurare debemus +» qui cum religiofi fint ? fia

a follicitudie prouidere -

prorfas in paupum fuftentaédm + hofpitun: reecepeom effundat « Hine eft
qd ci domus de Dunf: caritatis gremii nulli_petenti excludat 2 not’ reli-
gionis quieti puidere uolentes - monachif ibidem deo Suientibs *Tippetud
feruituris ad caritatis 7 holpitalitatis augmentii + dam? « eoncedim? « 5
Plenti carta ofirmamuf’ Eetas de Wymeth 7 de pua Ningori 7 pptos ufus
coydé 7 ppetuii conuertendas » Qvare uolumus ut ci d@as ecéas vacare
contigit aéi @bchi fructus earundé in uful pp'ot’ p fue uoluntatis arbitto 7
ppetui conutant - 7 eafdem ita liBe 7 plene teneant 7 poflideant - fit
' religiofif in diocefi ira Hibi? tenentur 7 poflident? - Saluif’
nob + fucceflorihs tris efalibs - Ad cecam aii de Wemet ef cam yaeare
ntivit ¢ viearit ad honeftam fuftent:
tabiit «qui not 7 fuceetlorihs iris de spualib; - eif aii de tépalibs refpon-

ali cete av

7m nob 7 fuceclloribs ris Pfen-

debunt + Q'a uw’ puentuf’ eete de pua Kingorii adeo tenuef funt + ut fi ibi
vicariaf’ inftitueret® # modieii ut nich @onachif acerefecret ? volum? 7
ftatuim? ut cid@ ecte p idoneof 7 honeftos capHnos faciant de8uire + In
h? vei teftimdia pfenti te'pto figilli: n?m apponi fecimus - Hit # + Wagris -
IT - de @elleb’ne - AleX de Edenb - W - de mortuo mari + A - walearue-


--- Dunfermline_page124.png ---
120.

195

72 REGISTRUM DE

EC. XL.

{tuii- R-de methfen capHno iiro - Et aliis- Dat ap Tinigha anno gie
a + ce’. xP» Duodeeiii Kt Januas -

De tra de Bowieh q fuit Salomonif de Norham -

Oimib; bh. felp- vis. t+ aud « Rob di- g*- abbs de Keleh 7 cid loci
con® 7 dno Sat - Notitif nof of ofenfa eapitli iri cdceffifle 7 pretenti
fe'pto ptir® abbi 7 Con‘ de Dun tra iA ius” hofpitale f tri § Tri” de
BPwich q® iid abb 7 o™ emunt a WiHo de Doway + q® ¥ ide Witt emerat
ab hedibs dni Salo™ de Norha - Tédam 7 hnda eifdé abb* 7 con™ 7 ppetud
Tid begagii - Reddendo finglif annif Rog Landlaud t hedibs tnif’- iij -
Jot q’s antea eadé tra foltle ofucnit - Et ut b fira peeflio 7 ofirmacd ppe-

tis

optineat 2 Pfens fepti figillo eaptli firi roborauimus -
Tefte ipo eapiilo iro -

tua robur firmi'

Dn viearia de Dufmlyi ct facrifta ipir -

Unitifis tte warrif ecée filiif ad quos pfentes Ife pucnint Wits de Lam-

spade dina Eeée fei And? winitt humil
ors Aan Fi =O

In collacbibs biificoy ectatticoy illos nd inte dees

Nponi quibs
dabilioris vite pfeedrifg, earitatis mita faff gant’ - Cum g* in religiofis

viris abbe 7 eGuentu de Dunfinet difeipline regularif’ 7 pfee@ris ad dei

Laudem t pximoy ifermacom feruor vigeat caritatis

ps eo anpli? in
c : Pa . : ps

nto min? tpalib; deftituti fhint
auxiliis ad honore di 7 bi And? patroni firi n° nd 7 be margarete Regine

Bmiffis io fuentores redde f{pantes

cui? reliquie ibide sh celebritate velant? - vieariam Ecte eduentualis de
Dunfmel¥ - ci cei ipa Eeta prochialis exiftat Pdtis abbi 7 cOuentyj i
pot ufus p nob 7 suceeflorih; in ppetuii eonfimus p pfentes faluis
epalib; - Ita videl; q fae'tta ipi? Ecte q* p tpe fuit curam heat viearie
sup'dée. Et prochie p ecaptint ydonci faciat deSuiri Et qd memorat?
fac'fia nd obftante cura hui?moedi s' cOmifla p fui abbem inx” regularem



--- Dunfermline_page125.png ---
EPISC. 8. ANDR. J DUNFERMELYN. 73

ipi? monalt ij difeiplind ab adMiill"@e iPi? sactftarie 1iBe valeat amoueri -
In cui? rei teftimonia pfenti septo sigitt ném fecim? apponi - Dat apd

Dunfinet die lune px" p? feltii bi Nichi confetlo¥ Anno dni” ece’ -

De viearia de Diifinlyii «

. Oimihs x* fidelibs fens fe'ptd vik ut anditut Johs di gia prior sti

And? 7 eiufit loci cSuent? humit etna in dno satm - Nowtit vnitifitas tira
nos tram veilabit Pris firi dni Wiki de LamBtoi dei gta. Epi iri q'm
fecit monachis de Dunfmet sup collagone vicarie Ecée eSuentuat de Dunf
mel¥ que etiam proch exiftit T hae for infpexiffe - Vnitilis ste aat's ec&e
filiis ad q’s litte Pfentes puenit Wilts de LamBtoii mi8aée dina Eete
fei Andi @inif? humit fatm 7 dno fempitna + Th collacdibs biifiGoy. ectaf-
tieoy illos nd imito de3 aiiponi quib3 eOmendabilioris vite pfecébrisq,
caritatis merita fuffragant® - Cum g'i Religiofis viris abbe 7 conuentu de
Dunfmel¥ difeipline regular 7 pfecddris ad dei landé 7 pximoy iforma-
Gm ? feruor vigeat caritatis / nof eo ampli? in Pmiflis ipes fuenres
redde fperantes » q“uto min? tpalibs faint deftituti auxiliis ad honorem di
7 bi And? apti patni ini n° nd 7 be Margarite Regine cui? reliq'e ibid
sb celeb'tate venant? viecariam ecée conustuat de Dafmet eft ctiam ipa
ecéa proch exiftat pdzis abbi 7 cSuentnj 7 pp'os vfus p nots 7 fueceffo-
ribs firif conferim? p Pfentes faluis efialibs - Ita videls q fae'fta ipi? eete
qui p tpe ftit cura heat viearie sup"dée - Et prochie p captanii ydonei
faeiat deBuiri- Et gq memorat? facta nd obftante cura hui?mod st comiffa -
p fai abbem iuxta reGlarem ipi? wonatt ij difeiplina ab adi de ipir
fac'flarie 1iBe valeat Amotij - Inc? rei teftimonitr pfenti se'pto sigitt ném
feeim? apponi - Dat ap? Dunfmet die lune px pofl festii bi Nichi ofet-
foy - Anno dni.” - cec’- Nos g' ut hee pda veilabilis fir sup“ddi eollago
put fupi? continet* robur optineat ppetue firmitatis de cSmuni cdfenfu
jiro d@am collacdm ratifieam? 7 plentis {e'pti munimie coftmam? - In eui?
rei teftimonit pfenti {e'pto figit cSmune ecapili firi appofiuim? - Dat apd
{tm And¥ die Venis in O&abis Epiphanie dui» Anno gie - @” - ece? -
K



--- Dunfermline_page126.png ---
74 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xu.

Confirmaéo Andree Katenentif Epi - de Ecéa {Ge Trinitatis de Dunkeld -

Ofibs fee iris ecde filiif. And? di gia Katefi Epé Satt - Et efalem
Bnd - Nofeant t& pofteri q%m pfentef me dediffe 7 pfentif fe'pti_muni-
inine ofir deo 7 ecte fe Trinitatif de Dun? in ppetuad elemofinam pro
falute aie Tutt’ Dauid Regif Scot 7 Pdecefloy fuoy 7 fuccefloy 7 p
falute aie mee ec@am fée Trinif de Dunkeld - cum omib; hiif que ad cam
jufte ptinent - f+ Fordoui - Dunmernach - Benda&thin - Cupmaccultin -
Inchethurfin - Chethee - Siquif att aufu tenlario o* hoe uenire prefipterit
feiat fe 9° ipm mundi faluatorem niti - 7 ideo n* refiptit 2 etne dampna-
Odis fentenciam incurrere -

Confirmato Grego¥ efi Dunkeldens de ecéa {te Trinitatis de Dunkeld -

Unifiis tee matrif ecte filiif €@ dei ga Dunk ept Sat - 7 epalem
bnd - &m ad ntm fp‘tat offm {Ce religionif cultum amplifieare / nofcant
ta pofti qm pfentef me gceffiffe 7 he mea carta pfir? abbi de Dun?
7 wbochif ibidem deo Suientibs donagom Regif Maleolmi 7 And¥ epi
Katenen3 fedm gd coy carte teftantur ectam 8 Trini’ de Dunk - 7 ds
Pras ite ad cam ptinentef'. Bat 7 quietaf ab di exaccone tam ecZattice
q‘m feeularis pfone « Concedo % eis ott aéom i epatu meo- 7 ut diuini
eSeeant officii « 7 fubditoy fuoy curam habeant aiarum - 7 ut conffantel
in diocefi mea a me q ad xPianitaté ptinent: accipiant .  - And¥ epo
Kateii - Rob Abbe de Scoii - Brito p'ore de infula S Columbe - Gillem*
candico - Qauriéo candico - Duftach faddot « Sutilled ta8d - Magro Matho
7 Johe fie ei? - Abra candié de Dunk - Qurethae efico epi Kateii -

Confirmaéo Riz epi Dunk de eadem ecéa -

. Unittit tte siris ecte filiif - Rid dei gta Dunkt epé Sat - Et efalem biid -


--- Dunfermline_page127.png ---
126.

EPISC. DUNKELD. } DUNFERMELYN. 75

Qn ad nim fp'tat offi 72 - bo ad fbum fieut in confirmadone peedente -
Tefé- Qatho arch fti Andi. B'cio ptore de infula Wich clico - Wagro
matho 7 Johe fie fuo - RoBto dapifo ePi Rad. eapHo - Thofi pfbro
Murthae efico - Abraham paruo -

Confirmaéo Jchis epi Dunk - de ece* de Molin -

Johannef dei gia Dunk ept - dibs {te mat'f Ecée filiis Sat. Seiant tam
futi q® pfentef nof concefliffe 7 hac fira earta ofir* dco 7 eete de Dunt
7 wochif ibidem deo Suientids in 1iBam 7 ppetuai elemdnam Ectam de
moclin in atholia ci omibs {nif ptinentiif’ in decimif 7 1 Gib; aliif’- Ita
liBe 7 7 y'ete plena® 7 honorif? fieut carta alcolmi Comitis 3 i donagone
fua teftatur - 7 Carta Regif Withmi ofenciendo pfirmat - Hiis F + Walt
pore de iftla § colittbe « Th fenefeait . Regifi eapHo iro. Witt eapHo de
Vétertule - Magro Hent clico firo . Stepho fre Regifi capHi - WiHo de
Jokelei » Walto elico de Berwieh -

Confirmato Johis epi Dunk de ecta de S*thardolf -

. dolies dei g* . Dunk Epe - vnitlfit’ § iris ec&e filiif pfetibs 7 futtis fat -

Sciant ofis eliei 7 laici pfentes 7 pofti nof concef - 7 h“e earta tira
ofir® deo 7 eete de Dunk 7 cdchit’ ibidé deo Suientib; ectam pe St“dar-
adolf. rat) sibs biificiis 7 decimis 7 reétitudinibs ad eam iufte ptinentib; -

7 Bam 7 ppetuam elemofinam - Quare uolumus 7 precipimus ut Pfati
ofichi tencant 7 poflideant memoratam ectam cit Bibs bonif fui ita 1iBe
7 q'ete 7 honorifice fit ipi HiBie 7 7 qetiut 7 honorificenci? - alig” tenent
ceéam in regno Scocie ¢ faluo Jure epali - Mis tefé - Walt pore de Infula
{Gi Coliibe- Rog pore de lochleucne - Th a de Vehi tule « Rod capi
epi Eugen fit Dufth + agro watho » Naza¥ filio wagri Sfaae - Symoii
dapo epi - Rob - cama ei? «



--- Dunfermline_page128.png ---
130.

~
a

REGISTRUM DE [sec. xu.

Confirmaéo de ecta de Bennachtiti Hugonif efi -

Hygo dei gta - té -

Confirmato de ecta de Abirerumbi ci7dé epi -

Hygo dei gia» ge +N Noffit unitfitas Gira nos diuine pietatis intuitu
7 I

oceflitle 7 hac carta ira oftmaffe diléis filiif monachis de difermet - ecéam

de Abere’mbi et omib; fais ptineiif pp'if ufibs monachoy I ppetuii mod

omib; pfut’am - Salua honefta fuftentacde idonei nicarii ppetui qué p

rif inftituend id monachi Pfentabit . Saluif %

tempe nob 7 fuceefforih;
efpalibs - Hiis teft - 7é -

Confirmato GilBti Dunkeld Efi de Ecctia de Qoliii -

Oonibs x* fidelitys Pfonf fe'ptum vitur ut audituris Gilbertus di gia Epe
Dunkel Etnam In dno Salt - Nottit unitfital ira not’ litPas dni. re -

Pp in hee hiba fiteepiffe - Gree Epe § Q- Suoy dei Verfabli fri efo Dunk
fali - t aplit biidéom - Pertuadet honeftas t debitum caritatis expotcit -
quod opem impendaf t opam- ut divin? cultuf in locif religiofif fernetur -
7 defém no faftineant opa pietatif’- Signifieantibs fiq'dé dildis filiis abbe
%* con” monaltij de Dunf> inotuit - qd eum 7 Bago monaftio gd de nouo
no_ih magnis expnfif t ere alieno - nobiliori ftrnétura fubrice auginen-
tatunt in tauti p diuini cultuf angmento - Suitoy ampliatat numum -

vt ubi ée folebant ? Q'ng*ginta wodchi habeantur - pro eoy fultenta-
Zone ac recepéde peg'noy 7 paupum 7 hofpitum - nd fuppetentihs ppit’
facultatibs - fepe ona fubeunt debitoy - Vade humiliter fupplicarunt - ut
ci in q'b3dam ecctiis tue dioé jus optineant patronat? ? ne i d&o monattio
p neceflarioy defectu cultuf diuinuf depeat - 7 defeétum hofpitalitas
patiat? - deputari pté pp? hoe alig* de Puéis ecis coy ufib; pp"! mandare-



--- Dunfermline_page129.png ---
2. Oconis x* fideli

EPISC. DUNKELD. } DUNFERMELYN. 7

muf- Quoe'ea ffnitati tue p aplica fe'pta majimus q*ten? q" p'mum aliq*
ex cediis vacatlit fup*déis ? ipam de aflenfa eapituli tui gcedas eifdem -
vt falua honefta fuftétaGone viearij poffint eam jure tuo t capitli tui faluo
ad op? hui? in ufuf pp'os retinere » Dat Latait vi Kt - Julij- Pontif iri
anno iiij? - Hui? g* aue” mandati - 7 diuine pietatis intuitu ocedim? eifdem
monachif Eeéam de colin 4 p'mo uaeauit - Tenenda s' 7 poflidendam i
ufus pp'ol- liBe 7 quicte - plenarie 7 honorif « ab Oi Suito 7 exactone +
Pfentando nots *t fuecefforibs firif idoneum viearid - aceeptura fuflentagom
fedm eeée facultaté - q' nob de {Pualibus 7 omihs aliis epalibs ¢ illif uw’ de
temporalib3 respondeat - Tefte Capitulo .

Confirmaéo Capitli de Dunk de Eeéa de Molin -

. Omibs lent feptum vifuris vi audit@is- A - deeanuf 7 Capitula Dunk
3 I 7 Cap

{alt Etnam In dno - Notit vnittitaf tra nof vnanimiter 7 ocorditer
prebuifle affentum 7 pfentti ofirmacdi 7 oceffioni - q* G - epe air feeit
Rete {Se Trini" de Dunf’ 7 abbi - 7 conuentuj ei%dem loci fup Ecta de
Molin ad faftétacdm fratram 7 hofpiti 7 paupum - in ufus pptos fedm
mandatum aplien - ficut Carta dé cpi teftatur - Ad hui? ¢* fire pceffionif:
7 ofenfionis ppetuam firmitatem ? ptenti pagine Si
appofuimus - Tefte Capitulo -

Jum Capituli fri

Confirmato GilBti Dunkeld epi de Eectia de Strathardolf -

p-felp+ vi-ut- [audituris] G- di. gia. 7% Nottit
vnibfitas tra nof diuine pictatif ituitu: coneet* 7 Plenti Carta iira ofir®
deo 7 Eete & Trini de Dunf . 7 abbi 7 wdchif ihidé deo Suientibs ”
Suituris ad fuftentacom fratrum 7 hofpitii 7 paupum ecéam de St‘dardolt
cum dib3 ptinenciif fuis in ppetuii - 1iBe 7 quiete - plenarie 7 honorifiec
ab bi Suido 7 exaetone - Tenédam s' 7 poflidendam i us? pp'os - plentando
nob 7 fuceeflorib; firis idoneum vieariti aceepturum futtentacdm fedin


--- Dunfermline_page130.png ---
134.

78 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xin.

ecée facultatem - q' nob 7 fuccefforibs tris de fpualibs 7 dibg aliif epalibs
itt ati de temporalibs refpondeat - Et oie jus qd in déa ecta ung® huim?
vel nos dicebamur hre? g'etum clamauim? in ppetuii - Hiis P- A - de
Bbenda decano ec&e Dunk « Magro Petro de eaftro tri- Bno Galfrido de
1iBatone - Magiliro Rot de Rapelawe - Wagro Rot de laiceftria Candicis
ei9dem cece Dunkeld - Et multif aliis -

Confirmaéo Capitli Dunkeld de eadem Ecéa de Stradardolf -

. Omibs (Ze firis ece® filiif- PB. fe'lp - vit. aud. A. decan? 7 Capittm de

Dunkelden etna i dno Sat- Noflit vniueFtas tra nof unanimiter 7 pcordit
Pbuiffe affenfum 7 pfenfa ofirmacdi 7 gceillidi q*m dif. G - Epé iir fecit
ecte {Ge Trini de dun? 7 abbi 7 wdchit’ ibidem deo Quientibs ” Quituris
fup ecta de St"hdardolf - ad fuftentaéom fratrum 7 hofpitum 7 paupum i
ufuf pp'os ofirmata in ppetud 7 ome jut’. qd i da ecta unq*m huimuf ut
nof hre dicebamus / quietum clamauim? in ppetuii- Ad h9 g" fire ofen-
fionis 7 pceflionif ppetuam firmitate? pfenti pagine figillii capituli firi
appofuim? - Tefte Capitlo -

Renuneiato decimay de Inuiramund 7 de Heruiiferoe - ab abbe 7 Con-
uentu de Scona -

Omiib; haf littaf vifaris t aud + Ph dei gia abbs de Scofi 7 cid loci
Con" bait etna T dno fat « Noilit vni'* jira qd ci mota Get otroufia i
eapitlo de Gouerin {ti And¥ dioé int abbem 7 Coiitum de Dunf? ex vna pte
7 nof ex alta {¥ Gimodis decimif q‘s peipiebamus aliq tempe in? villam
de Balulfi 7 aq*m de Amund ex occidentali pte de Thei - 7 ff decimit’ de
heruiiferoe - nos de fpontanea uoluntate fira - 7 oi affenfu totiuf captli Bri
reniiciauim? dibs decimif fup*ddis - n°nd 7 inri q@ in eifdem habuim? ut
hre poffemus - *t eaf' domui de Dunf quietas in ppetuii clamauim? « faluif
nob dimodis decimif infule de Scoii- Vt aii hee renunciatio juris iri 7



--- Dunfermline_page131.png ---
137.

138,

139.

140.

EPISC. DUNKELD. ] DUNFERMELYN. 79

day decimarum q'eta clamato rob? ppetue firmitatis optineant ? pfenti
fe'pto coiie figilli capitli firi de edmuni affenfu tro fecimus apponi -
Tefte eapitlo -

De Inuiramund 7 de Heruicroe % de Ecéa de Wolin - Galfrid? Dun-
keld epé -

. Galfriduf pmiffione diuina 7:

36. Confirmato capituli Dunkeld fup eodem -

De decimif de Inuiramiid 7 de Heruicroe 7 de ec&a de @olin -

Omnnibs hoe fe'ptum vifur ut auditur qe.

De fra de pth q fuit nepotif Galfridi Dunkeld Epi -

Galfriduf diuina pmiffione - 7@ -

De ecéa de molin - abbi 7 ouentui de Scona ad firmam data -

Oconids has littas vituF ut auditu¥ 7°

De Pra de pth g fuit hen¥ nepotif Galf'd efi Dunkeld -

Galfrid? dei pmiffice Dunkeld cpt - dilZis fibi in xpo - ppoitif 7 cetif
burgenfibs de pth falé- i dno- Nofitif qd hen¥ nepof fir . fili? videlicet


--- Dunfermline_page132.png ---
80 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xu.

Alyx fororif’ ire de fpontanea uoluntate fua- 7 pfenfu 7 affenfu firo - 7
alioy amicoy fnoy dedit 7 gceflit in ppetuii domui de Dunf p fatte aie
fue 7 aficefloy 7 fuceefloy fuoy tram illa q’m eidem otulimaf f- Pram
ill q iacet ex pte occidentali ecée de pth - inx* domof abbit'7 Con™ de
Dunk fat aquiloné . Vnde de Confenfu pdei Hen nepotif’ fri vob
mandam? - q*tin? abbi 7 Con de Dunf? vt coy peuratoy faciatif’ faifind
de déa tra 7 ipi? omibs ptinenciif ex pte Pnoiati nepotif firi - In eui9 rei
teftimoia haf litPaf frat’ patentef vob t*nfmittim? - q*s volum? penef
fepedictof abbem 7 Coniintai de Dun? in ppetud reteruari - Vali i dno -



--- Dunfermline_page133.png ---
CAPIT. 8S. ANDR. J DUNFERMELYN. 81

Confirmaéo Capli de Sto Andrea fup decimis Garbay Eeée de tnuirkethin -

41. Omnibs Ste mat's cede filiis ad q’s Btens fe'ptum puchit « Johannes dei
gta prior {Ci andree 7 ciufdem loci ouent? humit etham in dno Salute -
Ad unitfitatis dre neticiam uolum? puenire - nos ratam hre coneeflioné
+ ofirmacim - q*m Wits eps Sti Andree feeit {Ce Margarit de dunfermlin
z monachis ibidem deo Quientibs 7 Quit®is - fnp omfiibs decimis garbay ad
eetam de Inu'kethin fpe&antibs tei 7 poflid imppetuii ad ufus fuos pptos
7 paupt S%tentacom ficut in carta ciufdem epi pleni? otinct® - Saluo jure
epali 7 ofuetudine - Et ad Imi? firi pfens? ppetuam firmitaté Pfenti pagine
figilli: n¥m appofuim? - Tefé eaplo fro -

Confirmaéo capli Sti And sup ecdis -

142. Omnib; Ste iris eee filiis ad q°s plens fe'pti puenit 2 H- dei aia por
Sd Andree 7 ciple loci putt? humit etham in dno Satm - Noflit unitfitas
Fra nos vnanimit’ 7 ocordit Pbuiffe aflenti 7 ofentii gceflidi 7 ofirmacdi
q*m Wiks eps sti And fecit ecte Ste Unit de dunfermlin 7 abbi 7 ouétui
eiedem loci - fap ectis 7 p%rehdihs 7 Sibs bfificiis ece*aft
de difermlin tenet 7 poflidet jn epatu Sti AndF- ficut i carta dei epi
pleni? ptinet® - videlicet ecéam de Pth 7 feolam ci%em ville 7 eapellam
de Caftello - 7 Eeéam de villa de Glenewi 7 ectam Séi Leonardi +7 ectam
de ft'uelin 7 feolam ei%t uille 7 capellam de Caftello 7 @ - {ad eam iufte
ptinét 7 ecGam de Kellin 7 eetam de abiverumbi 7 cctam de Nithbren 7

+ | dea ecta

ecfam de Kinglaflin 7 eetam de occidentali Kingorn - 7 oes decimas
garbay ptinentes ad eetam de Tnuirkethin - 7 ecéam de Tnu'efe - ct
capella de Coukefland «7 decimas de Keth » 7 ce@am de Wemeth - 7
ecdain de Tala ci omib3 ptinenciif fuis 7 eetam de Neuton® . 7 Ecéam
de Weftealedonir « 7 ectam de Waleuitt - Saluo Sure efali 7 ofuctudine
qad hui? fri pfens? ppetuam Mmitat? plenti pagine figilla nfm appo-
fuim? - Teft - eap nio -
L


--- Dunfermline_page134.png ---
82 REGISTRUM DE (sec. Xin.

[te oC maéo capli Sti And¥ sup ectis -

Ojtiibs ste iris ecke filiis ad q’s Plons fe'pti puenit y J. dei gfa pror
{@i andé 7 ciufilem loci ouent? hamit etnam jn dno Satm - Nouit un
fitas tra nos unanimit 7 gcordit Phnifle aflentii 7 ofenfit - oceffioi 7
ofirmaéoi q'm- W - eps Sti Andi fecit ecte {Ge t'nit - de difulin «7 abbi-
7 pustui cid loci - fup ectis - p%eflionihs - 7 omihs biiticiis eccafticis - 7
déa ecta de dunfermlin tenet 7 p?fidet in efatu 181 AndF - Sicut T carta dé
cfi ptinet® - Noucritis ¥ nos ratam hre donacdm 7 gceflioné 7 pfirmaéom
yim fecit dd - efs St AndF pi

abbi 7 ouétui fup ecta de Kircaldi - 7
ecta de pua kingorn - 7 ecéa de Wy

meth - ad ufuf fuos pp*os 7 paupum
Stentacom habend jmppetui - Sicut 7 cartis ei%dem epi pleni? 7 meli?
cdtinet® - Saluo jure epali 7 ofuctudine « Et ad hui? firi ofens? ppetuam
firmitatem - pfenti pagine Sigilli nim appofaim? - Tefé Capitlo not? -
Dat - mente februa¥ - Ani gFe - w° - ce? - q“dragefimo -


--- Dunfermline_page135.png ---
COMIT. DE FIF.] DUNFERMELYN. 83

Carte Comitif Walcohni - filij Duneani Comitif de fit -
De Eeéa de Abirerumbi -

Unnilitis tte Airis cote filiif prentib
In dno. S
deo 7 ec&e x de Dunf? - 7 abbi 7 wichif ibide deo Suientibs c
Abirerumbi - eh decimit’ de Quichtis » et Pris 7 decimis 7 obtonib:
Sib3 aliif iuflis ptinenciis fuif T TiBam 7 puram 7 ppetua clemdna - p aia
pris mei 7 iris mee - 7 p falute aie mee 7 dium antecefioy 7 hedum
meoy - Q"re uolo 7 peedo qit PAG abbs 7 OSehi Platam eetam de Abirerih

57 futuris Malcolm? Com de fif Sali -
iatis me deditle 7 concel™ 7 hae pfenti carta mea confirmatle

m de

% dibs ptinenciis fuis T ppetnii habeant 7 poffideant - adeo HiBe qrete >
honoritice ¢ fic alig® clemofina i regno feocie 1ibi2 q'eti? - 7 honorificenci? -
tenet* 7 poflidet® - Hiis ¥- Duneaii 7 dd ftih3 meis - Johe fit coichact .
Th - de Kilmat - Witt de Wyuilt - AleX de Blar - Duné de pt - Witt
Noren$ + Waleolit de Maleuitt « WiHo de Blar - BB de Atun. Wali
capH - Hug elieo - > mif aliis -

De Ecta de Cles +

. Oiiibs & mat's ceve filiis Pfentihs 7 futtis . Malet? Cofi de fit fal i

dno - Sciatif me remififfe - 7 a me 7 hedib; meif
clamafle do 7 ecée & Trini de Dun? 7 abbi 7 wochif’ jhidem deo Suien-
tibs vnidfa juf qd dicebam me bret caplla de Clef’. @re uolo 7 vecdo
qa Pd&a calla fpecialit {p'tet ad cetam de Dun? 7 qd tup"dti abbs od

n ppetui q'etum

codchi eandé capllam de Cles 7 ppetuit habeat 7 poflideant - bit 77 pace -
liBe 7 quicte 1% p"diede mei ant alicui? hedum meoy - His - F- Dun&
7 ad fib meif’- Waleot de Waleuitt - Menrit de Abirnith - Duné fit ad -
Dnné de fvreif - AleX de Blar - G&- capHo meo + WiHo fit Dunod -
Wagre Hug - wedico - Hug clico meo » Aneg? Judice - Ewen de Login -
Neto de Rame’ - 7 Milf aliif’



--- Dunfermline_page136.png ---
S4 REGISTRUM DE (sec. suit.

De quieta elamacde Pre de Petelochin ab eodé - Q). Comite de fif - 7 omib;
{7 abbi 7 Conuentui de Dun? -

heredibs

146, Comet 0) « de fif - Omibs Plenf fe'ptir oe -


--- Dunfermline_page137.png ---
148.

CoMIT. ATHOL. J DUNFERMELYN.

~

M@aleolmuf Comef Atholie - De Ecetia de (olin -

omibs pb hdibs tociuf tre tne elicit’ 7
q'm fut*i me de® « concef® +» 7 otirmaffe hae

alcohmut’ Comet Atholic
ue» Sciant ta pfente:
mea Carta ecée {te Trinitatis de Dun 7 wdehit ibid deo Quistibs p falute
aie [mec] 7 fponfe mee +7 Regun pdecefloy meoy ibidé requicteencii
ectam de Molin + ci omib3 ptinenciis fuif- 7 tref’ carucatat fre « {eit -
Petduuedi - Petmaldoic - Balchonene - Petmaedufgille - in libam 7 ppe-
tuam elemofinam - ad tenendum de me 7 hedih; meif’- adeo libere - qiete 7
honorifice - ficut liBiuf - qetiuf 7 honorificenci? aliq® clemotina 7 ead?
ecéa de Dunf® ptinetur- Excepto oi tux
habebit - 7 dia aeifiamenta fia jn trif meis q Cebiacent tre coy - In
Botch 7 rane 7 ay's- 7 in eetis reb; nectiis - Ego ati 7 fponfa fila E -
Comitifla - ipo Rege pfente - efit’. abbibs - Comitibs + pbit hodibs veg
aflantib3? reddidimuf nos eidem ecée - vt cum obierimus :
amur + Hiis - Teft - Wie dei gia Rege Scocie - J + C enti» Q) +

abirdoii - J - dunkeld - aerate - T- BreichinenS + epis - R + de
Seoii - IE. de eta + R- de Cupre - abbiby « Comit Duné - Comit
Pat'to - Comit Gillet «G - a de War - E . Comitifla fponta mea . H-
filio meo - R- de Qnei - R -« de londot - Philipp de Valloii - Wit de
Lynde$ - Walto de Berkct / eatlario regi - 7 cetif phis boils r

ilio Regis -Comuné aii pafturam

ibid fepeli-

‘emi +

Confirmaé} Henrié Comitis Atholie de pga Ecéa de Molin -

Hnricuf Comef de Atholia « dibs prob dibs toci? Pre the elicis 7 laicit’
Sat. Sciant pfentef 7 fut*i me geet 7 hac mea carta pfir® ect
tatif’ de Dun? - 7 wdechif ibidem deo Suienti illam g* Cont
eae ol ae xual pe ab eis coram rege + Jaa . abbaths - Jomitibs «7 pb

‘Trini-

donat

t'b3 carucatif tre f- Petduned + Petmaldoie + Balechonene - Potmac-
duuegil - in 1iBam 7 ppetuam clemofinam - Tenend eis de me 7 hedibs


--- Dunfermline_page138.png ---
149

150,

86 REGISTRUM DE [sec. xu.

meis - Ita lide 7 quiete - plenarie 7 honorifice - fieut HBiut qretiuf -
plenari? 7 honorificentiuf- aliq* elemofina i eadem ee%a de Dun? otinetur -
7 fieut carta pat's mei teftatur . Hiis P- Gillets Comit de Strathen -
Margaret Comitifla Athot - Qichaele 7 Rob candicif de Scot - Gillenef
fenefeaH de Stherii - AleX milite - Rit 7 Bolino capHnis - Malis fic
comit Athot - Gillemur fenefeat Atholie -

Confirmacd Thofi de Galwethia Comitis Atholic «7 Isabelle Comitifle
de ecéa de Molin -

THom de Galw* - coi de Athot - 7 Habet uxor ei9 Comitifla Atholic -
Bibs phis hdih; tre fue Sat. Sciit tam Pentel q* fat%i - not oceffiffe - x
hac Pfenti ca de Dunf? 7 wdehif ibidem deo
Suientib; donaéom ill q* Coi Malcolm? de Athot cif fecit 7 Hen? fili?
ei? com de Athot eifd@ ofirmanit: de de Molin ci dibs inttif
ptinenciit’ fui iii” carucatis tre - f- Petdunedi - 7 Petmaldoic -
Baleonne - 7 Petmacdunegille + in 1iBam 7 ppetuam elemofi
eis de nob 7 hedil
Bint quieciul’. plenari? 7 honorificentiuf aliq® elemofina 7 cad’ eeta de
Dunf: tenetur- exeepto cémuni au
hebunt - 7 Oia aifiati i?

v ofirmaffe ecte § Trini

zy eche
+ Tenend

s ita liBe 7 quiete - plenarie 7 honorifice : fieut

io dni Regif- Comune auté patturam

7
plano 7 aquis - 7 in cetis rebs ncetiif’- Hilf. 2. Q)agro Hu& de mortuo
mari. Johe Byfeth - Wit bran - Euftachio Wala hha - WiHo clico de
woratt + Petro byfet - Rad de Brade clieo - Hen¥ fit Galfridi de Pth -
Nicholao de Benauchin -

{ eeumiacent tre coy - In bofeh

De tra de Molin - dno BB - de Haftings data ad firmam -

Oonibs ad q’s pent tpt puenit? dd de Hlattings Salt . Nowitif’ me
recipiffe ad fendofirma de dno - W - abbe de Dunf*- 7 ei9dem loci guentu -
tram fu de Qolin - f- Petduuedi- Petmaldoich Baleoh - Petmacdunegil -


--- Dunfermline_page139.png ---
COMIT, ATHOL.] DUNFERMELYN. 87

las fias - 7 ci omib; ptinenciis - 7 eh Sib; natiuif’ ad eam
3+ Tenen
fuecetlorib; coy + ita libere 7 quiete + plenarie 7 honorifice - fieut dz abbs

p rectal’ diui
tra ptinenti

un mi 7 hedih; meis de pdéo abbe 7 Conuentu 7

7 ouentus eam ex donagone bone memorie Qaleolii Comité - 7 ex ofir-
matone fnecefloy fuoy liBiut 7 quictiuf? tenent 7 poffident » Reddendo
inde cif 7 fuccefloriby fuif annuati - ¢ - folid pacandos 7 abbia de Scoii - {-
dno p'ori uel tupp*ori ci%dé loci. uel eerto nuné abbis 7 cofit? de dunt
infra - xv" dief Pentecoftef - Si ucro ptigit qt p guerram ut p aliq’m
aliam oceafionem « infra pddos xv dief’ pentecoftef’ a déc peeitie fotone
ceflauero ? tenor earte BdZoy abbis 7 convent? penef me refidentis penituf
infirmetur 7 7 irritt: reuocetur - Hiis-'P - Galfrido clico de TiBatone - Witto
de Niditi. Wagro Alano de Pth - Rots freberfi - Wit de liner - Witto de
coaifttun - 7 multis aliis -


--- Dunfermline_page140.png ---
rr

a5 REGISTRUM DE [SEc. x1.

Ada Comitifla de Tofto in Karel -

» Oconibs § Airis cete filiif tam pottis q* Pfentibs Ada Comitiffa fir Regis
Scoé fat. Seiant ta pot ti q® pfentef me dediffe 7 hac pfentis fe'pti pagina
confirmafle ecte {te Trini de Dunf - 7 @dchif ibidem do feruientib; unam

toft in burgo meo de Karel - p falute anime mee - 7 p animab3; Henn
comitif - Waleoliii regif filij mci. > dium Pdeceffoy meoy - F- Hugone
giflard - AleX de & cartino - Jordano le flamang - Witto Giffard clice
comit apud dunf -

Ada Comitifla de tofto in Tadingtui -

- Ada Norhumbric- Comitifla . ppdito fo 7 burgenfibs fais Q omibs probis
hoibs fuis de hadigtunef feyra francis 7 anglis - elicis 7 laicis fat - Nota
fit uot Gib; me pveetfiffe duo deo 7 {te A)arie - 7 ec&e de Dunf . Vni
plenarium toftum i burgo meo de hadigtona - libere 7 q'ete - 7 in ppetua
elemofina + p falute anime Comitis Ten¥ dni mei - 7 p falute aie mee - >
Id Plecefloy meoy 7 dium fidelium dei defunctoria - Teftibs hiis - Magro -
R. AleX de {Go wartino . Tugoi Giffard - Apud Pth -


--- Dunfermline_page141.png ---
ELE, CoMIT.] FERMEL So

Ela Comititla de fif - de Beta de Kaledoi -

tla Comitifla de fif Salta - Seiant tam potti
q’ pretentet’ me deditle 7 pces* 7 le mea carta fir - conceffione comitit’
nde Kaledot! cu dimidia carneata terre tit
Trini® de Dunf: 7 aichif ihide deo Suientihs in

Unnittti

Riris cece filit

Duneanj dni mei ev

ptinenciis tuis I
LiBam 7 ppetuam clemofinam p falute anime mee 7 parentum meoy -
Teftibs - Andy efio de Kate - Alfredo abbe de Senet - Com Duneano -
Madiano 7 Albino eapHnis - Mich 7 Hugoii 7 Abraham clicis - Wahald
de faint Liz - Witlo de Anbeni - AleX de f@o Martino « Ada de Svreis -

M


--- Dunfermline_page142.png ---
154,

90 REGISTRUM DE [sec xu.

Sayerus de Q'nei de Beeth -

Severaf de Unci Sih; amicif {uis 7 hdib; falt - Sciant tam pfente? qm
fut*i me p falute anime mee 7 pat’! 7 firis mee - 7 aui_ mei omiiig, fue-
ceffoy meoy dedediffe 7 oceffifle 7 hac Carta mea contirmafle ¢
de Dun? et abbati 7 wonachis ibide do Suientihs - terra mea totd de
Beeth - q* Waldeuu? tennit p fuaf recat’ dinifas ct omiibs ptinenciif’ tuis
in liberam 7 ppetuam elemofinam - i
fieut aliq's baro in toto regno Sco

) ; ; +p
a libe 7 quicte - plenarie 7 honorif -

alig® clemofina dare poteft - aut potit
Bit 7 honorificentiuf - pleni? 7 quieti? - Hiis teft - Ipo dno Rege -
Comite Dauid {Fe Dni Reg - Comite Duncaii de fit. Rob de Q'nci pre
meo - Maleolmo filio comitif Dun de fif - Alano filio Symonif’- Walto de
lundifi - WiHo cognato meo de bifket - Rots de biet - Johe feneticallo
meo + WiHo efieo meo +

Sayerns de Q'uci de tra de Duniker -

. Oconihs fe firis ecte filiis Pont fe'ptum vifuris t auditu? - Sferut de

Q nei Com Wyntott Salé - Fra nouit vnilifitas me ad inftaneia. dni. W-
dei gta chi F Andy 7 quoyda alioy bonoy uiroy p atab? dni mei regis -
We 7-R-de Qnei prif mei 7+ R- filij mei: totam fram de Duniker
q’m dés Rob pr fis tenuit in uita fua ad firmam de ocefli Ark abbis +
reddidifle 7 q'etam elamatle ippetuii deo 7 eete fe Trinit® de Dun? - +
efedé loci c@dehit’- ficut fnam pp'am - ch omib; 1Dtatibs 7 ptinenciif this -

z ef eifdem diuifis ct quib3 cam fepetatis Dr fis aliqi tenuit - Tta qd
nullus hedum meoy occatione alicui? poffeffionis qm ego ut pr fis T déa
Prva habuitle uidebar aliqd ius in cadem tra fibi poflit uendieare - Vt ad
hee mea fepefate tre reftitnto 7 q'eta clamato maiorem optincat firmi-
tate? Pont fe'ptum memorati efi § Andy + 7 Rogii filii_ mei sigillis vna
cum meo? feci robovari + Liiis - F- Dno Wito efo & Andy - Rog de
Qnei - Ad abbe de Neubott - Radulph ptore de féo Smano - Wich de



--- Dunfermline_page143.png ---
15)

6.

Se

. Galtrid? de Maleuiti - di

sec, xt] DUNFERMELYN. 91

Wrhinet - Euerardo de Trumpetun - BD Giffard - WiHo de Sealford
tune fenefeaH » W + de chamund - Pate fit Nefi- Wilone corneth - Th
de leftalrie tie vit de Edenti » Th de lundin tiie vid de fif- G~ de Tnuir-
kunglas - Rots de Maleuil! - AleX de Setun - 7 filtif aliis -

Renunciaco Juris Syeri de Q'nei quod habuit 7 fra de Duniker -

Oooni S. de Qe coi Wintoii falt -
Nouitif me p me 7 heredib3 meif venunciafle omi iuri qd habui in terra

5 lens felpti vifuris ut anditurif’

de Duniker + Qvare uolo ut fig’ Carta ut aliqd iftrumentii de tra pfata
aliewbi inuentii uerit qd @onachis de Dunf nocere potit ? nHur repute-
tur - Vatt -

Litte ciufdem . S + ad dim epfm fi Andy -
REQendo fri in xpo dno - WiH dei g*. efo § And -S- de Qnei Cofi
Wintoii ctnam i dno fat - Ste prnitati tre haili® 7 attente fupplico

q‘tinus ituity mee peticdis figillum vFm earte mee qim @dchit’ de Dunt
dedi cum tra de Duniker : fiti gia appone dignemini - Vatt -

Galfridus de Maleuin de ceéa de Malenilt -

amici

5 fuis 7 hominibs tam futuris q* plentib;
fat «i dno - Nota fit uot me deditle 7 con® - 7 hae carta fia confir® Eete
x' de Dunf 7 @oiichif ibidem deo Suientib; Eetam de @ateuitt in ppetuam
fais. 7 max’ ct tra ila q’m aflignaui ecte
ct paiabs dd Regif 7 Waleolii Junioris . +

palab3 aiicefloy meoy 7 iuecefloy - Ita ut de pdéa elemotina inueniatur

clemofinam ef Gibs ptinen

cidem 7 dedicacde eitdé - fe

Eo A . 9 a
lui in ppetuum coram fepultura pdeoy Regum . Qve uolo ut Pdzam
ceéam ita libe 7 quicte 7 honoritice tencant 7 poflideant / ficut aliq’


--- Dunfermline_page144.png ---
159

160.

ge REGISTRUM DE [see. Xi.

ecéam ab aliquo barone ut milite 7 toto regno Seoé libiut 7 q'eti? 7 hono-
rificenci® tenent 7 poflidét - Teft hiif'- Hug epo fi Andy - Pat'co decano
‘le fif- AleX capo» agro Witt de Benigwirthe « Johe clieo de Keleh -
Conftantino de Lochor » Walto de Lundn - Rob freberii » Andy fie Epi -
Th. Rob. ug - Rig - Walt - filiif ei9d Galfridi -

Retignaéd tocint jurit qd dd albuf de hadigtun habuit in eeéa de Maleuitt
ex gceflione Greg filii Wit de Qalenitt -

Dauid de Hadigtun amico tno kmo Gregoy de Waluitt Salt 7é -

Collae& einfdem Gregorij ¢ de eadem ceta de Qaleuilt -

Uniutit x° fidelibs haf littas vifui uf auditui Gregoy de Calenitt tilie
WiHi de malenil Sat. Sei
paiabs atiectioy 7 fuceetioy meoy dedifle 7 con® 7 h*e earta fila contir™
deo 7 eete Trini de Dunf «7 @dehif ibidem deo Suientihs 77 ppetun
Suitnrit’ j? patronatnt’ eete de Qaleuift ei omihs ptincneiis fait’ pro me
+ hedib; meis iure ppetuo + Quare volo 7 pcedo ut ijdem conachi Jus

aunt tam plentef’ q" futuri me caritatif intnitu 7

patronat? d@e Eee teneant 7 poflideant abtq, aliq’ clamio 7 9“déone mei

At Fen Pe Cn Sp
zhedum meoy + 7 ad ipam quotienfetiq, uacauit plonam plentent - ut

alio modo put fedm dm potilint ? de eadé difponant - Ego u° p me 7

f fuif hui ut bre

hedib3 meif’ omi iui qd in cadé ceta eit ptinenc
debui totatr remuneiani - 7 illad @bebit’ pd@is integ“lit quietum elamaui -

obligando me + hedef meof ofif 7 fingulof qd cont® bane jurif’ renun-
eiacom 7 q'etam elaméom filo ung™m tempe veniem?- In h? rei teft
huie feripto figillii mei appotui + Hiif tett - Dnit’ Wali byfet . Joh de
Vals « Wen de Brade . Rig de Balweri - Witto capHno dni Regis - Alex
de capHa «Th + de wevnt. Rid de tntula - 7 Rots de infigenit - feruientib;
dni Reg + Dat ap caft® puellay - Auno gfe - w°- ee"+ 1° - primo - Q'nto
die Julij -



--- Dunfermline_page145.png ---
161.

162.

163,

sec. Xt] DUNFERMELYN. 93

Walteruf filinf Alani de - xx" - acrif terre 7 yno tofto in Dunfmelin -

Waltut fili? Alani Dapif regis Sec
Seiatif me de* 7 con® 7 hac mea earta fir’ eete {ee Trini® de Dante? +

Sih {Ce Hiris ecée filiis Sat

fiihs ihidem x° Suicntibs fram mea de Dunk - s+ i+ tofti p

7 fiiris mee 7 aeetioy

ala Reg Waleot . 7 afieetloy fuoy «7 p aiabs pri
atq, pro mei ipi? aia - 7 ppetuam elemofinam + TiBe 7 q'ete tenen-

meoy
dam + 7 hoe fient alig’ elemofina inf” region Seo® - meli? tine Tibint’
gio meo m7 hedihs meif fap cam faciendo « F -
Rié cho S andy - Eng cfo Glafe . 6. efo Dunkeld « And eo de
KateneS » Nich can? - Joh abbe de Kelch - Osbi abb de Jedd. Dune
com - Hugoii giffard - Johe de vant’. WiHo de la hai -

tenetur - faluo hofpi

Walfus fili? Alani de tofto in Renfrn -

Walt fit Alaii Daf Re Seod . Gihs hdibs tif 7 amicis clieif’ 7 lnicis ti
fut’if q® plontihs fat . Vninfitati tire inotefcat me p amore dei - 7 p falute
corpis mei 7 aie T Bam 7 ppetuai elemdnam dediffe - 7 hui? mee earte
> Tri® de Dunf 7 cdchif ibidem deo

ofirmatle teftimdio deo 7 eete f'
Ruientibs 7 Suiturit’: Vind toftum plenariii T burgo meo de Renfrn -Tenendir
cis ita Be 7 qete : tient aligd toftii 7 eodem burgo i clemofina datum -
Hibie 7 quicei? tenet? 7 poflidetur - B . Englt cancel » Nich canta. Rit
capH . ileffwano » Neflio fit Wihi - Ungoit fifico afi Pth -

Walt fit Alani de Tofto In Inuirkethin -

Wali fit Alaii Dap Regis Seot - vnilifif 3 iirif’ cee® filiif’ {at - Seiant
pfentet’ 7 fut? - clici 7 laici me deditfe 7 geet » 7 h“e mea carta fir’
eete fe Trini® de Dunf? 7 wdchit’ ibide deo Suientibs toftii mei de
Intkethi 7 ppetuam elemofina p aia Walcolii re& - Ita 1Be 7 quiete


--- Dunfermline_page146.png ---
14.

165.

166,

94 REGISTRUM DE (see. xu.

tenendam: fient aliq’ elemofina libiat 7 q'eciuf 1 regno feot datur >
tenctur » £- Alaii filio Symofi - Rad rufto « Rob fit Mathie » Rid elieo
iio - Walto cailario meo -

Wi Eng - de iii’ . falinis 7 vna earucata tre «

Wits Eng dib3 fidelibs {te dei cede fat. Seiatis cquidem me dedifle 7
cet eete & Trini® de Dunf? pietatis fludio - pdeeeffoy q, meoy falute -
iij - falinaf in feudo de Bure - f- fup ripam Ethene + dimidiam carueatam
tre in ppetuam elemofina Bat 7 qretaf ab omi De 7 inquictndie - ad
tencndii de me + de hedibs mei’. Teft + AleX @bcho + 7 Radulph elico
de Bure» 7 Benardo fit Pat? - Roto filio Hherti - 7 Hen¥ eng - 7 Geri
dapifo - Vat -

Waldeuuf fili? Gofpatrieij de ee@a de Inuirkethi -

mat's ecte

Unit filiif’. clicif 7 laid Waldeun? fili? Gofpate fali i
dno - Seiant ti fut?i qm pfentet’ me oceflifle 7 dediffe + hae mea carta
ofr ecte de Dunt> ec®am de Invirkethin in ppetuam elemofinam p

amore dei rete + 7 pain Pris mei 7 iris mee + 7 p aia mea 7
aiieefloy roy - ut ds 7 dif fir iis xps int-
regine 7 peibs ibidé etfutil fray 7 cunciay mifereatur
- Comite Duné - Hug Giffard « WiHo filio theraldi -
AleX fit tuo - Het de Dundas - Joh de Cragin - Rob Auenel p* de
Dunmani - \WiHo p* de Dunmaii - Sunnolf- Galfrido fit fuo - AleX fit -
Gotpat'eij - Rob captto - Wag de Hefeltun -

n

5

usoris mee 7 filiar

: Ore x
ceflione pdée {te

ari + Hiis

Alano ateer - R

Philipp? de Mub*i 7 Galiena de ecta de Inuirkethin -

Ovonibs f@e Hiris ecde filiif haf littas vilut vt audituri ph de oubray 7


--- Dunfermline_page147.png ---
167.

XU} DUNFERMELYN. 95

Galiena uxor ci? etna jn dno ft - Notit uniner™ Fra nos dinine pictatif

ituitn p falute dui tri Witt Re& feod - 7 dni AleX filij fui oeeffiffe + hac

arta Hira ofirmafly 7 in ptencia due Ermeré Regine feot . 7 dni Witt
fe] Andy epi q fetas clamafle 7 ppetnii deo 7 ceée § coar® de Dunf +
wotichif’ ibide deo Suientibs + ois decimas bladi ptinentef ad ecéam de
Inuirk tefidaf 7 potlidendas 7 1iBam » pura 7 ppetuam clemo™ «de nob 7
Tedihs firis - adeo Te + qete . plena¥ 7 honorif - fi ali decime in regno
feod - qreeinf - 1iBie - plenius 7 honorificencinf? tenent® 7 poffident® » Not
ati 7 hedef iiri Warantizabim? eis pd&as decimas 0" ds hoies - Et clici a
not 7 hedihs firis Plentati dno Wito efo {i Andy 7 fuceeflorihs fais
refpondett de omib3 epalibg- Ad h? rei teftimdii - figilla dme Ermengard
regine 7 dni Witt epi {ti Andy ¢ figitti iri munimie fecim? apponi:
Ap Edent primo die Julij . Whit # . Dna Ermer Regina Seot » Bno
Witto S Andy epo . Andrea decano Laudoii . Rot de 8 fimano - Wagro
Steph de Lillifcliue - €ruas de Neatle - WiHo de Golin « Hug filio Witt -
Ph de Lundin - Jobe de Pencathlan - Duncan fit Jat de Pth » Wiflo de
fontib3 - Helia de Dundas - Rog de Quby - 7 multif aliis «

RoBtus de Londoniit’ d Vneth -

Omibs M' fidelibs haf lita! viturif ut andit®it’. Rob de Londofi ili? re&
foot Witti talé - Nowit unitifitas tra me p falute Srif mei 7 fris mei Alex
zy mea- 7 p aia Ade Comititle dne mee - 7 pro aiabs aiicefloy Moy - + pro
quicta elamaone + vi + o*reay m' 7 heredib; meif 7 ppetuii q*s mdchi de
Dunf folebat peipe annuatim de elemofina dni Reg de Kellin - dediffe
7 ocel 7 hae mea Carta fir’ in puram 7 Ppetuam elemofina deo 7 eet
8 Trini® de Dnnf 7 @dehit’ ibid deo Suientihs Totam Vneth ca
ptinenciif’ fuif' 7 libtatihe + 7 ailiamitif. p café diuifaf p q*s Witt dei g

Rex Secoé pr ais eam m" dedit 7 ic Carta ci? teftatur «7 ego eam poffedi: :
die q* cif e& dedi 7 ocefli 1 botcth 7 plano - 1 morif 7 marefiif’- in ili
pateuit - in Ragnif 7 ag't- 7 Sib5 rectitudininibs 7 franchifis ad pdéam
tram ptinentibs - lcs libe + 7 quiete - plenarie 7 honorifice . ficut eam m'

bs


--- Dunfermline_page148.png ---
169.

96 REGISTRUM DE sec. XIU.

Pr flis HBi? q'eciut’. 7 honorificenci? pleni? otulit - 7 carta fua pfirmanit -
WIN cfo S Andy - Ri= epo Dunkeld . Thom pore S Andy - Job
pore de way + Walt p'ore de ifule S Colitbe - Coit Maleot de fif - Walt
Olifard - Ingelra. bai. Wit de Bofeh clico dni Reg - AleX vie de Stueli -
Galfridy de fnuirkunglas - Joh de @orauia » Symoii walleurer - Witt

auenel + 7 qultif aliis -

Inter Oroch 7 Balmacmol -

UNivdf & firis cete flit Pfent ftp » Vis ut aud « Rob de Londoii tr

dni reg feoe fat - Nouitif me q'etam clamafle abbi 7 ptintui de Dun? p

aia Regis WiHi pris mei - 7 p ala Ade Comitifle - 7 pro aiab3 dium
antecetloy meoy clamacom ila q*m habui 7 tra q dr threpland int
diuifas de Balmaemol 7 de Oroe « Et ut hee q'eta clamate rata pmancat
7 Toeulla: lane carta figilli mi impfionc duxi roborandam « [iis F -
Slone capeHo de abirdow - Galfrido de Inuirkunglas - eruco coco -

Thoma filio Wiki» Nieh de Balram + Et multis aliis -

dn Kecth {hwin - Johes Gaillard -

Ooonibs has fittas vituris t andit’if' Joh Galart etuam i dno Salé » Notit
yni* jira me fide mediante - 7 tactis facroftis cuu“ngliif’ obligalie me +

2 » _ - Mes, oF + >
hedes meos 7 tram mea de Keth itwin ufus abbem 7 Counentii de

Dunt - ad oSuandii pdm abbem 7 coniinti 7 eoy fueceflores indempnet’

7 illetos pro tra de Keeth (win - hfus Witt de mortun 7 hedes tios -
Ne ~ * 7 Dae t > ~

7 ulus ofis hominet de pdéa tra - accones - caulas 7 qrelas mouentes ut

moucre ualentes + Preterea feiendum eft qd prettiti iufiurandi p me 7

heredihs meis ad onmef antiy"s eartas de terra de Keth fiwin loqntef dno
abbi + ci¢dem loci Conuentui + {+ de Dunt  fidelit: ci poto reddendas 7
comittondas «Hilf. i. Dune filio ad » Dunt clieo dni Regit’- Wagro
Alaii de Pth - WiHmo de Nteford - 7 cultis aliis «


--- Dunfermline_page149.png ---
170.

SEC. X11. J DUNFERMELYN. 97

Qvieta clamaéo Johis Gallard « de Keeth fiwin -

Omid; hoe fe'p - vi8* . ut audi . Joh Gallard Sat . In dno » Nouitif
unitfi me quictum elamafle p ime 7 Tedibs meif abbi 7 Conuentui de
Dunf 7 ppetuii totum inf gd habui ut bre debui in tra de Siwinif’

Keeth- qo Tram de cifdem abbe 7 Coniintu aliqii tenui ad feudofirmain -
Vade uolo ut di abdbs 7 Coiit? dam tram tencant 7 poflideant - 7 de ea
ad uoluntatem fuam difponant - nullo retenemento - iure - ut clamio m*
uf alicui hed meoy reSuatis - Et ut hee mea qeta elamatio 7 Juris
renunciaco ppetuam firmitaté optincant? p me 7 heredih3 meif huie
fe'pto figilli mei appofui - Hiis -- Bno Joh ptore de Vrehard « Bnif
Witt 7 Andy de dufglas » Sjmoii - Rid - 7 Ad - wonachis de Dunf: -
Hen¥ de Edmundift’ - Symoi de Oroe - S¥ it de foret «TH bik « Joh de
pitun « Dat afi - Wufkilb® - Anno g*- w - ce? + xlviij’ « die {Toy Warcelli
7 Warcelliani -

De tofto 7 Crofto in clerbaudiftun -

. Ocnihs hoe fe'ptum vifuris ut andit?is - Petr? fit Pet* de rupe eterna 1

dno Sat « Notlit vnitifitas jira me ex ofenfu 7 affenfu Joh hedis mei vin
pfentia civdé Johif dedifle 7 pee 7 h*e mea carta pfir® deo 7 cece x de
Dun? + @onachis ibidem do a ntibs 7 Suit’if. vn toftii 7 ecroftum in
uilla de Clerbandiftuii { Normann? belle tenuit - 7 iacent in? traf templi
7 hofpitat - 7 longitudine g*ntum fra hofpitalis fe exftendit - efi vna
pticula tre mee 7 Northflat « q exftendit fe de North crag in latitudiem
Ufa’ occidenté z ufq, ad Grenlawe - 7 1 longitudiem a boreali pte terre

hofpitat ufq, ad bodhum - ci edmunione patt*e - nuttendo 7 retinendo

annuati in illa paftura - xiii boues - Et - iiii

feqntib; ¢ don® fepentur a firihs - Et - ij - eq’s - ci Sib; aliis aifiamentis

ad villi de Clerbaudeft tp*tantibs - i morif 7 marefiis 7 turbariis - exeeptis

p*tis meif'- Tenend - 7 Bnd déis cete 7 woiichif de me 7 heredib? meif - 7
N

soues matteet’ cit



--- Dunfermline_page150.png ---
98 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xumr.

puram 7 ppetuam clemofinam - IiBe 7 quiete - plenarie 7 honoritice - ab

oi Quito - exe one 7 demanda - Et ego Petr? 7 7 hedes ne warantiza-
himus déas Pras fepedtis ecée Dunf 7 wonachif’ ibid deo uientibs ffas
diim Regé 7 oftis hoies - Et ut hee donacd mea rata 7 inconeuffa pmaneat
Cartam iftam Sigillo meo roborauj + 7 ego 7 7 Jobes heref fis illam fup
magni altare de Dun? i oblacom pofitimns + Hiis P- Dno Galfd de
Boteh - Ph de lochor 7 Conft filio ci? - Waltero de login - Wito de
livers - Ilu& de villa magri - Galfrido de fitun - Rig eraffo - Alati de
faufide - Johe de Kernee - WiHo pittore - 7 wultis aliis -

De tofto de Karamund Scottoy - Agnes -

Unilttfis x fidelibs Biens fe'ptum vifivis ut audit“is - Agnet filia Job filij
Ranulph de Karamid Sal - Nouitif vnit me ex ptentu 7 affenfi: Witti
heredis mei dedif - coneet* - 7 lace mea earta ofir deo 7 wbchif de
Dunf* ibidé deo Suientibs 7 uituris in puram 7 ppetuam clemofinam
toftum imei ci crofto . ex aquilonali pte ville de Narramiid feottoy -
Tenend 7 hnd déis wonachis i ppe' tuum adeo liBe 7 qete + plena® 7
honorifice ? ficut ego ung" d&am tram ViBiut’ 7 7 quieciuf tenni ut poffedi -
In cui? rei teftimoniti Pfenti fe'pto figillum mei appofii - Hiis Teflibs -
Heruico vieat de Karamiid - Symone geno dni hen¥ de Brade - Bno
Ricard de maleuitt - Wi de Petliuer - Rog de Balmacmol . Wite
cementario - Gittb elico - Et multif aliis -

ConuenZo fa in? eegam de Kellin - 7 oratorit dni Rob de Londoniif

pee De oe . ,
Hee eft conucn?o f%a in? ecéam de Kellin 7 oratorium dni Rot de
Londofi de Kellin - 7é -


--- Dunfermline_page151.png ---
see. Xu] DUNFERMELYN 99

De Gateinienemfin - Miehacl tcot? 7 Margareta fponfa fua -

. Ownihs has littas vifuris t auditut wichael feotus 7 warg ci? fponfa fat -

Notit unitifitas tra nos divine remunaddis intuita 7 p falnte jira - 7
aiarit aiicefloy 7 fuccefloy Troy ci ofentay Duneani heredis dediffe 7
oecllifle 7 pag carta fra ofirmafle deo 7 ecte Trini de Dun? 7 wdchit
ibidé dco Snientibs q Quit?is totam Pram de Gateinienemfi jux” vneth +
ct omib3 aifiamentis ad cam ptinentihs - p illas dinifas P a s cam thomat

Plbr de nob tenuit »7 puram 7 ppetuam elemofina - liBe 7 qete al oi

aedone 7 Sui 7 demanda + ei omi inure placitoy 7 qrelarum déam Pram
otingeneiti / fient alig® clemofina ab aliquo barone ut milite - bi? -
q'eciuf » honorificenci? data eft ut dari potit + Vt ati donatio ifta rata fit 7
iconeulla ? huie fe'pto figillum nim - una ef figillo fponte wargarete - f-
anulo fio fecimus apponi- iif. #- Walto faed.'Th de Clef 7 Th de
Nithbren faedotibs - 7 Dund filio fro 7 hede - WiHo de Petlitt . J ohe de
OBuile - Walto de logi. Wit de coaifitun - Ad de ftobbis - Rid le crat
7 Miltis aliif’-

Confirmato de Gafkinicnemf » Wargareta -

. Omi; = iris cede filiis has littat vifuF ut andit?if’ warg® - filia Dunt de

fCrait’ fponfa wich feott Salt - Notlit vnitita!’ fra me donaéom ila q
dif wich feot? marit? fis 7 ego & ofenta Dane hedif fri cede xt de
Dunf 7 wofichit’ ihidem deo Suientibs 7 Suituris in pura 7 ppetuam
elemo™ otulim?? rata 7 firma i ppetuii hituram - Vt att hee donatio
robur ppetuitatis optineat ? ego margarita p me 7 edibs firis corpali
fae“mento Ppitito predéa obSuare fidetr affidaui - 7 Plens fe pti figilli
mei- f+ anuli appofiéone roboraui - Hiis #- Wali» Th. 7 Th - faldotibs :
7 dno + Q)- marito Mio. 7 P- filio firo 7 hede - Witlo de petlit! Joh de
OBnit - Walé de login» Witt de caitttun - Ad de ftobbis 7 R- eratfo -
7 multis aliis -


--- Dunfermline_page152.png ---
100 REGISTRUM DE

Confirmaéo einsdem de Gatkinienemf: -

. OmMibs has littas vithF f anditn® marg de Sfreis - q°nda fpSfa «ich feoté

fat In dno - Nouitif vnitlfi_ me 7 ligia poteftate mea tép° viduitatis mee
oftituti gceffifle 7 le earta mea pfirm® deo 7 ecée fe Trini de Dun -
7 wbchit ibidem deo Suientibs 7 Buit’is in ppetuii ? donaéom illa q* diis
7 7 maritus flis wichacl Scotuf fecit ciflem de tota tra Gatkinienemphy
iux® “ vneth + efi omibs aifiamentis - liBtatib; + 7 reétitudinibus ad déam
tram plinentibs + Tenendam 7 hndam déis wdchif’ in pura 7 ppetuam
elemo™ - 1

Je

z y'ete ab di exacne - Ruivo 7 demanda - ficut Carta
d@i @ariti mei fup hoe cis ofecta? pleni? otinet 7 tettatur « Ego u’ 7
heredes mei déam tram pii&is monachis cont" ois gentes in ppetuii
warantizabim? - Hiis * - Dno Galfrido de freffelei - Ph de loehor -
Conttant filio ei? - PD - hoft> - Wali de login - Rot de Rofliue - Neff’ de
Rani - Gilt de Clef’. Witto de Petranin - Edmundo Trenfide - Walt fit

Gamel - 7 muitis aliis «

De Beeth flemig - Alexander de Setun -

Uniiutit haf littas vifuF ut anditut AleX de Setofi Salim - Noilit ynitifitas
tira me dediffe 7 geet - 7 hae pre® earta mea pfir® Ad de Pollifwrth eam
Emma forore mea in maritagifii totam fram meam de Beeth ci reétis
dinifis fais «i p‘tis -7 patcuis - 7 bofeh - 7 7 plano - 7 7 dibs aliis locis ad
Bdéam tram ptinentihs - Hae Pdéam tram dedi 7 gcefli pddo . A - 7
Eme forori mee - 7 pueris fuis q’s in? eos genuerit - Et feiendi eft qd
iq, ploy tuoy dice. A-ul-E- pata tram aflignare uoluerit 7 ipi
redes fui qui de fe procedent pdéam fram de me 7 7 hedibs meif’ in
puram 4 7 ppetuam Tieditatem tenebunt - iBe 7 quiete- honorifice + plenarie
in pace - Reddendo iii anniiti m" 7 here’® meif + ipi 7 hedes fui - xij - fot -

f- Sex foi ad feftum § wichact 7 - vi - fot ad pafch - PPea habebunt ois
Mehetas 7 dia foriffea exceptif iH | ptindt ad coronam dni Regis » Quare

cuic)



--- Dunfermline_page153.png ---
=
n

xin] DUNFERMELYN. 101

uolo qd predéi affignati pli. A-7- E+ 7 Redes coy Piiétam terram
tencant 7 poffideant adeo liBe 7 Gete - fi ego 7 Redes mei Blam Pram
teneo de dno abbe de Dunf 7 Conuétu ei%dem loei p cartam mea -
Hii’. £- PP filio comitis - Duneaii de ffreit’. Conftat de lochor - Joh
de @ethkil - Rot freBu - Joh de Peeathlant - WiHo de Baillol . Witto de
Graham - 7 cultif’ aliis -

De Beeth - flemig - AleX de Setun -

. Onis lent fe'ptum vithF ut anditu® Alex de Setun fat - Notlit vnitifitas
jira me p falnte aie mee 7 aiay afeefloy meoy i ppetut q'etam clamatle
pro me 7 hedibs meif’ totam tram de flemiffe beeth ei totif ptinenciil’
fuis deo 7 § wargarite 7 domui de Dun? in puram 7 ppetuam elemofina -
Q'm flemigef Beeth Emma foror mea 7 Rob ei? attornatuf m' reddidernnt
p fuflé 7 baeulum - 7 p i%inrandum qd nnng® huie refignatoni in poftum
cont“irent coram pbif hominibs Pitum ¢ qui hie noiantur teftes - f -
cagro Alaiv de Pth - Th de Setun - Wil de lifls - Joti de Lundin - Wali
de login - Cuthberto - Johe de foeth - Rob maunduet - 7 cultis aliis -

YE C) =A E A
Cdflatin? de lochor - De tra de Ninglas’ 7 de Pethockin -
. Ocnihs xi fidelib? haf’ littas vifu¥ ut auditn? . Conftantin? de lochor

Sat in dno - Notit vnitfitaf fra me affenfu 7 ofenfu DB hedis mei +

lees

Johis de hay: mei - 7 alioy amicoy meoy - renuuei
qretum elamaile pro me 7 hedib; meif’ in ppetuii deo 7 eeée S Trini" de
Dan? - 7 wdchif’ ibid deo Suientibs 7 Suituris totum juf 7 clamit gd
hui ut fre me dixi in tra de Kilglassin - 7 Pethbok?. Et iflud p me 7
hedibs meif in pofterum fidetr obSuandi 2 tide media coram teftibs fab-
fuis iftam renuntiagom

+7 philippi fi

{ptis pmifi - Danid v° heres iis pro fe 7 heredi
7 quieti clamacom {¥ magni altare de Dunf - faerafito corpatr 7 {ponte
pftito fidetr 7 {7 frande fe Quaturam pmifit - +7 qd filo m° eafu ut tempe

KOCK,



--- Dunfermline_page154.png ---
180.

Isl.

102 REGISTRUM DE [sec x1.

o* déam q'etam clamaém 7 jurif renunciagbm uenict iurauit » Et ut dia
ifla fup"fe'pta robur ppetue firmitatif obtineant ¢ Pfent’ fe'ptum figillo
meo una cum figitt dni Johis de Haya. 7 dni Dung filij Ad - 7 Andy
auunéli mei- 7 Ph ffis mei - qui offis ad hui? rei irrefragabilem obSuanciam -
fide mediante plegij funt ¢ roboraui - In pfentia dui - H - abbis de Culenros -
7 Tl - porif’- 7 H+ wonachi - ci¢dé loc} «7 dni Wich Seoté - 7 dni Wiki
de Blar tune tenefeatt de fif - 7 @agri Rig de Dunbretaii . 7 Symonis de
Droch » Walti de login - 7 aliorum multoy qui ofiis Imi? rei teftef funt -
Aci» Anno gfe + @- ec? - xxxv° . Septimo Kt Q)‘ré - Ap Dunf-

Nicholanf filiuf GilleBti de Smithetun -

Ovonihs Pent fe'ptii vitur ut andif . Nichot fit Gillebti de Smithetuii
Salé - Nouitif me intuitu dei 7 p talute aie patrif’ mei 7 di effoy + >
p releuio tre de Smithetuii q fuit patrif mei? deo 7 dnif meif’ abbi y
giintuj de Dunf q'etam clamafle 7 ppetud totam ptem fre de Smith q
eft in orientali_ pte magne uie q dneit de hnuirefe in le Lonig - § tendit
de villa de Smith ufq, Bofehi de Crebarvin - 7 ita in oceidentali pte
botehi ufq, magnam uiam G uenit de Madigtun ufq, Neubott - 7 fie p
illam uiam ufq, diuifaf de Crebar
tr

a? fient pambulata fuit coram Rit
de Dunf? 7 dno Alano de Sewintun » 7 unultif aliif die venif’ aii
ad ninéla {1 Pet’. Hane ati tra Ego 7 hedet’ mei deo 7 dif abbi >
Confintuj 9° off’ hoief 7 femias warantizabimuf 7 ppetuid - qm cif’ do +
q'eta clamo 7 puram 7 ppetuam elemofina : nich inde Sino alicui faciédo -
£-Dno Alaii de Swithint - Alaii 7 dd de faufide « Pet? 7 Rob Ballinif de
Wutkalt - 7 multif aliis -

Adam filiuf Patricij - de Crebarrin -

Omuibs ad quoy noticiam Pfens fe'ptum pucnit - A. fil. P. de Crebarrin
7 + Gee . . é ~. Pasty!
fat» Notitis me dediffe - concef* 7 quietaf clamafle deo 7 ecée & Prini™


--- Dunfermline_page155.png ---
1RQ,

SEC. NUL] DUNFERMELY 108

de Dunf 7 dnis meis abbi + Cofitnj ci2dem loci - iii - bouatal tre de
dnio meo de Crebar® 7 - ij - bouatas | fuerit warland in eadem uilla ¢
TiBas 7 qetas ab di Suito foriffer 7 demanda - cum duob3 toftis - mo
qd fuit Nich eriblethened - 7 alio qd dicebatur Godemaniftof - ficut
pambulate 7 menturate fucrunt coram Rid de foeth tice Prario de contkil-
7 aliis bonif uiris - fiue ibi plus fuit five minus - reddendo inde

Ve

m7 Tredibs meis ipi 7 fuecefloref tui 7 ppetuii ad felt 12 Michaelis
vimm par calearifi de ferro » Ego ati 7 hedes mei refpondebimus in
ppetuii 7 fatiffaciemus pro déis fex bouatif’ Pre T dimodis auxiliis 7 Suieiis
q ptinent ad diim regem: 7 offis regales - Et illi qui déas - vi - bouatas
tre noie abbis tenuerint ¢ quo ad comunia auxilia dni Regif’- nich Sino
redebunt de - xii -abiit pporcionatr F Fone Pre q* m tenflint fe g otingentib; :
fiue i gi paft’a pl’a aia habtint fine pauciora + Ipi q” habebit Simoda
oitia aifiamenta q ptinent ut ptine poterunt ad villam de Crebaré tam
inf uillam q" ex® . Hiis - ¥ + Joh de erebar? eui? figit huie Carte
apponitur - Petro de oufkilb tie feneteatt - abb - BD - de fanfide - Rob -
de munketun - Reginaldo {fe ei9d - Rots Gothewait - Rad de Munketuii -
Rand de Coufland - Git de morham - Rot filio Reginaldi . Johe filio
Thor - Arcombaldo de chart . 7 Pet? ffe eius - 7 multif aliis -

item - Adam -

Oonib; hoe te'pti vifut vt anditué - Ad fit Pat'cij de Crebart fat -

Noititis me dedifle de uoluntate 7 affenfu Alani de fanfide deo 7 eeée =
Trini® de Daf i puram + ppetud elemofina totam ila tram q' ipe- A. de
pre meo 7 7 de me aliqii tenuit i feodo de Crebar® - p » vi - dena¥ annuit’-
Qn tram memorate ecte de Dunf: abbs 7 cofit? st 7 fuccefloribs fais
de mic > heredih; meif p fuas rectas disas tenchunt in ppetnii - adeo liBe 5
quiete fit aliq'f homo mee liBtatis aliq'm tram libie 7 qvei? dare potit 7 i
elemofina puram 7 ppetuam - Hiis - F - Alaii de faufide eni? fignum una
ci meo prefenti carte apponitur - Duo Rob de {@o clero - Th - flandrenfi
de Setun - BB - de fantide - Wit de Sniithctui - Rob de Graham - Pet?



--- Dunfermline_page156.png ---
183,

104 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xr.

de m9kilbure tie fenefeallo abb - Rot de ounketul - Reginaldo fie
ciufdem - 7 multis aliis -

Johes de Crebarri -

Oonihs hoe fe'ptum uifu¥ ut anditu¥ - Johes fit Gilleb de Crebart - fat -
Noltitis me dediffe 7 con" dnis meis abbi 7 Cofitui de Dunf? - ij - bonatas
tre q's Wit crifp? aligii tennit ci tofto 7 erofto | ide» W + tenuit -
habendaf 7 tenendas de me 7 heredibs meis st 7 fuceef fuis 1 ppetut -
liBe 7 quiete ab 6i Suido 7 exacGone 7 ofuetudine forintecis 7 int'nfecis 4
ptinent ad tram de Crebart - 7 ad warantizandt) déas bouaias eifilé abbi
+ codchif in hac Pnotata liBtate obligo hedes meof 7 refiduii tenementi
mei gf offis holes - Si aii dée houate plene non fuint ¢ ego pficiam eif de
alia tra mea in loco competenti- Ipi ati abbs 7 cot? m' 7 hedibs meis
de d@a tenura - vi- @- finglis annis pro 6i alio Quito 7 demanda ficut
Pnotatii eft reddent - Kt feid eft qd memorati abbs 7 of? 7 magna
neceflitate mea - ad releuandi - f- teneiiti mei de alieno debito « xii
are pacatlunt p déis - ij - bouatis tre - Et ih? fti teftimoia ¢ plenti
carte figillum met appofui - Hiis t - Bno Alano de Swintun - Rob de
Gham - Wit de {mith - Pet? fe fenefeatt de (ekit - Rob de Munket> -
Gilleb captto de Wymet - Rot clico de COkilb . Mich de foeth - Rob -
Gothewait - 7 Alano de cora -

Item Johes de Crebari -

Unillit x* fidelihs ptiis . fe'p - vis - ut audit?is - Johes de Crebart fat -
Noflitis me de® - con® +7 he pfenti Carta mca ofir® dno meo- W . di
ofa abbi de Daf 7 fuif fuccefloribs - Ixxx - acs de dnio meo de Chart -
cum uno crofto utq, in finem - xv - annoy - Fmino ieipiente anno ab incaFne
dni - "+ ce? - xxx’ ij? - ad fefti § wartini - Tenendas 7 fndas de me +
heredibs meis 1Be 7 quiete ab Si exactone 7 demanda- Red” m' 7 hhedib,


--- Dunfermline_page157.png ---
186.

. Ovonis has litt

SEC. N11. ] DUNFERMELYN. 105

meis + xij. + d+ finglis anni’. Siu ego 7 Tedes mei fata deceflerimus ? anni
cuftodie Pre non cSputabuntur - lis ¥. Wit feneteallo - BB de faufide -
Rob de Munket » Wito de Petlit: . et multis aliis -

Item Johes de Crebarrin 7 Adami filiuf Patteij -

s vifu® - t+ auditut® Joh de Crebart . 7 Ad fit Pat'eij de
Creb - falé - Notitis nof pftituiffe nos 7 hedef’ firos fideiufforet’ Nich filij
Gillch » de Smithetnn - 7 infap omMia tenementa ira obligaile abbi 7
coniimtuj de Dunf . g@ ipe Nichot warantizabit dé

abbi 7 coNitui totam

s
tram de Smith gq" eis dedit + q'etam clamauit 7 puram 7 ppetuam
elemofinam {ed tenoré carte fue q" eis inde fecit - 7 figno Rob clici de

mkilfy fignari fecit - Si i ds Nich aliquo ca

tu otingente déam tram
d@is abbati 7 p™ 9° oms hoies 7 Gs femias warantizare nd potit ? nos itt
tenementa jira q'eta clamammf’. donee ad plena eifdé p ila tra fatiffeeine -
Mit. FP. Bno Alaii de Swintuii - Alano 7 dd de faufide - Th flandrens
Petro 7 Rob hallinis de Q)%kilburé - Rot de Munketui - Rob Gothewaite -

Alanuf de fajide de tra de Creh

Onib; has littas vifnF 1 anditn® Alan? de faufid fat i dno. Notit
unitler jira me ex ofenfia + as" hedum meoy q'etas clamatle 7 ppetuit
deo 7 8 Trini de Dun? - 7 wochif ibidé deo Snientibs 7 in ppetut
Suit?is Q'ng'es viginti ac’s de tra q'm tenui de eis in feodo de Crebarrin

f+ Ix". aes en le Wytefide - 7 tref bouatas in lef latbrokef’ p fatte aie

a3 patris 7 mat's + afice flog 7 fnecefloy meoy - ci
i ¥ %

mee 7 pa ure qd
ad me ent fuceefforet imeof potit ptine In cuint rei teftimdin pfenti fe'pto
figilli met appofui- Iiis tet? « Walto vieat de Q)kilt - Sym de Oroe -

DD de fanfide - Pet? de Uekilb - Jordano de Hadigtuii - 7 filtif’ aliis «

Valeat vnitfitas jira in dno -


--- Dunfermline_page158.png ---
wo
at

188.

106 REGISTRUM DE

Item - Alanus de faufide -

. Omid; pfens fe'ptum viluF ut auditué Alan? de faufide fat» Notitif me

7 hedef meof hve carta mea fide % int pita obligatos dnis meif abbi 7
« ‘ofitut de Daf finglis annis 1 ppetuii 7 vigt § Wich redde + v- tot - argenti
p tra q® de eis teneo in feodo de Crebarni - De q" % tenura ad pleni
ploluem? eif deeima 7 multuram - 7 eifdem inde homagii feecim? 7
fidelitaté - Hiif. PF - Bno Rob de {to clero - Ad de Crebar¥ - cuiuf’ figni
vna ci figillo meo luic fe'pto apponit®. Th flandy feneteatt de Setuii -
Wil de Smith - Petro feneteal - Rob de munket> - Reginaldo ffe ei¢de 7
multis ali

Thomas de laflalrie - De tofto in leth -

Omiihs {Ze fiiris ecée filiis . Th - de laftalrie tat - Seiant ta fnt?i q" pientet’
me dedifle 7 con® - 7 he mea carta pfire deo 7 ecte x‘ de dunt 7 wichit
ibid’ do Suientihs dnis meis vn plenarit tofti in leth Bum 7 q'etii ab
di otuetudie 7 exaecde 7 Sib3 aliif iq'ficdib; 7 Iquictudinib; - 7 Bam 7
puram 7 ppetua elemofin - ita HiBe 7 quiete plenarie 7 honorif - fie aliq's
baro in toto regno feod libint + 74q Seti? 5 honoriticenei? tofti alii, dedit
ant dare potit - Hie aii tofti eis dedi ex auftrali pte 7 orientali: pte
pping’us tofte Phitt de valloii titas mare «

Reginaldus Gaillart -

. Onis x" tidelibg ad q’s Pens te'ptii puenit Regiti de Gaillard fat -

sqm diléi 7 venables dni mei abbs 7 puent?
dom? de Dunf m* fedunt fup tra de Keeth: non lieebit we t alicni
heredum meoy aliq'd invif uendieare in hiif @ {p‘tant ad regiam corona -
qd q'dé Ptenti carta figillo meo fignata / Sib; manifefto - Hilf - t - Witto

Seiatif qd oceafione peefl



--- Dunfermline_page159.png ---
lol,

SEC. XUIL.] DUNFERMELYN. 107

de Bofeh dni Regis canect - Bno Ph de Valloii 7 Wil filio ei? - Ph de
Mub*y tiie tempis oftablay Edenburg - Th de laftalrie - Jotie de Graham
tie tempis vieccois - Johe de Pencath - Walto de Ormettun - Huico
marefeallo « [Ing brit - Heruico de Jonifi - Witto fit Johis - 7 coultif aliis -

+ dena¥ annuatim

Dauid de Lyndefeia de dimidia petra cere - ut -
foluend -

. Oomibs has littas vituF ut anditu® BB de Lyndeg fili? dd de Liedes

y > re al) ~ oe . sees a *
fat i dno - Nouitif’ me ppt recdpenfacom decime - iii - acray tre in
feodo de Torfopin - q's illuft's - Rex - A - Sco@ firi mee ad monaftium
ibidem pftruendi conceflit q" decim& wbehi de Dunf matri mee 7

monialihs dé loco Suituris T ppetuii remiterunt 2 dediffe - con® - 7 pit
earta mea ofir* dimid pet"m cere t-

ti
«+d. annuati ad feftii natiuitatis
be viginis -p me 7 hedes meot 7 ppetui monattio de Dun? - 7 apud Dan?
pfoluenda t pfoluendof. Et ne hae oeeafione mea poflint aliquo m? dé
@dchi def“udari ? tubiéo me + hedes meos iuritdgdi Ani Epi tei Andy q!
ie eft F qui p tempe flit - ut fi ego uf heredes mei i tolnge dei redditus
ceffautim? : poflim? p dém epm ad folugdm dé reddit? p cenfurd
opelli- Et 7 hui? rei teftimdit: pfenti fe'pto figillam mei appofiai + [iis -
¥-Dno-G- pore de Dunt: . 7 dna Qargeria de Lyndefeya - Bno - R -
de ABefbi  Bno- R. de Aldecamb3 « méchif’ de Dunf: . W - de mortuo
mari» R + de Cranford capHo meo - 7 multi’. aliit’-

Dauid de lyndeteya fp codem 7 de tofte fuo de Madigtnn -

ce 2 a rree sae fra * ~¢ cr. eae ge nar -
Ovid; haf littas vitut t audig PD - de Nndes fat - Nowitit unitit qd ct
ego 7 hedes mei fim? obligati domui de Dif in folucde dimidic pet® cere
p qeta elamagone ili? pticule Pre

7 q* monaftinm de elichoe fiti eft
annuat? facienda: 7 recdpenticde d&e cere do 7 yeedo d@e domni de
Dunf 7 ppetnii toftii menm 7 ladigtun - ci ptinenciif’ fuis qd Witt bran


--- Dunfermline_page160.png ---
192.

193.

108 REGISTRUM DE (see. xIn.

de me tenuit- Et uolo qd dés- W- brun 7 hedef fui dém toftum de domo
de Dun? teneant 7 poflideant » refpondendo eid& domui de firma 7 de
aliis ft m' 7 hedib; me fate debuerunt - faluo m' 7 heredib? meif
oftallagio cit uenim? - [iif =. Puno HenF de ftueli  IL- de haliburtuii -
Gerardo militib; - Bno Rob eapto - oagro » W- de mortno mari +» Rit
feruiente meo - 7 multis aliis -

Gilleb de Clef de - x - fot annuatt foliindis -

Omihy pens fe'p « vis t aud» Gilt de Clef fat - Noltitis me 7 hedes meos
obligatof e dom' de Dunf- ad pfoluentt 6i x-
fot. fi i malo genio t o“dieGde 7 ppetud - wediet ad feft 3 war" + 7
med ad Pentet sp q'eta clamadde iurif’ qd abb 7 coiit? huerit t hre fe
diSunt Fone forefti t alien’? al’i? clamii in Pra q eft int C
Vueth - fit recogniti fuit p phos hoief'- 7 p Peeptii AleX di gta Re

no d&e domui de Di

s 7 foreft de

Anno ab inea®me - xt - «+ ce” °. i» Q' recognitoref’ i reeognoteédo

dinifaf int foreftam de Vueth 4 Tra de Clef’ icepit de exitu de lochglo -
in? borealé laci 7 mediver’ . 7 fie HW dorealé colle 7 mediocrem q*
uocant® yneianef. 7 s° p fimitaté motis de Dunglo . defeendendo p le
holegath ufq, Cnocenlein - 7 fie p uallé ufg, falumirefide » 7 ide ufq, ad
monté q' nocat® Dumghereloihe - 7 inde fi riuul? defeendit 1 aldendeich - 7
fie in goruin + Vt afi prefens fe'pti in pofterum ratum pmaneat ? figilli
iii impflide Hd roborani - Hiis - F - Jobe de hava - BB de lochor - Pat'to
de Petglaffin - Edmundo de Beeth +» Johe de obiruit - 7 multif at -

GilleBe? filius Rotheri de Crambeth 7 De - x - folidis annuatim foluendis -

Omibs pins fe'pt - t+ and - Gittb fili? Rothi de Crabet fat - Nonitit
q ego Gilb fili? Rothi de Crambeth 7 hedef mei debem? 7 p hae carta
mea obligati fum? pfoltic domui de Daf - x - fot annn® {i di malo i]

ppe" - medietaté ad fefti § wartii 7 med ad Penteé - p q'eta clamacde



--- Dunfermline_page161.png ---
194,

xuL] DUNFERMELYN. 109

SEC.

toci? juris qd abbs 7 Cofit? de Daf huerdt t hre fe diSunt- feu Fone
forefti t alicui? altiut caliipnic 7 tra q eft in? Cramts 7 forefti de Vueth -
fieut recogniti: fuit_p pbof hotes «7 p Peeptit - AleX di gia Reg feod -
Anno g* + @° + ce’ xxx°+ i? - Q" recognitoref amblatiunt Teipientef p Caltin

venkat

aq'lonaré 7 longi ufq, ad riuulii y! orit® ex orientali pte de C
fie ufq.ad faluleeche + 7 ita 7 longum fauleeche wf ad faluhil - qui uocatur -
Croft Yneanghynki+ Vt aii hee mea pceflio 7 obligato p me 7 hedibs
meis {ma T pofta pmaneat ? ptns fe'pti figilli mei appde roborani » [Bis
Teft + Dno Conft de loch 7 phi fie ci? - magro we de® Andy - Andrea
gnduite - wagro Alano - conjiro Ric - Rothi /W--de maifttun » W. de

lint’. 7 multis aliis -

Witmus 7 Emma de Smithetun -

Oanibs hoe fe'ptum vifuris ut audituris Wits de Smithetuii 7 uxor tua
Emma Sat» Nouitif unilfi nos p faftentagone jira 7 7 uite fire neceff
7 preleuamie q* din uiximus ab egeftate 7 pauptate dediffe - con® «
qreti clamafle domui de Dunf: i ppetuii p nob 7 hedibs 7 faccetlinibs
is ibs 7 futtis 7 p hedibs 7 fuccetforibs alic? nfm tot
feudum 7 jut qd habuim? thre debuim? aut potuim? in feude de Smithe-

tun ta inf uilla. q* ex" fii aliq’ retenemento - Tenendam 7 hnd dée
domui 7 ppetuum {i ialig" iny’etatone e"dictone 7 clamio fro Tt alic?
fhedum aut fuccetloy firoy t altinf nim tota Pdtam tram 7 uilla de Smith
ct bibs ptinenciis - aitiafitif’ 7 libtatibs et quibs Gillet de Smith
Nich fili? ci? eandem tram de Bata domo aliqii tenuerit 7 > potledunt -

Ad pdda wu’ fidelit 7 ppetuatr obnanda - obligamut’ nof 7 lhedet
fincectlores firof otf’ 7 alti? ném Dedes 7 fuccefforef’ tam p fidem fram
¢ Tmanu dni abbis de Dunf dedim? qm p facta eorpale qd de pp'a

pltitim? uoluntate qd ice nos a * aliquif’ nim n° pial 's hedum ut fuccefioy
iiroy «ne aliq’s hedum ut frecefloy altiuf nim 9" hoe fém aliq® tempore
veniem?- Intup iftrufita dia {de pda Pra aiicellores # fri he ubneriit abbi 7
cotitui de Dunf> ei toto inure q@t antecefloref iri 7 nof’ in pfata Pra huime



--- Dunfermline_page162.png ---
195

110 REGISTRUM DE {s

NIM.

ung" ut debuim? habuiffe p nots 7 hedibs 7 fuecetloris firs 7 p hedihs
7 tucceilorih; altinf nfm 7 ppetuum refignanim?. Et ut hi jira donato «
cdceflio - + inrif q'eta clamaéo una cit Pdtoy inft*mentoy refignacse
robur optincant ppetue firmitatis: plenti fe'pto figilla fira_ fecimns
apponi » Iii’. #- Hfen¥ de edmund> . Dno Alaii capHo - Criftiano de
Pftun - Thoma bik - Arciibaldo filio Bonardi - Job de pita. 7 filtif aliif’-

Eama filia GilleBti de Smithetun -

Sciant pre 7 fat‘i_ qd ego Emma de Smith filia 7 hes q’ndi Git de
Smith ad fuftentand 7 relenandii me g® diu uiXo de egeftate mea 7
pauptate + dedi - geefli 7 q'eti claimni domui de Dun? 7 ppetui p me +
hedihs = faccefforil; meis omibs plentib; 7 fut‘is toti feudum 7 jus qa
hui ut hre debui ut potui 7 feudo de Smith tam int uillf q ex‘ {71 aliq'
yetenefito » Tenenda 7 hada dée domui 7 ppe® fii aliq*® ing'etaéone -
“dietone 7 clamio mei t alic? hedum ant fuccetlorad. meoy tota pdéam
tram 7 villa de Smith ¢ dibs ptinenciis - aifiamitit’ - LBeatids ¢ efi q'b3 Gith
mith pr fis 7 Nich fF fis eandem tram de pdta domo de Dun

tenuerat 7 pofledunt » Ad Pita w° fideli? 7 ppetnatr obSuanda
obligaui me 7 edef 7 fuccetlores meos ofif tam p fidei mec dagom g* p
fac"mentii corpale qd uoluntarie preftiti qd nee ego n® aliq's hedum ut
fnecetfoy meoy o* hoe fFm mei aliqno tempe neniemuf’- Infup ift*menta
Bia | de pdta tra ailcefforef mei hucrunt abbi 7 o de Dif ei toto iure
qd aficetiore!’ mei 7 ego in plata tra hui ung” ul hre debuim? p me 7
hedib; 7 fuccefforib; meif in ppetuit refignani - Et ut h fia donago -
oceflio 7 inris q'eta clamacio una & pred@oy inft*mentoy refignaébe rob*
optineant ppetue firmitatis pfenti {e'pto figilli mei appofui - 7 iltd deo
ac be Qjargarite Re™ in ecéa tua tip magni altare optuli domui de Dunf
7 ppetud ualiturai - Teftibs 7 carta afieedente pfe'ptis -



--- Dunfermline_page163.png ---
196.

197,

SEC. XHI.] DUNFERMELYN. Hd

Perambulato int’ traf abbif’ de Dunf 7 terram Dauid hoftiarij - teitt
Dunduf? -

Oitibs fits fe'p - vis ut audit - BD - hoftiat fat - Not me pees +
p me 7 hedibs Mit 7 ppe* hae pfeti carta mea pfir® ia recognicom
pambulacdis q {ta fuit Anno gic - w+ ee? + xxx" - i? + die Meu ps" aii
feftum aploy Sémoii 7 Ind in? Pram mea + f'. de Dada. 7 tras ani abb

7 Cofit? de Dunf? - eidé fre mee Dundnf - otigne e'ciiacentef cora ph
hdibs ad eandd recognicom facienda p peepti dui Res congregatis - Videt
Cont de lochor « Wich feot - Ph de loch « Joh de oBuitt . Rot de rofline -
Walt de login - Walt’ fit Gamet - Rob de {Vue - Walt> fit - fahyf- Met
clico vid . Bridin potanach ¢ tiie iudiee - W- b'ti - Git de Clef. Gith
de crambeth - Gillandf de torrin - 7 multis aliis . 7 p hof inratoref’-
Gillec'ft_ de lacu - Gilleeoftentin - Gillethomas - Bridi Camts - Gillefert
mae Rolf - Gillemartin - Gillecolm ac melg - Joh trodi - Rifcoloe -

Gillandref’. Seth mae lood - Gillepat'e mae mancehin - ineipientef eafdem
dinifas ab oriente montif q' dr torduf- defvendendo p fumitaté ili? iifis
aq'loné i fiketum - 7 fie fat oceident® ufg, ad marifii - 7 fie p nallé ad
qddam uada - 7 inde ad orientalem de eragfode «7 fie p mediii marifij
fas auftt nfy ad diuifas de Infk Gocelin- Vt aii th mea geeflio robur
ppetue firmitatis optineat ¢ cam 7 eaplla dni regis feci annotari 7 plent
fe‘ptum figilli mei appone roborani - Btea ad plentis yceftionis 7 pfirma-
dis ppetuam obSuanciam ex pte mea 7 hedum meoy hof' pleg inueni - f-
diim - Q)+ comité de wenteth - 7 dim D .- ili: Ad - tiie
figilla una ei figillo meo pfenti fe'pto appdita fant - Teft hiif q' in plenti

i de fif - quoy

pagina noiant® - 7 multis aliis -

De molendino fixp Efeh -

Unitlit ad q's pris fe'pt puenit Alan? de Swintun fat - Notiitif me ad
1's] pi p di
foud firma f%cepific de abbe 7 9" de Dunf uni loett ad hndi molendini


--- Dunfermline_page164.png ---
198.

11g REGISTRUM DE (sec. XU.

nici {¥ uq® de Efe - 7 occidentali pte molendini fui de Wythenoe - et
aifiafito cOmunif’ paftte cea Pfept lod ad eq’f ilue bladii defentes -
Habenda 7 tenend im’ 7 here’> meis de déis @dchif 7 fuceeffo’ fuif - lie
7 q'ete ab Gi Buido 7 exacde - Red® ide ecifdé -j- mre argenti annnati
ad duos Pmios - Videt ditt wT ad pented 7 dit wre ad fefi S Martini -
ponendo % molendiné mei 7 plegiagifi q dém molendifi monachoy nq"
oceafide mei molendini impidietur p bac fled - Ego ait 7 Rhedef inci
fueceffiue déis abbi 7 piintui de Dun? 7 fucceflorib? {uit homagiii de
do tenefito faciem? - 7 fidelitaté i ppetuii it tang" dnif obSuabime - ca
aii molendinie coy de Ww thei p deftu aq mole non potit : : homief de
Elfiniftum q' m' opa molendini debent - ¢ hdib; @onachoy de fevra de
Inwefe oftis defés reparabiit 18 aq q° ftagni ci fracta fit - Siw” moindina
coy de Wi thenoe p feura lapidi t alice? altinf rei nd deficiente aq” mole
a potit : molendinarii fui motndino meo maliciote ag* nd fubt*hent q'n
ad ilud HiBe ueniat done motndini: faa reparet* - Hilf. £. Bno Wich
flandy » Alaii 7 dd de faude - Joh 7 Ad de Crebar¥ - Joh de miket . 7
Ad geno ciut’. Joh de King - 7 Nich de Smith? -Th de Pontek . 7 Rots
de Withecar

Ricard? fili? Rie erafli - De Ardlather -

Omiibs x fidelibs PfBs fe'pt ip 'turis Rid fit Ri cli fat. Nottitif me
q'etam elamatle p me 7 hedib; meif tram de Artlathir abbi 7 contintui
de Dunf 7 7 ppetuii renunei:

fle di iuri qd aligi dieebam me hre in
pdta tra + p haf diuifas - a redeforde p Crocketlecche ufq, ad pu marifié -
7 fic p uallé ufg, ad dinifas de caitttun » In cui? rei teftimoid Bfens
te'ptir figille meo roboraui + Hit’. P- Joh de oBuile - Symofi de oroe -
Witlo de maifttun » Witty de Petliuer » Walto de login . Walto fit
Gamet - 7 multif’ at -


--- Dunfermline_page165.png ---
19a,

xu] DUNFERMELY

Jotes Craflut fili? Rig Craffi de Kaldeftan

Omnihs Hi fe'ptis vita ut auditu® ~ Joh erafl?- filie 7 Tet Rid evafli fat
meif pfentihs 7 fut°it

Nohitif vii? me «ret clamatle pro me 7 he
duis inci’ abbi 7 Coftui de Dunf 7 ppetut tota iuf qd habui ut aliq? title
hre potui in tra 4 q@ndam appllahat® nilla Gotpatte | nie appllat? Kalde-
ftanif ci Sib; ptinenciif’ fuif ci qth; ego ut alig' ahectioy meoy ili Pram
aliq’ tempe a déif dnif meif abbe 7 ouentu tenuim? ut pofledim? 7 ppetui
efeambiti tre ili? q fait qndam Rob hod . = tre Rob carpentarij - ef
iis acts marefij ad ay'lonalem ptem de Garuoe - 7 p q"dam peciiie fiana
mt nectitate P manibuf’ ppacata - ut 7 carta mea tempe
pfeeddil hui? ofeta pleni? otinetur + Refignau x bona uoluntate mea
déis dnif meif abbi + Codtui dia inft'menta + carta’ qs de déa tra ego =
aiicefloref mei huim? - ch Si inre qd buim? in déa tra f dicebamut’ nox

T mea max’

Dre» Vnde uolo ut déi dni mei déam tram tencant 7 poflideant - 7 de ea
ad uoluntaté® fui difponat - ilo retenemto - iure ut elamio m? uf alicui
heredi: meoy resuatis - Pretea Habella fponfa mea hoe idé oceflit « ~ p
Oi iure fuo qd in déa tra habnit ut bre pot!
rio aunn" peipict - Et fi otinget qd a
ifté mea q'etam clamaédm o“nenire uoltint - déo

fei-celd®m fariii auch i

tota nita fua-de g* iq’ de meit’

Hedihs aliq’ tempe o

uel fe'pto ut aliq®? pacte sp falfif teneant® 77 nulla curia exaudiantur -
Et ut hee mea q'eta clamaco + iurif renunciaéo ppetua firmitat® optine-
ants fubicd me + heredef meof ds jurifdicGi efi zy Archid £% Andy - fi
aliq? tépore o° iftam iurif renunciaém uenif’- renticiando Oi invis auxilio
candici 7 ciuit - omibs littis impet* af 7 impet'ndif. regie phibiGoi z dibs
aliif q iftam q'etam clamaGm poterunt impedire - In cui? rei teftimodit - -
plentem toci? iurif mei 7 hedii meoy - reniiciationem + qtetam elamagdm
i dni Rot de Roffine militif’ «
Henrici de Edimunditt - Johis de Balbreni - Wichaet de login « 7 Thome

huie fe'pto figilli met + vna et figilli

de Craniftun feci apponj -


--- Dunfermline_page166.png ---
200,

201.

11+ REGISTRUM DE [sEc. Si.

De tofto 7 de tra ad itd fptante 7 Cragmilor -

Omib; hoe fe'pti vifuris t aud . Witt fit Hen de Cragmilor Salim -
Sciatif me mere caritatis intuitu p falute aie mee 7 aiiccfloy meoy
fuceefloy meoy dediffe - ocef - 7 h*e carta. mea cdfirmafle deo 7 ecée
Tnitatis de Dunt z aoiichif ibidem deo Suientibs 7 7 ppetud Suiturif
itd tofti qd hen* de Edmundiftui tenuit de henrico de C*gmilor pre
meo+ 7 totum p*tumn q“ntiiciq, habui ut pr fis aii me huit 7 p*to de
C*gmilor ex auft"li pte vie { dueit de villa de Nodrif ad ect de liBtui -
ufq, ad riuum qui uocatur Louthtan - 7 vn ac'm tre ex aq'lonali pte
ei%dem pti - que ac® funt otigue fup id® p*tum - 7 duaf acraf tre q
uocantur longe acre; iacentef ind ptum regif 7 Cragmit - fiue d&e aére
pluf ptineant + fine min?- Et pafturam ad - xl - onef matteef’. 7 iiij -
vaceal’s 7 vuii [equi] ut vna eq"m é feqla eay vni? anni in dnio meo 7
in cOmunione q"m fre debeo 7 déa villa de Cragmilor - Tenendii 7 tndai
eidé ecée 7 cifdem abbi 7 Coniintuj in ppetuii in puram 7 ppetuam
elemofing de me 7 hedib meif 7 fuccefforibs meif adeo liBe 7 qete-
plenarie 7 honorifice ? fient aliq’s lie tenenf - 1iBi? « quieci# - plenari? - 7
honorificenci? + aliq’m terra dedit 1 dare potit » Ego w 7 hedes mei 7
fuecefloref mei dam elemofina déif abbi 7 Coniintui ot* omnet’ hominet 7
feminat’ in ppetuit warantizabimuf - Hiif # - Bno Wito de lifurt’ milite -
Duneaii de Cragmilor - Wito fit lug - Wil fit c'{tine . Rob braciatore
de Nodrif - Rot fil arnald . Thoma Sicling - Et multis aliif’- Daf Anno
dni. @ + ee’ - i’ - ii’ - Die £¢i Biidei in q*drages -

at

Lutkr - Vniet -

Sciant fentes 7 fut’i hane conuen" f@am fuiffe joe AleX Vniet tit. R-
4 ©

Vniet ex vna pte 7 abbtem 7 Conventti de Dunf> ex alta - videl3 qd dés

AleX p fe 7 heredibs suif omib3 7 singulis dedit ad ppetuam feodofirma

. =f 9 o= :
d@is abbti et ouentui de dif ambas tras suas de Lusker oriétali - 7


--- Dunfermline_page167.png ---
202,

SEC, XI] DUNFERMELYN. M5

ardlather q fie uoeatur milneti - p+ x - lib’s legalid efPlingoy + de déis
abbe 7 puétu de dif . do AleX 7 heredih; suif annuati 7 ppetuir foluddis

>see". fot ad fefti: sti martini 7 hveme ? 7-c'. fot ad pentecoft p mani -

halliui d@oy abbis 7 oust? ap’ muikelb"e p tépore exittentis . Ita q fi
halliuu? Pdés déoy abbis 7 pudt? ceflailit a foludoe Pdza Pminis ftatutis :
liceat do AleX 7 heredibs suif namare hd'es d@oy abbis 7 oust? de
muskelbure p firma fua pdéa - Tenddas 7 hndas déis abbi 7 outtui de d@o
AleX + heredibs suis totali? sine aliq’ retenemito - In Tris jn agq's jn moris
7 marefiif’ - jn flagnis 7 lacis 7 molendini
Gib; placitif’ 7 qrelis 7 rtitudinihs q ad diétas Pras ptinent vt ptine

jn Pris cultis 7nd cultis. ct
potit » adco libere « quiete - plenat «7 honorifice st ds AleX ddas Pras de
dno Rege liberius - q'eci? - plenari? honofci? aliq’ tempe tennit jn Capite -
Salua in omihs firma pndita Sepedéo AleX 7 heredibs suis » Dd v° abbas

SEN Paring AOR nn xae 5
Yoon Suicit dni Reg q"nti ptinet ad déas Pras « Et

7 connét? facient fori

cdcedit 7 pfitent® qd ifta cdiineio 5 firme receptio jn ppetuam Ec@e sue
de dun? cedat vtilitatem - Et sciend eft qd d@s AleX p se 7 heredibs
suis 7 d@i abbas 7 conuent? p se 7 succeiloribs fnis renunciauerunt 6i
cauillacioni - exceptioni - omi Juris remedio canonici 7 ciuilis - omibs
vel regia poteft* impet’tis -

puilegiis - 7 Indulgenciis a sede apilic

. Can 7a:
+ de Sex Acris tre in Cramund -

Omnibs x° fidelibs h fe'ptum uiftis ut audit’if Alicia - filia Jobis filii
Rannulph salé 1 dno. Novitif unit me de of@u 7 affelu Johis filii 7
edis mei dedifle + geeflifle - 7 We carta mea cdtirmatle deo 7 beate

margarite regine 7 monaftio de difmet - p aiab; pris mei 7 Hiris mee +
ancefloy meoy + 7 p falute aie mee 7 liBa - puram + 7 ppetua elemofina - fex
act Tre ci tofto 7 e’fto in uilla de Karamid fcottoy se
croft pping'ori Tre dni reg VL oceidenta - ci afiafito agndi earri: q’cient

P53 und acm T

op? erit tA nacui q'm onufti » de pdza ac® tua p tra 7 ciam meam uf

= = 7 aw . rd a + re : ape Op ge
ad tofti fui - 7 aliam acm jux* p*tum dni Wilelmi de Ingilbi ufuf
an. > teiam acm ce" motem fpinay - 7 q*rt&i iux* puted turalie- 7


--- Dunfermline_page168.png ---
116 REGISTRUM DE (src. xu.

4 nti 7 fexta ac® m i langeflat ex oriétali pte lac? - Tenédam 7 hnda déam
= D .

‘tram i locis f pdéis de me 7 hedibs mneif §) inppe tui - libe « q'ete « plenaric

7 honorifice fié dém monaftii aliq*'m Pra 7 HiBa - pura - 7 ppetua elemo-

fina - 1iBie - Gieci? - pleni? 7 honorificéti? tenet ut poilidg - abiq, aliq’

Suicio auxilio- _exaedoe + ofnetudine +7 demada - ci ufiagio Pre inf® dam
villa uulgarit) lonig dicit® 7 pif exit? ad aialia tua? q’tq’t ibide huerit -

hndo duo aialia i paft?a mea 7 hedi meoy + hndo % Anuati fex caretas
P 7

petay 7 peta mea + Ego u? aclieia 7 hedef mei ila donagom mea
monattio de difermet féam - o* offif hoiet’ 7 feminaf’ ippetuit waranti-
zabim?- Et ad hh faciedii - obligo me 7 hedef meof ofif 7 finglos ta p
corpale fae“fita: qd pftiti 2 qom p prif it 'meth qd fap h fier feei - Hit’
tel? - Pno oftantino de lochor - Pno Waldeuo de fthechen - Jobe de
balb'nni - AleX de ethinb’e - Wilelmo dodde de inuirkethi - Wilelmo filio
Jacobi 7 Pat'cio de dafii - Cottatino fit. philipp - Qichaet fit Wale -

Simone ‘de foct - Aftii « Alaii. Ad. Suistibs abbif'de daPiti . Et multis aliif’.

Dr jnre patronatus eectie de waleuilt -

© Vnilfis x? fidelis haf litPat vitne ut auditit’- Gregoriuf de maleniH filiat
WiHi de waleuiH Salim - Seiant tam ptenter qua fut®i me ecaritatif intuitu
> panima mea 7 p aiabs aiieefloy 7 tuceefloy meow dedifle gcefeitle -
hae carta mea olirmaffe deo 7 ecée ste tnitatif de dunferfi 7 monachit’
ibidem deo Qnientibs 7 in poe Quit? jut’ pat*natul’ ecée de inaleuilt
ei omnib; ptinenciif fait p me 7 heredib3 meif inure ppetuo - Quare uolo
7 edcedo ut iidem monachi jot patnat? d&ée ec&e teneant 7 poffideat
abi, aliquo clamio 7 cdt"dicée mei 7 heredit meoy - 7 ad ipam q’eienfeig,
it: pfonam pfentent - ut alio modo put tedm dei potuerit de
eadem difponant - Ego u° p me 7 heredib3 meif’ Gi iuri qd in eadem ceéa
ci ptinenciif fait hui ut tre debui 2 2 totali? reniiciaui - 7 illud monachif’
pasit integ" i? «fet clamani - Et ad fi fideli? obferuada fide mea
intpofita 7 Pftito {ae"mento corpali obligaui me 7 heredef meof offi’ 7
fing@lof’ atq, Sia bona Sra mobilia 7 imobilia - Plentia 7 fut?a - Supponent’

vac


--- Dunfermline_page169.png ---
204,

SEC. XL. ] DUNFERMELYN. 117

me 7 heredef meot 7 pda bona iurifiliebi efi sti Andree q' p tpe fucrit -
vt - liceat s* p cenfuram ectafticam me 7 heredef meof ad obSuacom Use

if fine ammoniéde - citacde + ub

donaédif reniicia

is atq, q'ete clama
aliquo ftrepitu iudiciali edpllere - Reniiciando p me 7 heredih3 meit’ di
excepédi - cauillacdi cSpetenti - 7 cpetiture - 7 i iurif’ 7 fori p'uilegio - 7
dibs tif inpetratif’ 7 inpet" udif atq, regie phibiGoi « La hui? rei teftimonit
huic fe'pto figilli mei appofii - Hiif teftihs - Dno Gainelino eleco Sci
Andree - Pno Henrico clecto candide cafe - Dno - P- p'ore de sta eee -
Dnif- Henr’ - 7 Hug canonicif ci2dem loci - no Helia canonico de sto
Andy - Dnis Walt? de foet - 7 Rica de Inuirkethin monachis de diife? -
Dno Robto decano de Linlit% - Puno Gilberto vieat de Wimet - Wag
Rad de Bofeo - Rad de b“de clico - 7 multit aliif -

DE earta de Oroe -

Sciant Bfentes 5 7 fut: § ego Syd filius fimonif’ de Oroe dedi 7 cdcefli
confentu Robti filij 7 Theat nei intueniente cot" maui deo 7 ceée te
tnitat de Dunf + abbi 7 cdustui eiufd loci ibid deo Su ‘tib3 + Ippetui
Shitué totam illa tra q'm Symod pa me? dedit 7 otulit fretekino ffi meo
i tenefito de Oree +s +] yoca ut® @uyoch 7 7 Cnokduns yna cr jure 7 cOmuna
qd habeo ut hre debeo 7 Pra q voeat* Inethact ch q®m q'dé tra emi ab eodé
frefekyno ffe meo p q'dam sitma pecunie qm ei plene ppacaui - Tenen-
dam + hnda s' 7 fuccefloribs suit de me 7 hedibs meif liBe « plena¥ - «ete
7 pacifice abty, Oi caliipnia 7 e

ecde mei ut hed meoy - Dei vero abbs

7 cduent? p Pdta donacde 7 cdceflione m‘ t'ginta q'ing, ward p mianibs 7

mea magna née“itate plene ploltunt + Et ad maioré s

uritaté plentis
donaébis mee 7 ciceflionis iuraui tactis sae’stif’ ewanglijs p me 7 hedil
meis q cont hoe fm mei fillo tpe venii- Et si ego ut hedef mei es
hoe fém mei veito ub vertint : obligo me 7 hedes meos plentis Inf menti
tenore ad pena centit waré cifdé abbi 7 eSuttui foluenday - Ita: q n° in
foro ece“iaftico feu feculari aliq® nob audizcia concedat® - y"ufy, pleas

centii wareat cifd® plene pfoltim? - Kt ego pdés Syms 7 hhedes mei toth


--- Dunfermline_page170.png ---
205,

118 REGISTRUM DE (SEc. Xiu.

Pra Pdtam Pass abbi 7 cdustui warentizabim? 7 defendem? inppetud
cont® Ses hoies 7 feminas- Ad maioré % hui? rei fecuritat® figilla dni
Dauid de Locho¥ 7 Ricard de balweri militii - RoBti de Roffyue - Duncani
de Crambyth - vna cit figillo meo n'nd sigillo Bag RoBi filij 7 hedis mei

apponi peuraui -

De eectia de colin data ad ftmam -

Galf'duf pmiflione diuina eectie Dunkeld minif? humit - Gibs haf litcat’
vituy uf auditu® {alt i duo - Notit vnittital tra qd ci mota éet coe in
in? abbem 7 couent de Difmet ex una pie 7 abbem 7 cduet> de Seon

alta fF deeimif de Inthamiid 7 Heruicroe - Ad pace it ipof —
ta 7 hiif q°m fup aliif de hs int cof 7 poftmm matia littigadi poffet
i tire {ponte fide media fe fbiecit - Tandé ad or dina-
Sem fram Abbs 7 cSuet? de Scona p eit 7 fueceflorihs fui? Pazay tray
decimaf’ off 7 offimodat abbi 7 cSuttui de diifmet + 7 faccefloribs eoy
q‘etaf’ 7 ppetui clamatint reniciatet omi iuri qd 7 illif habueFt ut bre
potuert - faluif domuj de Scon* Gimodif decimif intule de Scon* « Ad

or

: vt"q, pf ordin:

cAd® v’ ordinaGem jiram abbs 7 cduet? de Difmet Pnodinatif abbi 7
pustui de feon* cecliau: fut de otin 7 atholia 7 epiteepty iro fita ef dibs
ptinceiif fuif- falua s* Pra q'm DP de Hattighif’ 1 cadé prochia de cif’
tenet anctoritate Tira 7 colefu itucnisti
q‘tuor @aré annuati foluédif domuj de diitm medictate feilz ad petecofté
yalia medictate ad fefti (8 coartini T hyeme - 12 v’ Candici dia ola Pdtam
ecetiaa cotigétia s°tincbiit excepto q fia dno papa - aliqd on? eidé ecetie
fit Tpditd te abbs 7 oust? de difmet p porée qm i eadé eectia peipiit
refpondehiit 7 abbs 7 onét? de feon* fatiffacidt p refiduo - Et ne aliq® it
dz monaftia de ceto oriat® otecd ? ut“q, pf ad ordinagdm firam {pote
7 fidetr pmifit 7 fide media fmau' q ta {¥ decimif de Inuirhamid 7
Hernicroe q* 1? cectia de colin n° ii 7 aliif’ rebg Sib; tepe cdfecddif hui?
inft’méti ab altnt® peit habitit 7 pefeffif Hllam 7 ppetui it fe mouebiit
q‘itioné - vt ait h total ordinagd tra ppetue Mmitatif rob” optineat ve'q, pt

sad Mma dedeit ppetua p vigiti



--- Dunfermline_page171.png ---
206.

SEt

xu] DUNFERMELYN. 119

reniieiaf i aetoni - appHoi - exeepédi fori 7 ¢lib; alij excepédi - p'uilegio -
61 auxilio - bifito in® candici 7 eiuit p'uati 7 omunif’- iurifdiGidi fire 7
fneeelloy firoy p tpe exiftétiti {pote 7 liBatr fe fhmifit - ut fi aliqit alta
peid o* h“ne ordinagdm ut alijm artictm in ea edtéti uenire Pfipterit -
pté refilient® pefim? cdpelle 7 cSpellem? ad h“ne ordinacim 7 q’ i ea
cdtinét® obternid p cenfuram eectiaftied 7 pend Céti ware fab'ee ecte
Dunkeld a pte uolente refilere foluéday «uf p recepGom dium honoy
pdtoy wonachoy 7 candicoy 7 ePatn jiro exiltstiar q’uti, pf refiftent ad
fom hY ordinaddif’ redierit 7 pti ii refiliti fi T aliq’ Iefa fit de

dapnif 7 Tiuriif plene fatiffecit - Ad maioré g* N° rei fecuritat® cdficit®

obferne
inde fe'ptura 7 modi efrog*phi cni? vna pf figillo firo 7 figillo capiéli de
feon® roborata penef wonaftia de diffi - Alta v" fimitr figillo nfo ~
figillo capitli de Dunfiii penef fepefatot abbem 7 cdudtii de feon™ refidebit
roborata - Aétum ano g' mo + feptimo - fextodeeimo Ka-
lendaf maij T cca fira eathedrali de Dikeldefi -

e+ m+ ce’. tee

De ec@a de malenilt « carta -

Vnitar fidelih3 has littas uifuris ut auditut - Gregoriuf de waleniti -
filius Witti de waleuitt - Salut - Sciant tam Pfentef q'm futuri me earitatif
intuitu 7 p anima mea 7 pro animah3 aiicefloy - 7 {necefloy meoy dedifle -
concefliffe - 7 hae carta mea ofirmaffe do 7 ecte {te t'nitatif de Dnn-
fermelyn - 7 monachis ibidem do feruientih; 7 inppetui feruiturif inf’
pronatuf ecte de waleuill ei oMib3 ptinenetif fuis pro me 7 Tedibs meif
jure ppetuo - Q‘re uolo 7 coneedo ut iidem @onachi inf pronatus d&e ecte
teneant et poffideant abfq, aliquo elamio 7 p*diétiGe mei 7 hedum meoy -
7 ad ipam quocienfeiiq, uacanit ¢ pfonam pfentent - ut alio m® put fedm
deum potucrint de eadem difponant - Ego uero p me 7 hedib; meif’ omi
iuri qd in eadé ecéa cit ptinéciif suif hui ut tire debui totalit reniiciaui 7
ilud monachif pdidif integr"li? quiet’ clamani - Et ad hoc fidelit
obSnandii fide mea intpofita 7 pftito facraméto corporali obligani me 7
hedes meof’ omnef 7 fingulos atq, offiia bona fira mobilia 7 immobilia



--- Dunfermline_page172.png ---
207.

120 REGISTRUM DE [sec. xm.

Pfentia 7 futura - Subponenf me 7 fredes meof 7 Pd&a bona inrifilictoni
Epi {ci Andree qui p tepore filit ut Hiceat st pcenfuram ecéafticam me
7 hedes meof ad obSnagm Ate donaddis + reniiciagif atq, q'ete clamadis

fine ammonicide - citacide ut aliq’? ftrepitu iudiciali opelle « Renticiando

pme > Tedibs meif’ omi excepedi - cauillacdi competéti 7 opetiture - 7 dt

int - 7 fori puilegio 7 omib; levi impet‘tif’ 7 impetrandis at, regie
phibicdi - In hui? vei teftimonium huic fe'pto figilli mei appotii » Hit
tellibs - Bno Gamellino clecto sti Andree « Bno henrico cleséo candide
case» Bno +P. pore de sta cruce - Duis Tenrié «7 Hugoii - canonicifeiufde
loci » Bno Thelya canonico de fo Andrea» Dnis Walt de foct 7 Ricard -
de Tnnirketh « monachis de Dunfmelyn - Brno Robe - deca « de linlyty -
DPno Gilbto uicai + de Wymet - Wagre Radulph « de bofeh » Radulf - de
brade clico » 7 Thofi + de brade fe fuo + Stephano de malcuilt - clico
Walto de Dunoti- 7 Aftino feruientihs dni abbis de Dunf . Duneano 7

Wito capllanis de Dunferfii - Magro fymoii - de claypoH » Alano ianitore
de Dunfermel¥ - Et filtif aliis - Dat - Aput Dunfermelyn - Anno gie -
co’ ce’. L?. Onto - in eraftino fz thome apti in pleno capitulo -

Carta dni cwalcolmi de morania de beeth occidétali -

Omnihs x* fidelibs hoe feripti vifu® ut audituris waleolm? de corauia
miles etnam in dno satm + Nouit vnilifitas fra me p falnte ate mee
Pdecetloy meoy 7 fuccetloy dedifle coneeflifie 7 hac plenti carta mea
cofirmafle deo 7 ecte ste tnitatif de diifermel¥ abbi v @onach ibid deo
feruientihs totam tram meam de beth occidentali qn de dno AleX de
qworania tenui hfditarie « Tenend 7 hnd in TiBam 7 ppetuam clemofina
ei omib; afiamétif’ et inftis ptinéciis in bofco 7 plano in pratif 7 pafenis
morif 7 marifiis viis et femitif ftagnis aquis 7 m‘lendinis 7 ef omibs aliis
Beating ad diéam Pra ptinétibs adeo lie - q'ete + plenaric 7 honorifice
ficut aliq’ clemofina in regno Scot ab aliq’? Vauatlore libing qreeiu?
plenariu? lonorificétiu? tenet® 7 poffidet® faluo forinfeco ferniG q*ntii
ptinet ad dita tra. Ego fio 7 h¥des mei dicta tra ei omib; ptinenctis 7



--- Dunfermline_page173.png ---
208,

208,

SEC. NU

J DUNFERMELYN. 121

HBtatil
zabi

sup digit’ cOt" ¢

3 hdines 7 feinas eid abbi 7 cuétui warenti-

1 adqtetabim? + in ppetuii defédem? - In eni? rei teftimonii plenti
fe'pto figilli met appofui - Hiis tettibs - dno Abraham legit pfeffore -
wagro Johe de w%kylburg tune tempis offié dni epi fanécti andree - dno

a a ——— ) = A
Wito de banchw candico fei Andree + Alano de eatila - Ri& coco tie
_— marae ATE 8 Pe Barra lara ONT

ianitore 7 Miltis aliis - Daf apd difverinely die nicurii aii felti sée_ cai

mginif’- Anno gfe - w+ ce’ » Septuag + quarto -

. 2
[te carta cintit de cad tra de beeth

Oitibs hoe fivipti: uifuF ut auditu® walcolmus de morauia miles satm in
dno» Notitis vnitlfi qd ch ego p salute aie mee predeeefloy meoy +
fueectiny deo 7 ecte ste Unitatif’ de dunfermely 7 monach ibide deo
fuientibs 7 in ppetul feruitu® tota ram meam de beth occidentali qv
de dio AleX de morauia tenui hdita in libom 7 ppetua elemofinant
gtulerim in ppetnii put earta mea eis inde eonfeéta plenius teftatur -
obligo me 7 hides meos p plens te'pti qt Pdictam Fram dittis uiris
relig 9" offis hdines 7 fCinas warentizabim? - adq'e
defédeme? - Kt fi edtingat me ul Lifdes meos

him? 7 in ppetuii
in waréetizaGine ut defenfione
fexdee?
rit dictif religioS foluenday in reedpeniaéoné diéte donaéonis mec

pdi&e tre defize + obligo me 7 hfdes mieos ad folegonem centi

mar

qi m in folucbne dice peennie eartam meam inde confectam reftituét - In
hui? rei teflimonid: Plenti tepto sig
mel¥ die theurii px“ aii fettie ste ma

septuag q"rto -

li meum appofti - Dat apd dunter-

gaP u'ginis - Anno gie - w°- ce’ -

Cofirmacd AleX de morania de becth occidentali -

Ofmibs x fidelihs hoe se'ptii uitu¥ ut audituris Ale& de jorauia
Jmih; 3 t ;

les
cin in dno salutem + Not vniifitas fira me peefliffe 7 ofirmatfe
dona

i iA p me z h¥dibz meis q'm walcolm? de morauia miles fecit
a


--- Dunfermline_page174.png ---
210.

122 REGISTRUM DE (see. xu.

deo 7 ec be fee t'nitatis de ait abbi 7 monach ibid do Suientibs 7 in

totam tram de beth oveidentali qm dict? malcolm?

ppetat Quitu® uide

de me tenuit hiditai - Tenéd 7 ind dtis abbi 7 monach in liberam 7
ppetua clemofinam ei omib; afiamentis 7 inflis ptinéctis fuis in bofeo +

uii

plano in p‘tis 7 pafenis - moris 7 ari

7 femitis fagnis aquis 7
molendinis 7 ci omib; alii

LBtatihs ad dicta Pram ptinétibs adeo libere
qiete plonat 7 honorifice fict aliq® elemofina in regno Scot ab aliq’
Vanaffore “Bing qecin? pleniu? 7 honorifieenciu? tenet? 7 p%idet* faluo
hinttes Ried qinti pting ad dika fra. Et ut ifta mea conceffio 7
ofirmacs robur ppetue firmitatis optineant | a omib3 7 per oiia sic’ carta
dia caleolmi eift abbi 7 onach de ead tra pfecta pleni? teftatur huic
se'pto sigillfi mei appofui + Teftibus Dno W - de Rathen tite p'ore de
Vedhard » Walto de lafeele3 - Symone clieo » W alto de logyii
becl 7 aliis - Dat afd Culbyii die imarti

i + Lent

px” ali fefta fi pett ad vineula -
Anni dni - co" - ect. septuagetimi q' rti -

Cofirmacd AleX de @orania de heeth oecidétali -

Oitibs hoe se'pti vituk ut auditu¥ AleX de worauia miles etham in dno
satm ouit ynilifitas fra me p salute aie mee aiicefloy 7 fuccefloy

meoy edceflife 7 q'etii clamafle pro me 7 hidih; meis deo 7 ecte ste
tnitatis
SuituF tothi ius qd habui thre potui in fra de beeth oecidentali - Quare
uolo + cdcedo pime 7 h¥dib; meis qf alind inti*méti ut si aliq® inft'méta
qa why yf) hedibs meis potit ut pot’ ‘unt pdefle 7 ditis abbati 7 monach
ob&e penes me ut aliq hidi meoy de ceto innéi

de dunfermely abbi 7 @onach | ibid do fuiétiby 7 in ppetut

itn nulla robur optineat
ut optineant firmitatis - In cui? rei teftimonii huie se'pto sigilli_ mei
appofui - Teftib; dno W - de Rathen tie p'ore de Vrdhard - Walto de
Laceles - Symone clico - W:

feo de Logyn + Hen? bet 7 aliis » Dat apd
culbyii die mart px" afi fefti bi pet’ ad uicula . Anni gfe -@*' . ec'-
septuag quarti »


--- Dunfermline_page175.png ---
Qn.

SEC. Xu] DUNFERMELYN. 123

De Eeéa de Innirkethin -

Vniitfis ste firis Eeée fi

ub auditaris .

~ fidelibus Littas iftas vitiwif
I] -di gia abbs de Kelch »~ Gs 7 Rede Coldigham 7 de Keleh p'ores
Salim Etnam jn dno- Nowtit vnittitas tra qd anno ab incarnaéone dni -
co" + ce? xij’ canta {] htehat? jnt P+ abbem 7 Gon de Dun® ex yna
pter 7 Ph de wub¥ 7 Calienam uxorem ci? cx alta pte fap Ecta de
Inuirketh nob a dno pp" delegata fuit fub hac forma - Innocent Epé -
us Suoy di diléis

Coldigham P'orib;

s+ sabbi de Keleh- 7+ + ciusdem loci 7+ + de
Andy dioces Salim 7 aplica bud - Significant nob
diléi filij - P- abbs + Contintus de Dun? qd cit in? ipof ex yna pte + 7
noblem viram Ph de cubé Sti Andy dioé ex alta coram decait Glasi 7
coniudicib; fnis fap Eeta de Inuirketh ave" jira ci titereturs iidem
judices pperam pecdentes poft appHoné ad nos legitime intpditam :
inig'm cont* cos fiiam pmulgarunt - [doq, diferecdi Tre p aplica fe'pta
main? q“tinus de apptone legitime cognofcentes ¢ fiiam ipam confir-
mare t inftmare appHde remota curetis - fieut de jure fit faciendum -
Que si de jure fiit irritata ? cim audiatis - 7 appHde remota fine candico
tminctis - facientes quod deerettitis p eenfuram Ec@afticam firmit obSnari -
Quod fi non ofis hii

~ . Dee se *: : :
exeqndis potuitis intée: Duo vim ea nichominus

exeq*utur + Dat Late iiij - kt Auguft - pontifie:
plenei:

° firi anno - xiiij’ - In
dne Ermingardis Regine Scottoy 7 dni WiHi sti Andy epi apud
Eden ultimo dic waij hoe modo fopita eft - Vidert qd ditfone 7 puifise
eoridem pdés Ph de oubi 7 Galina uxor cius p fe 7 hedibs fiis eon

ecileriit 7 quictas clamattunt 7 ppetua diuine pictatis iutuitu deo 7 {te
coargarite Regine 7 Contintui de Dunf- ofis decimas bladi ptinentes ad
Ecéam de Inuirk - Tenédas 7 poflidendas in libam 7 puram 7 ppetuam
elemofinam - de ipixs Ph de wuby 7 Gat uxore ei? 7 Hedibs
Ph de @uby 7

cord - Idé aii
¥ uxor eins 7 hedes cori pfatis abbi 7 Cor

ntui de
Dunt: pdéas decimas cont ofis homines warantizabunt - Abbs ait 7
Coit? quictii clamatunt in ppetua Ph de cub? 7 Gat uxori eius 7 hedibs
coy jus patronat? cide cete + faluis pdgif abbi + wonachis decimis tocius



--- Dunfermline_page176.png ---
212.

124 REGISTRUM DE [see. Xu.

bladi ad eandem cetain ptinentibs fieut in eora earta continetur - Clici
wad Plentagom Ph de oub? 7 Gat usoris cius 7 hedum eoy in cadem
Eeta inftituendi de Epalihs 7 omibs aliis onih3 refpondebit - ficut eoy
Carta confirmat 7 teftatur. Vt adi utriuly, ptis conceflio 7 quicta clamac
robur ppetue firmitatis optineat ? nos cam aue afliea qua fungimur
irrefragablid: confirmamus - Et figilla dne » Es - Regine Scottoy «7 dnori
W . fai Andy epi 7 Walt Glaf& epi - 7 Rad Brechinens - 7 Confintus de
Kelch - + abbis 7 Coniint? de Abirbroth «7 abbis 7 Coit? de Lundors -
7 poris 7 Confint? {71 Andy - 7 abbis 7 Coiituf de Edenburg + 7 abbis 7
Cofitut de Jeddewreh - vna cit figiH

feeimus apponi -

Controtfia int Danfmet  Seond - De molendinis de Perth «
De elros = de Dricburé di
viluris ut audit?is salfm jn dno» Mand dni Pp in hee tba fufeepimus -
onori? Epe suns Suoy di - dil@is filiis . de celros 7 de Drieburé abbibs -
7 Prori de celros Gla Andy Dict Salim - 7 aplié tnd - DIG
filij abbs 7 Coniintus de Dunt- nob conjrendo monft runt - qd abbs 7
Cofit? de Scott 7 quidam alii sti Andy 7 Dunkeldeti dive

abbes 7 Prior de melros ofihs has littas

wet 7 f

fup quibsdam
deeimis 7 reb aliix iniuviantur cisdem - Tdeog, dife'cdi Tre p aplica fe'pta
mandamus q“tinus ptib; econuocatis audiatis cim - 7 appHone remota +
fine debito tminetis - facientes qd deeretitis p eenfuram cetafticnm tirmit
obSuari + Teftes ati q' + fue - no". fife ¢" - oft ut. ti fubt "x: cenfira

g

{iti appHtde ceffate - coga - itit + telti®  phre «Atl - fi nd Os - hiif ex -
po + intée: duo + ue - ea - nich? exeg*ntur - Dai Laterait - xii + Kl

Janu: Poiit? fri anno - - Ci g auc’ Littarum ifiarum monachi de
g

Dunf cont® Candicos de Seofi cim mouifient sup decimis molendinoy
dni Re& que currit p ay‘m de A

id inf® pochiam ecte monachoy + t-

svete Perth quas decimas ipi candici peepit 7 piudiciti juris monachoy ut

ipi alforebant : Candicis ceont® eafdem decimas optentu tpeciat donacdis

recordacbis

is DD - a tempe eidem Re& Tonga pite'pne J infto
tiflo 7 bona fide fe peepitle obtédentibs «tandem mediante dno iNuttri


--- Dunfermline_page177.png ---
sec. St] DUNFERMELYN. 125

Rege AleX 7 quibjdam tre magnatibs: cont°uerfia illa int ptes hac fine
anicabliter conq'euit - {- qd abbs 7 Candiei de Scoii singlis annis 7

e Kete

ppetua tehif de Dnt p bono pacis - v + ove argnti ad laminar
de Dunf? ploluent af Scot p mani dni abbif’ de Scoit ut ploris fi abbs
abfuit ¢ ad duos tminos- f- med « ad felt ¥ wartini Z 7 alii med ad pent -
Monachi u’ de Dun? pdzis candicis decimas pdtoy motndinoy de Pth
7 ppetud quietas elamatunt - 7 Juri coy fi quod fuit in it omimode
reniciatlunt - Vt ait hee amieablis compo ppetuam optineat firmi® utq,
abbs p fe 7 fit Conintib; - ntnon 7 fuif’ fuecefforib; hane compen
inuiolablit fi frande + dolo obSuandam inrauerunt - Et ad maiorem
firmitatis enidenciain ¢ ‘conficitur inde fe'ptura 7 modum e¥rograph - cui?
7 dni WiKi epi
Capitli de Seo muninie roborata vna ¢ figitt iit qui judicet’

yna pst domo de Dunf sigilloy dni iluftris Reg Ale
tci And

fiumus T hac Ga remanebit - 7 alta psi Ecta de Seoh Sigilloy dt@oy dnoy

Re& + Epi + Capitli de Dunf impioibs munitay vna eit figit fivis
remanebit +

Controthia inter ¢ lef 7 Tulihbotheuile : In? Vueth 7 Quichtes - De aq"
q currit int Petlitt 7 ABerami :

Notlint vniidi q@ cum int de Cnlent 7 de Dunf> abbes 7 cori eapiila
fap de Cles capHam abbe 7 Conintu de ‘ulen® eam ad cetam fuam de
Tulibothwin ptine agente + contendentibs fab Plentia dnoy Dunblait efi -
zabbis de Neubott 7 P*oris de sta cruce qnibs de he rea sede applica
comifla fait cogniéd - contenéo iiteretur : eontendentihs infip eisdem
nichominus fup dinifis inter tram de Quichtis 7 foreftum del Vueth 7
it in? tram de Petlit! + tram de

ftagnis firmandis sup aq"m que ewri
Gelland ex vna pte - 7 tram de Abirerumbi ex alia: pe aliq*ntalas
tandem alteaGones fup déa CapHa in indigo t@
capitloy fuoy connenientes 7 amicablit) fap Bnois
t"aantes de jure fuo fe ad inuiccm de plano edocuerunt - Abbs u° de

s dG abbes de confenfu

is omib; capHa 7 aliisx

Culen? auditis inftrniitis 7 rdb3 ptif adife guib; déam ad Eeéam de


--- Dunfermline_page178.png ---
126 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xan.

Dunf ptitle capHam edocebant de coufnti capitli fui jari qd se in déa
contendebant bre CapHa renuncianit 7 totum - Conuenit % in? d&os de
confenfu capifloy fuoy abbes p bono pac is 7 utilitatis 7 ppetue t*nq'lli-
tatif’. ad ome diflentidis in? da monaftia refecandam matiam qd tales
fint divife int tram de Quichtif 7 forefttum de Vueth q“les fuerunt fee p
dim + Q)+ Comité de fif - fub plentia Pnoiatoy abbati - f. qd incipiant
ufaf auft® ab aqua de Letheni p fiketum q ppinquor eft aldlunahkthan
ius orientem - 7 ita afcendendo in directum p lapides ufg, ad lapidé
fianté in monte fithi - 7 fie defvendendo ufg, ad fonté fub monte - 7 fic p
riuuli ili? fontis ufg, in gorui - If - qd mdchi de Culent firmabunt ftagna
fa fup aq’m pdéam ubi uolfiint infins motndino wdchoy de Dunt: - Ita
qt non ult® +i + ac*m oceupabiit de fra wBchoy de Dunk: « hac oegne -
Simitr wbchi de Dunf? fiagni fui fF fram coiichoy de Kulent fi
opus fit + ita q@ n° p flagna

ti n° p aliud op? qd faciant impidiatur
deficca@ marefii de Abirerumbi - j omia pmiSunt ptes fub atteftagne
diuini judicij fideli? obSuare in ppetua 7 in nHo cont*uenire «Ad majoré
YT securitaté - d@i Dunblanen? epé - abbs de Neubott - por f%e e'cis quibs
fup memorata capHa cdmifla fuit cogniGd fuam impcientes auc - figilla
fua ut'q, pti huic fe'pture in modum cy
appenfif nichomin? in hui? rei teflimadin

‘og"phi confGe appenderiit -

7 plenam corroboragdm ei pti
eam hi { penes monaftinm de Dunf: refidebit # conattij de Culent -
y-«@ + Comii de fif patroni de Culen¥ figitt - ei n° pti q penes monaftiun
de Culent refidebit ? dni Re& patroni de Dunf 7 monaftij de Dunf-
Sigil - Hiis teft - no Nef) de Rames - Bnis Witt de Wyuitt - Ala
hanfelin - Het de kininmid fociis di Comit - magris Griffino 7 Criftino
clicis domini - Comit « Et multis aliis - Act anno gre + "+ ce? xx" vij?
ad pafeh - apud Dunf? -

Int’ Abirertwmbin 7 Culenros

Vnilifis Ecte membris pfens fe'ptii vifuris ut audituris Wits abbs de
Dunf- 7 lug primus abbs de Culen¥ 7 utriufy, mona.tii capitlm Salt -


--- Dunfermline_page179.png ---
xu] DUNFERMELYN, 1Q7

Notit vnitlitas fra qd ed per infpfeom pruilegiora monattij de Culent

onaftium a preftagdue decimari de nuttnentis aialit

ati ic
6e penitus exempta - 7 de decimis frugum 7 arboy > aliari: onenConii iu
teritorio tno de Abirerumts «in? déa monafiia noie Nete de aBerumt
uideretur fupée adhne matin querelandi ¢ int’ déa monaftia fup deeimis
frngum 7 arhoy 7 omit aliarum ofnGnii tam pfonalit qom Pdialiam ex

déo tritorio puenient

bet declar

: om

8 7 ppetuit matia conqueltionis amicabli
compdne eft penitus extinéta ¢ fub hae forma - ADbs 7 Coniintus de
Culenrof foluent in ppetuti monat
annis - medietaté ad p*itieagom te warie 7 alia med ad aduintla sti Pett

»de Dunit + xv - rd - argent finglis

p bono pacif’- Siu’ contingat qd a Solnone dée peedie ad aliq’m d&oy

tminoy ceflailit Contint? de Culeni « poft - xv - dies ex quo ceflatiint 2 de

feptimana in feptimand dabit noie pene hofpitali de Dunt- dit cred
argenti» Hane t

fuoy tactis 1

compom 7 peue adiee@om dé abdbes T animab; coniintua

rote

ppetue > plene obSuandam inratlunt - fubicientet’ {e

y fucceflores fos vnittos jurifdeoi Efoy Dunkeld qui p tempe fhint in

ppetuii - Vt liceat eis nHa appHone ut alin remedio obftante utrumaq,

inonaftinm ad tocius d&e compdnis obSuancian compHere p titpttionis

POH eT . P aa Ferree Me Dceates
ut intdéi fiiam quociens 9* eompém iflam ab aliq” ptinm Mit alig*tenns

attemptati - P hane quidem folu@om - coarea? p bono paeis int pditam

7 ~ ». cose 2. :
Bum c# monattiun de Culent yiuune erga monaftium de Dunt . +

ecéam de Abit 7 ppetuit ab oii vexacdnue + exaccone sup oimib; decimis

© 7 ptinenciis iius puen
enei -adno Hug Epo Dunkeld ;
firmid eft appbata 7 finaliter confirmata - Salnis s' 7 fuecctloribs Epis
omib3 epalib; ab adbe 7 Coniintn de Culen® peipiendis - Cni? componif’
part pencf monaftium de Dunf: - refidens ¢ figiH ci?dem Epi 7 Capili
Dunk
monaftium de Culent :

frngum 5 aliarum ofinédnii oMiii ex geo trito

- Hee aii compo in modi eirog“ phi conte:

Id 7 wonattii de Culent - Pfu ei’dem edpinis refidens penet
sigitt coydem Epi + Capli Dunketfia 7 Capli de
Dunf + vnanimi allenfu 7 inniolabili firmitate roborant? - Hiis t- Bno -
Q)- Comit de fif cui? ¥ figillum ut'q, pti apponitur+ Due Nefl* de Rameg -
DBnil Witto de Wyuill- Alaii hanteli . Het de Kinimiid fociis dti Comit «
iffino 7 Crifti elicif dni Comit - Alano capHo Comit - 7 nmiltis
hs apud Dun? -

cagris C

aliis - Act anno gfe - «”

sec? xx"+ vij’ ad pai



--- Dunfermline_page180.png ---
128 REGISTRUM DE

Ces Bo - .
Controtifia inter Dunfmelin 7 Kambufkinel -
ee. en ore arn
1US 8 Airis ecée filiis littas iflas vifuF ul auditu® - G+ de Lundors 7

7
G ede Abirbroth abbes 7 J+ ptor de way ctnam 7 dno Salé- Littas ani

‘ s filiis
de lundors 7 de abbroth abbibs 7 Priori de way - diet {ti Andy Salé -
~ aplit bud - Dildi filij abbs 7 Cont? de Dunf fia nob oquettioe
montt*runt qd @ abbs 7 Cano" de Kambskiii in dioé ti Andy eof’ fup
quibsdam decimif’ q‘s ad Eccam tuam de ft'uelin ptine diecbant cora
yenabli {fe fro Epo Dunblaii > vindicibs fiis delegatis a nob t"xiffent in

Dp Innod - iif fufeepimat in h tba - Innod Epe aus Suey di. dil

tam 7 ipi fp capHa de Dunipaft auc’ fira puenitl@t eofdem ? tandem

yenabli f¥e firo Epo § andy ae collegis

° in quos fuit a ptib; ecOpmitla
ablis compo intuenit - Q'm ult”
déiabbs 7 Cofit? de Kambsk nitant® inf ngere min?
iufte cont’ iuramti pititum teme uenientet’ - jog, difecdi F
fe'pta a

nt eof am

intponentibs ptes thas

qnqnnii obsuata

> p aplica
m ficut {ii puitate puide fa eft. + ab
ut‘q, pte recepta? faciatis p cenfirant eeéatticé appHone remota firmit
obsuari + €¢d fi nd Os hill. ex + po + inte ¢ duo. ue - ea» nichn? -

fim? q*tin? compom i]

exeq'ntur + Vos deniq, filij abbes tup uob ipit' 7 eredito vob grege talit
viviletif’ extirpando uicia 7 plantando nirtutes: ut in nouiffimo diftriai
auminis die coram tremendo Judice qui reddet vniceuiq, fedm opa faa
dignam pollitis reddere

Fm + Dat Lata - Noi noth - pontificat? Tri

ani) + xvij? + Harum littard auc" pt in Plentia jira conttituti

intpeone influfitoy autenticoy 7 aflercone peid nob pleni? conflitit yd

ex

abbs 7 Candici de Kamb3i t'xerunt 7 Gam abbem 7 @dchof de Dunt tap
fh3dam decimis ad eetam fuam de Kirketuii ut aflerebant fp'tantihs - t-
fap decimis bladi de tra Rob Camb - de fiphaln - de tra Hug pareur -
de Pra caleolmi Suientis Reg + de Pra de Kirket - de Camb3barmn - de
Skeoce q'm Ruientet’ Reg tenent - de Buth eatheroe - De tra Odonis
foruicntis Reg - de fra Welandi - de Polmafe q'm Pat'eius tenet + de tra
candicori: iux® motndini + de via earueata tre de Cragorth + 7 de alia
carueata Tre q’'m Vunipae tenuit » 7 fup decimis pifearie de Forth
moindini de Bannoe « onachi w’ de Dunf uice tt conueniebant abbem


--- Dunfermline_page181.png ---
DUNFERMELYN. 129

ndcof de NKambsk eadem auc fup caplla de Dunipatt - 7 fup omibs
decimis de Kernoe - 7 plane 7 Veliterbannoe - Q'a ut iidé coehi afferebant
offis deeime de anio dni Reg de Seh¥ra de St'uelin ad eof ptinebant -
Hee eft for’ littay quibs vtchant® Cano" 0" monaehos - Innot Epé Quut’
Suoy di. Venabli ffi Dunblancii epo + 7 diléis filiis de Cupy 7 de Seoii
abbib3 dioé (ti Andy falt - 7 aplé - bnd - Querimdiam diléoy filioy abbis 7
Candicoy de Kamb3k aecepimus - continent? gd abbs 7 wdehi de Dunf
diot {Gi and quatdam deeimas ad cetam fuam de Egeles ptinentes p
violeneiam occupatas detinent 7 reddcre cont“dieit - alia eis dampna 7

+ papi

tre

iniurias irrogando - jog, difereddi + ve' + sep + maim? + qi? - ps

conuo™ audiatif hie 7 inde ppdita - 7 quod eandici fivit appttone poftpdita
ftatuatis facientes quod dee‘titis p + een” - ece - fit? - obSuari - Teftes aii
q'- fa - no". fi- fe. g's od - ub ti® « subt"x? p ea ne difecm appHone

remota eogatis fitati teftimoia phiBe « nitis litteris hitati 7 7 iufticie Pindl-

is - €yd fi nd offis hiis ex - ‘potu™ + inte:

eantib3 a sede aplica impetr
tu frat Epé ci corum alto ca niehominus exequaris - Dat Latati Kt
Ap'l- Pontifieat? fri anil - vj - Hee eft forma Lit?arum quibs utebantur
@dchi cont® Candcot’. Innoé epé g. seruoy + di + dil@is filiis - Pori {te
crucis - Decano de Tinigham {Gi and dio®. 7 magro Laur offieiali venablis

fris tri Epi sti and Salt - 7 aplié tnd - Querelam diléoy filioy abl

Coiituf de Dunf accepimuf continenté qt Candici de Kambsk diot sti

andy capHam de Dunipaft> 7 q"sdam decimas ¢ “uct ad eos de jure
{p‘tantes cont* infticiam detinent 7 reddere cont“dieunt - Quia uv’ nob non
conftitit de Pmiiffif ¢ diLCEI Fre p apliea fepta mandamus a “tin? vocatif’
qf fuint enoeandi audiatif hine inde ppdita - 7 qd candied fit appttone
p°poita ftatuatif’. facientes qd deerctitis pcenfuram ee@afticam firmit
obsuari? Teftef i. q'- fu. no. fi-fe-g"-od- ul. tit. fubtraxerint / p
eandem cenfurd ceflante appHone cogatis titati teftimdiit phiBe + Bilis
littis Qitati 7 intlicie Pindicantibs a sede apilica impet*tis - Qd fi nd ofis
hiif’ exeqndif’ - po - inte? duo - ue + ea + nichomi? . exeq*ntur - Dat -
Rome - apud fem Petrum - vi - kt Nouemt - Pontif firi anno - vij’- Tandem
u® poft multas altcaGones de affenta peium auc" dni Pp 7 judié delegatoy -
Wiko inclite recordaédis tiie tempis Rege Scottoy ad pacem in? eos
R



--- Dunfermline_page182.png ---
130 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xin.

reformandam ptes fuas intponente 2 ita amicablit conuenit - f- qd abbs
7 wdchi de Dunf p bono pacis geeflerit abbi 7 Candicif de Kamb3k
annuii redditii - ix + marca? in ppetui affignatum p arbitto bonoy viroy
in decimis bladi trarum iftarum - f - de Butheatheroc - de Polmate
Elwyn - de Polmafe Weland - de terra Conft> q*m Rob Camb tennit
eo tempe - De tra Hug Peur iux* fulelecehes - 7 de Crofto fuo in
peo - Monachi % fimitr p bono pacis quicti clamattunt abbi 7 Candi-
cif de Kamb3k offic jus qd dicebant fe tire in cafilla de Dunipaft 7
in decimis fupius noiatis - Et q'a pax fub pdéa forma in? ptes plocuta
no fuit ut decuit in fe'pturam redaéta? nots de auc® mandati aplici ad
pacem ppetuam int pdvas abbias pficiendam 7 contirmandam diligen?
intendentib3 de confilio uirorum p"dentum - in? abbem 7 obdchof de
Dunf* ex vna pte 7 abbem 7 Candeof de Cambsk ex alia pte - Anno ab
inearnadve dni - co’ - ce? x°- vee ix kt Nouemb in Ecéa pochiali de
Perth ita amicable connenit - q@t pax int cof priuf plocuta 7 formata cit
oii integritate Suabitur inx® “qd fupius continetur - Hoe adiecto qd dis
abbs 7 Coiituf de DunP: ad increfiitum eoy 4 ptuf fuerant abbi 7 Candicis
de Kamb3k affignata dabunt eis annuati - j - celd"m farine auenicie
pacablis de decima bladi polmafe Ref ifr. xv- dies a die Pented nutlandos
ap polmafe - Ita q@t @dchi numlabiit pais cano™ q° die inf pdéof. xv -

dief pati fit folile - Et fi cafu aliquo albutra ps impedita fiuit q minus
die noiato fiat foto? hoe nd obftante - alio die inf* eofdem - xv - dief ad
mandatii jonachoy fatiffiat - Et Pea Pra illa @ dr Pra Candicoy ius”
motndint q"m Rex DD dedit ad fundaéim abbie de Kamb3k remanehit
Ba 7 quieta candicis de Kamb3k ci oi integ*tate tam in tempalib3 q*m
in fpualibs - Ita tn qd non liceat eis i cadem tra - neq, ectam - neq
capHam - neq, oratoriit conftrucre - Saluis tam pd@is monachif' qm Candicis
omibs aliis poffonibs q*s die q? féa fuit hee compo tenuerit - Et ut hee
compo fat*is tempib3 rata 7 ipeufla pfeneret ? appone figilloy froy - 7
appofige figillorum utriufq, Conintuf - 7 alioy proboy viroy qui huic
compofiéoni intfuerunt ? eft corroborata «



--- Dunfermline_page183.png ---
216,

SEC. X11] DUNFERMELYN. 13]

De Controttfia Inter Login 7 Atherai -

Cvm canta que Peehatur ind cooniales de NorthBwieh agentes cx vna pte
+ eonachof de Dun? defendentes ex alta fup decimis Bladi 7 pifeii 7
motndini de Atherey 7 de Cornetuii auc’ dni pp abbi de Neubott 7 fuis
conindicibs cdmitterct® in hie modi - Honoy Epé - 2+ Snoy di - dildis
filiis de Neubott 7 de Sta Crnee abbib3 - 7 Syiti de Lindc$ Candico
Dunkeld Saltin - Et apt tnd - Dilée in xPo filie-  - p'orifla 7 Conitintus
monialiti de NorthBwich Ciftciet ordinis not oqueftione mon{t*runt - qa
abbs 7 Coniintus de Dunf* - 7 quidam alij {i Andy 7 Dunblaii diog - fup
quibsdam_ deeimis 7 reb3 aliis ininriantur eifdem - ioq, dile'oni - ve - p
apli® fe'p - maim? - qin? - ptihs conno™ - aud“ - cim - 7 appHone remota
fine debito Pminetis - facientef qd dec'tlitis pcen™ ecéaftied firs - obSuari -
Teftes aué qui filint « no". fi. fe. g®- od - ut ti fubt*x ? p cenfuram
eandem appHie cellante cogatis Qitati teftimait phiBe + Qed fi nd . ds -
hiif ex - pd - int’s duo- ue + ea nich - exeq‘nt® - Dat - Viebij + Noi
feby - Pontif fri anno - iii? - 7 peca chi faq eebatur in? Pdtos w@dchof
agentes - 7 pd@as coniales defendentes fap decimis omib3 de Kinbrith-
mund 7 decimis pifeii de parochianis fuif’ de Nithbren aue* dni pp - 7
ee abbi 7 fuis coniudicibs omittetur in hie modi - Honoy Ep - g.
+ di- diltis fillis de Keleh 7 de welros abbibg - 7 arch Laodoii sti Andy
7 Bete dioé Saltm - 7 aplit tnd - Conquetti ft nob abbs 7 Cofitul’ de
Dunf qd cit in? ipos ex pte vna- 7 W - rectorem Ec&e de Kilconchath
diot {Gi Andy ex alta fup q'b3dam decimif coram officialibs fti Andy
non ex delegaGne aplica quettio verdetnr 2 dés rector Ga fubt'fugij fedem
aplicam appHauit - 7 licet officiales ipi ci? appttoni detulerint retlenter ¢
ipe in cam inf* temp? Iegitimit pfequi non curauit - dq, difereddi - ve -
p-ap-fep-man- q‘tin? fi eft ita ptib; uocatis audiatis cim - 7 appHone
remota? te debito Pminctis - facientef qd flatueritis p cenfara ecéaflica
firmi? obSuarj - Aliog'n ptef ad p'orum indicum remittatis examen -
Impet“utem in legitimis expufis condempnantes - Qd fi non offs + hiis -
ex + po- int’? duo - ve - ea - nich - exeq“nt* + Dat - Later iij Iduf maij -



--- Dunfermline_page184.png ---
182 REGISTRUM DE (SEC. SmI.

Pontificat? Sri anno pmo - 7 diucius coram Padif Judicibs in Pdéis eaufif
fuiff litigatum : tandé de edmuni affenfi 7 noluntate peium eleéti fant
-H- 7 H- de Keleh 7 Drieburg abbes - 7 wagri- 5 - de lillifeliue- 7 W -
de Edenham 7 diis Neff de RameS in hie modi - f- yd diis abbs de Dunf*
tub facraftito - Wbi Witatis pro fe 7 fo Cofitu exaaus a Pddis eleétis in
aumieables compofitores 2 nudam titatem fedm qd ife noff; diet cis de
reb3 T utroq, iudiG petitis - Simitr ex pte monialii de confenta dni Neth
de Rame$ procuratoris earum ad componendi conftituti ? dna Aelicia
fupprorifla de North ei exaéa fuiflet ab eifdem compofitorib; - nudam
ilitat® fedm qd ipa noff;- tub fieraiite Ubi titatis p fe 7 tho Contntu
dret eis de Ptatis rebs in utroq, indiGd petitif - 7 Pdzi compofitores
examinatis diligent déis PdZoy abbis 7 fupp'oriffe « Pldas Gones amieatlit
dePminarent «7 qd ab cisdem get dém in? ptes - firmiter 7 inuiolabliter
obSuaretur Cum g* paz compofitores in Pfatis caufis diligentem fatent
inquifigom - 7 Pd@as plonas fup Ritate q'm ex fe ipit: ut Tp alios juratos
feire ut inquirere poffent diligent’ examinarent 7 pot diligentem hi?
indagaéom de viroy p"dentum confilio phono pacis int paéa monaftia
7 ppetua hnde 7 conferuande 7 ad lites fup Pdéis in ppetud fopiendas
Pasi compditores in pfatis caufis ordinatiunt in hic modi - Scitt qd
«@dchi de Dunf fii p*dicédne 7 moleftia foluent annuati cdialib; de
Northb - iij- ecld fariii aueni@ de decimis de Cornetuii 7 villa de Cormetuii
p manit miniftrantis p tempe in Ecéa de ftuclifi ad pateh - pftito a minif:
t'nte 7 déa Eeta juramito ad illas ftatuto Ymino foldindas - Pea pate
mdiales hebunt fii cont‘dicédne 7 moleftia tota decima motndini tinue
multure de Atherey 7 de Cornetui ef tota feqnela pd motndini

Pdéis u* monachif’ falue 7 quiete ab omi clamio 7 quettione remane-
bunt ofiis deeime garbarii 7 pifeium ta de Athes
ifs oceidentem - a eapite de la chancee px’ inx hofpitale ufq, ad
petera de Athey - pfubtus hofpitale - 7 ita cea auftralem ptem ili?
petere p follam Ufus Burgreuifflat - 7 ita per aliam foflam {fas villam
de athey ¢ wfg, in rival q' dr Gelfraifburne - ficut illas contietunt
peipe - Et de illo riuulo ult monté ufq, in Glackinlouy - ita ug, in
Albethy » 7 ita ufqg, Alun / pe decimas cui#dam pticule de Burgreuit:

q'm de Cornetuit



--- Dunfermline_page185.png ---
SEC. X11] DU ERMELYN. 133

7 . itis peteram q folet arari fifus villam de Athey 7 ponté de ft'uet
Et pe + vi» Croftof g‘fnannoy de Athey 7 onis delues eoy de quib;
qbiales peipient decimas - Pea wdiales peipient ofis decimat « de Athey
fuuf orientem in? pnotataf dinifas 7 Ectam de Login - pe decimaf’
de floris - 7 cui%dam pticte fre in pte orientali illi? uie que ducit de
hofpitali ufg, Athey o g's dé coonachi peipient - Cum aut wdchi decimas
Prarum hofpitat iacentinm int la chaucee - 7 Cometuii q's cdiales illis
omino quietas clamant optinucrint 7 in pace habuint ipi_ mdialibs déis
decimas def florf efi alia pticula s' adiacente ? quietas clamabit - 7
ppetuii - Decime u° de Kinb'thmid 7 decime pit
Nithbren qi applictint in pochia de Kilconeath redeundo de piteaone

i de pifeatoriby de

q's wdchi Pdz petierunt ? falue 7 quiete in ppetui ab offi clamio 7
quettione remancbiit Eeée de Kileonchat + Vt ati hee ordinacd 7 difpo'
robur ppetne firmitatis optineat / edficitur inde fe'ptura in modi eyro-
graph - cui? yna pt’ relidebit penef @onialet de NortBwich - eit figitt
venablia. pat? . W. Epi {@ Andy 7 A» Dunblaii Epi - 7 ci figit
Pdtoy Judica delexatoy +7 PdToy compoitoy 7 ei figillo Capli de Dun? -
Altera u° ps hui? fi'pture cit Pfatis figitt feitt Epoy 7 Judiet Bdtoy - 7
compditoy » 7 Cum figillo Capitli de NorthBwieh - penes @onachof de
Dun? velidehit «

Controtifia inter Bennauchtin 7 Cupre -

Ojmiihs has litPas vifwF vi audit - Be 7 G. de ounem’e 7 de Ruftinot
pores +7 1D. deeanus de Aneg?- 7 I. 7 H- de Keleh 7 de Dr'eburg abbes
7G. por de Coldigha Salim - Duo paria litPay dni p PP fufcefe! in hee
tba - Honoy Ept 8. Suoy di diléis filiis de cunemee + 7 de Ruttinot
And 7 ABdoi dio® fal - 7 aplé bud - abbs
de Cup" nob expofuit eongrendo - qd abbs 7 Cofit? de Dun? . 7 J - clic?
And 7 Dunkeld dicot f¥ Ecta de Bennacht 7 rebus aliis iniuriant®

p'oribs 7 decano de forfar Sc

eidé - ioq, diferegdi tre p aptica fe'pta mandants quin? + p"> ouocatif’
+ remota ? fine debito Pminctis facientes qd deere-

audiatis cm + 7 app’


--- Dunfermline_page186.png ---
134 REGISTRUM DE [sec. xin.

uitis p cen™ « eccafticam firmit obSuari « Teftet’- aut q': fu-no-fi-Se-
© - odio - ut timore - fubt*x / p cenfuram eandem app™ ceflante cogatif
Qitati teft - phiBe + Qd fi- nd s ofis hiis - exe - po - intée? dn-ue-ea-
nictiomi? exey“ntur - Dat Latait - ij? - Kt Nouemts - Pontificatus iri
anno - iij? + Tlonoy - Epé 9.9. di diltis filiis de Keleh 7 de Drieb’g
abbib3 7 p'ori de Coldigha diot fti Andy Salt - 7 apt - tnd - Querelam
dil@oy filioy abbis 7 Coniint? de Dunf: recepimus continété - qd eum in?
ipos ex pte vna 7 abbem - de Cupro Cifteich ordis - Sti Andy diod ex
alta - fup Eeta de Bennachtin 7 reb3 aliis coram decano de forf 7 coniu-
dicibs fuis auc’ ira Qo Rteretur ? ijdem fencientef ex co indebite fe
g“uari qd a@a Judieij sedm genat ftatuta concilij redige noluerunt i
fe'ptif) firam audientiam appHarunt - Quoc'ea diferegdi ve - p « ap- fe'p -
man - q“tinus fi eft ita - reuocato in ftatii debiti q'eq'd inuenitis poft
appHom hi? terme att@ptatii : in ta ipa iux” p'oy continenciam litday
appHone remota Fone Buia peedatis - Alioq’ns ptes ad yorum judict
remittatis examen - appllantes ¢ in expntis legitimis condempnantes - Qd
fi nd « offis - hiis ex + po - int»? duo + ve + ea + nichomi? exeq“nt® - Dat
Lavaii - ij? - kt Junij . Pontif* fri anno - v’- Ci g* auc’ Littay iftay coram
nots ind wBeho! de Cup” ex vna pte 7 @dehof de Dunt ex alta diucius
Yo fiteretur / tandem poft multas alPoagonef eadé qo hoe fine in? eos
amieablit conquieuit - Videt q+ abbs 7 @dchi de Dunf 7 hoies fui Pras
quas hueriit contiguas ci terri’ @dchoy de Cup’ - f + Cup’maceulti -
Bennachtin - 7 Kethee p easdem diuifal’ 7 ppetuii tenebiit pacifice : p q*s
eas tenueriit aii litem mota int illos - Ita tn qd tota petaria g eft in?
Blare 7 Cupmacculti 7 Bennaché ticut pamtilata fuit cord Pdéis abbihs 7
aliis viris fide dignis  d@is «chit de Cup’ quicta remanebit in ppetui -
eo faluo qd hoies de Bennachtin 7 Cupmacculé finglis annis hebunt de
eadem petaria - ce. Carratas petay p affignagiém monachoy de Cup® -
hona fide cis faciendam - Loco cong’ 7 tempe oportuno - Hebunt infup
@@chi de Cup? Viam p Pras de Bennachti - 7 Cupmaceulti pro tempe
cdpetenté - fine p fram fit paqtm- pq"m viam liciti fit eis 7 vecturis
fuis fre je 7 a&um ad pdtam petariam - Wits 7 Arcombaldus q' d@as
Pras tite tempis de @onachis de Dun? tenuerunt ¢ tadtis faerof tis ew ngliis



--- Dunfermline_page187.png ---
» Anno dni - «m+ ee? x:

sec. x11.) DUNFERMELYN. 135

p fe 7 heredibs tuis Jurattunt - q fup pddis via 7 petaria? Pldis wdchif
nilam in ppetuii p fe ut p alios moleftiam infent ut grauamen - Tenebunt
% fepedti mdchi de Cup’ de Pfatis mdchif de Dunf in ppetua de aflenfu
7 voluntate dni Tug tie Epi Dunkeld 7 ci9%dem Eeée Capli Eetam de
Bennacht et offib3 ptinene + Reddendo eiflem mdchif de Dunf
annuati - ij - ore argent 7 dimidia ad duos tminos - med - f- ad Ponte?
7 alia med ad feft 1% artini - omia oa Pdse Ecte aducnientia: in
ppetui fuftinendo « Q' fi qd abfit aliqii a fotone pdde peeiic ceflaftint ¢
fubieceriit fe jurifdédi diocefani Epi - ut ipe cof nd obfiante appHone
poffit compile ad pdéam folugim faciendam - Hane afi amicabilem com-
pofigm in ppetuii valituram ? nof indicef delegati auc’ dni fp q* funge-
bamur in hae pte confirmauimus - huie fe'pto in rei gefte teftimdiii figilla
iira apponendo - Vna ef figitt dni - IL. diocefani Epi - 7 Capli Dunkeld -
7 parcii -

Concordia in? Thomam de Laftalric 7 oagim Ricardum pfonam de Halis -

x°-vj°- Die {Ge fidis Virginis - f&a eft finat concordia
int Thoma de Laftalrie ex vna pte - 7 magim Rié pfonam de Hat noie
ede de Mat ex alta - de confentiu + aflenfi. dni WiHi abbis 7 Coniintus
de Dun? « f+ qt pads Thofii 7 hedef fui habebunt flagni: motndini sui de
Tat ficut flagnum iHd fuit Pddo die « Ita qa nd exftendent flagnum fai
afar tra Eete plus qm fuit illo die. Hebunt % ples Th 7 hedes fui
moindinii ci midelhope - 7 milnecroft uly, an grofla pet"m ficut dts Th
illo die huit - Habebunt % % ipi 7 homies fui TiBum acceffiam 7 veceffum ad
motndini p magnam viam + Pfona u° hebit noie Eeée a puomiata grofla
pet® totum refiduii Pre ufq, ad foflatum q a a fem fuit p diuifa ci
dimid Seyittun - ifus faleys - fieut diis - If. Ep Dunkeld 7 dis Wits
abbs de Dunf? illo die puiderunt « Hebit pd@a Ecta ilam portiunélam
tre q iacet int gardinum Ecée 7 magnam viam q tendit fas molendinum -

Saluis  Eete tris 7 poffoibs quaf’ PdGo die pacifice poffidebat « Vt*q, u°
pars conceflit - qd fi alta illay ab hae eoncordia refilire uolfit? dif Ept



--- Dunfermline_page188.png ---
219.

136 REGISTRUM DE {s

. NUL

Dunkeld poffit pté refilienté compelle p exedicaéom apptone remota ad
ftandum concordie fée - Vt ait hee concordia rata pmaneat 1 ppetnii
dée ptef altnatim huic fe'pto figilla fua appofuerunt - Et ad maioré hui?
rei feenritat® ¢ dis - H- Dunkeld Ep@- 7 diis - W- abbs de Dunf>. 7
dis - W - de Bofeh arehid Laodofi - 7 diis Tho} cancel - 7 @agr - W -
arehid Dunkeld vtriq, pti hui? fe'pti figilla fua appofuerunt -

Der Craggis 7 Gorgin -

J. di gta abbs de Lundors «7 IE eadem p'or de {to And. 7 Ptor de

Lundors - vnititis x* fideli 5 ad q’s pfits fe'ptii puenit Salim etnam In
dno - Noflit Vnitfitas fra q Ede mandato dni Pp Glam Ga Qeeret® ink
abbem 7 Con" de Dunf . 7 @agtm Ri& reétoré eete de Hat ex vna pte -
7 abbem 7 Con" de {ta Cruce cx alta fF decimis de Craggif de Gorgin :
Tadem de Confentiu peiwm lis in? ptef mota: fie fopita amieatilit’ con-
qreuit - fq pdd abbs 7 Coit? de Dunf - 7 wag. R- rector dée eete
de Tat p fe 7 fuceefforibus fais 7 ppetua Pie liti renunciatiunt fab hae
for’ -f. qd Pus abbs 7 Cofit? de f%a Cree dalunt p bono pacis finglis
annis voit bifancitt uf - ij - fot ad fefti £ti wartiii ad Iuminaria innenicnda
in ecda {@i CnthBti de Hat - 7 fic omis cont'tifia in? ectaf fai CuthBti de
Hat 7 {Gi CuthBei fubtus caftellum de Edenb?g ceflabit 7 ppetuiti » Nos
n° judicef delegati hane pd@am amicablem compdm aue" dni fp qua
funadi fuimus tempe iftius compdnis confirmauimus - 7 figilloy firoy
corroboraéone cOmuniuimus - Vna ci figitt veniablis prif fri Epi (ti And
+ Capitli fui. 7 figitt abbis 7 Conuent? de Dun? 7 figillo wagri Ric
rectoris dée Eeée de Hat - Teftibs . H- Epo Dunkeld - Wagro Laurent
arehid £% And - magro @atho cance dni Reg - W - de Bofcho archi-
diacoii Laodoii - Rad nigro decaii Laodoi - Magro Petro de Rame& -
Gilleb de Sttuct 7 Andy clicis dui Re& - Rit 7 Hugo efieis - W - de
Botch » Et multis aliis «



--- Dunfermline_page189.png ---
220,

SEC. XIE] DUNFERMELYN. 137

De decimis molendini de Dregerii -

W «7 R- di gia abbes de Cup’ 7 de abbroth - 7 W- p'or de Cup” oimib;
xpi fidelib; has littas vifuris vt audituris Salim Etnam In dno. Notit
vnitifitas tra q cum de mandato dni pp fteretur cont*tifia coram nob int
fies hofpitat 1¢i Leonardi de Edents- 7 magtm Rid pfonam de Tat fup
decimis motndini de Dregeri fie amicabtr conq'enit - f+ qd Pdidi tes
fei Leonardi de Edent tenebit in ppetui offis decimas motndini de
Dreger) de Eeéa de hat +7 p bono pacif finglis annif foluent Ecée {Gi
CuthDti de Hat ad luminaria Tuenienda in pnoiata Ecta - iij - fot - f- xviij -
dad Pentet 7 - xviij-d- ad feftum {Gi wartini - 7 fie oMis econt*uertia in
ppetui ceflabit - Hane aii paet 7 amieablem compdm in ppetuii valituram
nos Judices delegati auc® dni Pp q* fungebamur ¢ confirmam? - 7 appone
figilloy firoy 7 abbis 7 Conuent? de Dun? 7 ptinm ¢ eOmunimus - Valeat

An
vyniiifitas Fra In duo -

De Ecéa de Innirkethin -

Q)emoranda qd eum Contenéd Rteretur in? dim abbem 7 Cont de Dunf
ex pte vna 7 vieat de Inuirket ex alta fup folu@ne peciiie pmiffe dno
legato a fingtis Ecéiis paroehialib; Regni Scot . déo vieario pponente
déos abbem 7 Conneni teni p Rata porédis q* ibidem peipiunt - @onachis
uv’ cont*ria aflerentib; - Tandem ap Vétermokethin ptib; 7 Caplo ibidé
celebrato p peuratores time conftitutos compentibs - lite legitie eonteftata -
plato monachoy inft'mento - in quo talis ptinebatur artiets - Vidert qd
clici ad pfentagddm Ph de aub- 7 G- vxoris fue 7 hedum fuoy 7 eadem
7 omnibs aliis onihs refpondebit - Q’ artidlo

Eeta ittituendi de Ep
diligenter infp*to - decreuit ibidem capittm déos @oiichot' a folugone d&e
pi? foldm fentenciatr
eondempnantes - In cui? rei tefti® dis - A - archid fi Andy - 7 @agr -
W «de mortuo mari: officiat dni Epi. 7 @ichacl decanus de fif Sigilla

aah . ey ee
peeuic libos fore 7 Tmunes - pd&m Viearid ad

s


--- Dunfermline_page190.png ---
990

138 REGISTRUM DE [sec. Nau.

fua pfenti fe'pto appoterunt - Tefte Caplo - Act ap Vetmokethi - anno

gte + + ce”. xP. Q*rto kt apt -

Item - De Eeéa de Inuirkethin -

Aéa ab incarmacde dui anno - «0° + + ii? - die m*rtis px" p?
felt {ti co*rei Eun‘ngtifte i Ecta de Inuirket cora dno Rad pore de oay
gerente vices abbis de Paffet ad tota cm - 7 wagro - J - rectore feolay de
sto and Fente vices Deeani de Leuenax fimitr ad tota cim-In ta q

Veitur Int dim - abbem 7 Coniint de Dunf ex yna pte. 7 diim Ph de

couby + 7 G+ uxorem ci? ex alta fup Gwarantace garbaraii de Inuirk -
ptibs p’ “ty compentibs « Ci in déa Ga inter ptet’ Get diucint’ litigath

spe
multas hine inde alteacdes 7 7 {Gas 7 jure ofeffiones - p q's judieibs, lesitie
oftabat dim + P+ de mab 7 Gey orem ei? ad guarantifaGom déart
garbart ius forma Carte 7 compdis int déos abbem 7 Con" 7 ipof ptus
inite fore obligatof's tandem mediantis judicibs 7 eoy affeflorihs int ptef
in hie modi amicatlis compo inteeflit - @d- f. dis P+ de wud jurauit
tattis fhe'ttis ew'ugliis fe de ceto fidetr 5 fii malo ingenio carta fua 7
compo bona fide obSuatura » Et qd in Plentagone dium Cficoy a deo -
P. > G-vxore ei? plentandoy + ds decimas garbari: de Invirket in utis
qonachoy de Dunt> coneeflas ? excipict - Et fi contingat qd aliq'f diéi
abbem 7 Contint fup déis garbarum decimis iquictare pfapsit : dis. P.
7 G-yxor ei? a tempe ex quo cis deniiciati fuit ? fi mora fub corpali
fac"mento p? pilito déas decimas cif defendent - Et ad hi omia fidetr
obSuanda ¢ dna» G+ Vxor dé +P - corpale pftitit fhe* mentii - Judices
w au dni pp q* fangunt?® iftam amicablem compom int ptef i ppetua
obSnaturam diftinitine ex ofntu ptii intlocnti fat - 7 7 ipam | figilloy fuoy
z dni abbis 7 p'oris de Culenros 7 alioy phoy hott fefunt  roborari
appone -



--- Dunfermline_page191.png ---
29

. Oimihs has litt - vituk y ut auditu

SEC. NUE] DUNFERMELYN. 139

De Balweri -

J-7P. de lund 7 de Seon" di ¢
abbes 7+ 11+ ptor de Seo etna jn ana fat - Notitis vnitli qd it mota
Set ot uerfia int dim Witt di eta abbem 7 Cont de Dun? ex yna pte >
de Balweri ex alta fup tota tra de Balweri enm ptinenciis fuis q%m

Rie
ijdem abbs 7 Cofit? illicite alienata aflerebant 7 c& reuocare nitebant® p
lietat ani p i ad nos fab he for* impetratas - Grex Ep S.S. di dileit
filiis de lindors 7 de Seo abbib3 7 pori de Seo {ti And dive salt. 7
apt biid - Sigifieantib; abbe 7 Con" de Dunf nob inotuit qd quidam
Baeceffores coy q‘sdam tras monattio fio a regihs S is fidelibs
p fratri: 7 hofpiti fuftentacde collatas q'bsdam tuif familiarib; in enorme

cot ae a

padi monattij difpendia ocefferunt - 7 optinuertit pceffiones fuas affenfa
rj + Vil petebant vt fubuenire fup hoe ipi monattio p reuo-
caddis biiticiii dignaremur - ioq, difereddi- ve - p-ap + fe'p - mafim?. qt.
tras eafle fi alienatas inucnitis ilicite ut diftraéas / ad jus 7 pp'etaté
agi monattij - oeeflide Pdéa yz affenfir regio non obftantib; legitime
renocetif’- Cont*déores p cenfuram ectaftied appllde p2pdita competeentes -
4d fi n6 offs hiis - ex®* - po « inBe zy duo + ve - ea- niehn? - ex ceq"ntur +
Dat Lataii - yj - 1d? Jui. Pott? tri anno - iiij’ - Tandem dé abbs =

regio robora

Coit? in Plencia jira de fpontanea Voluntate fua reniciantes oii actoni

{up illicita alicnagoe citdem tre o” dem Rié ut Redes fuot competent ¢
concefferat eidem Rid 7 hedibs fais in ppetud totam d&am tram de
Balweri ea fuif reétis diuifis + ptineneiif’ - 7 ct IBtate conftrnendi
motnding in cadem tra - 7 et Bihs aliis livitatihs q's aitceffores fai in
eadem tra hueriit vt hre Acbuerunt fedm tenorem carta¥ fuar - Reddendo
anna" de fe 7 hedibs fuis in ppetua domui de Dun? - vj - cr legalit
ftlingoy + ced ad Pentet - 7 aliam med ad fefti S wartini px’ fejns in
hieme + Ipe 7 Rit 7 hedes fiyj facient forinfeed Suicit dni Reg q*ntii ad
eandem tram ptinet - Sepefati u° abbs 7 Coiit? p fe 7 fuceefforibs fuis in
ppetua - 7 Rig p fe 7 hedibs fu ppetui pmigunt fe compdm iftam
fideli?’ Suaturos - fubicientes te jurifdcdi fire 7 fuecetloy troy Siam qui



--- Dunfermline_page192.png ---
140 REGISTRUM DE [SEc. XIII.

pro tempe flint - Vt fi aliqii ipi ab hac forma pacif refilierint : nof
diftetius compHemus eof p cenfuram Ec@aftica ad ofiia fup‘déa plenarie
7 fideli?. ob3nanda » Nos g' ad inftanciam ut" wf, ptif hane forma pacis
ci dibs articulis 7 ea contentis anc dni fi bp q* fungimur in h*e pte -
confirmam? - 7 eam in poftam ppetuam detnimus optine firmitaté - Ad
maioré ait hui rei feenritat® oficitur inde fe'pt’a in modi Cy Tog" “ph -

cui? vna ps figitt iris 7 figitt Buoiati Ri munita penes mone aftium de
Dunfmet remanebit - Alta v° fimitr figitt frit 7 figillo Capli de Dun?
roborata et fepedto Rid 7 hedihs fuis refidebit -  Hiis - B - Buo Henk de
abimnith - Bno wich feott - oagro Hen¥ de Norham - Philipp de Lochor -
Gillets de Cles « Johe de Balby » Ad de Keleh - Aftiti - 7 coultis aliis -

Der multura de Edmundiftun -

. Sciant tam Pfentef qm tut?i q ci contend in? diim-+ W abbem 7

coniint? de Dun? ex vwa pte. 7H. filit - E- ex alia fup multura de
Edmundift mota fuifl; ¢ tandem mediantib3 q'bs a uiris diferetis +
ut'ufq, ptif’ amicis int ptef’ ouenit fub h*e fort. f- qd dés H- 7 hedes
fui dabunt Pdéis abbi 7 Coniintui 7 fuccefforibs fuis p bono pacis 7 iam
mota lite fedanda : fingtis annis - xx - fot - ftlingoy + foluendos 7 domo
ipi? - IL - ap Edmundifi ad duos timios - mediet - tad Pent 7 aliam med
ad fettum {Gi coartiti - Ita q ipe- H- 7 hedes fui fii p"dieédne ali’ in
tenura illa habeant motndind 7 fabrieam 7 b‘cinam - VE alibi ubi noltint
st-7 fuis querant - 7 ut habeant omia aifiadita 7 i quib3 s' 7 fuis 7 eadé
tenura fedm tenoré cartay fuay melius potunt puidere - 7 %jura 7 IBtates
ofis q“s aficeffores fui pleni? optinuerunt - Vt ati h - Coninés robur
ppetue firmitatis optineat ? pti hui? eyrog“phi q remanebit penes dém -
Il - 7 hedef fuof appditur figilla Capli de Dun? . 7 pti que refidebit
penes conachot de Dunf ¢ apponunt? figna dni Nefli de Rame’ - =
agri - Pet? - de RameS - Vna citi figno memorati Henrié -



--- Dunfermline_page193.png ---
xu] DUNFERMELYN. Vel

Ind kyrealdi 7 dytart -

Vnitfis has littas uifat ut audit’is: Abraham di gta epé Diblanci +
Gilbert? e%dé loci ardcacoi » 7+ W + abbf’ de feona etna in duo salt -
Mandata dni Pp Th tba fufecpim? - Honori? ept Suut Suey dei venabili
fri. Epo 7 diltif filiif’. Archid dunblaii - 7 abbi de feona dioces
falé 7 aptam biideDem - Querela Atti filii - fimonis de nofiaco r‘torif’ ect
de difard recepim? edtingtew - qd abbs 7 cSuent? de dunt in Diet sti
jane’

si andree

andree fup capHa de kircaldin ad eandé eeéam de inre {peétante 7
eid’ - Tdeog, diferecdi fire p aptica fe'pta madam? q“tin? ptibz eduoeatis
audiatif eaufa 7 applldue remota fine debito Yminetif - facientef qd
Teftef aii q* fuerit nojati -

eandé ceflante appHoe

deerellitif p cenfurd cetatticd finmit obferu:
fi fe gta - odio - ut timore - ftit‘xerit 7 p
cogatis Witati teftimonia - phiBe -Qd fi nd offif hiif exfegndil potititit’
ie x tu ea frat efe ci coy alto nichilomin? exfeq‘rif- Dati vit bit -
vii id? feby pdtificat? iri anno q‘rto- Ci g" hui? autoritate mandati

aliq*mdiu ve ptef’- fcilies fimoné de Nofiat ex una pte - 7 abbaté 7 edueti
de dunferiti cx alfa cord not Get alPeati - Tandé poft pluref’ citacdes 7
miflion’ i poflefdin Ga rei Suande a nob feam ptef pdée unanimi? ofentert
7 dim lau¥ Archd séi Andree 7 magtim ftephanii de lillefet 7 diim {¥mone
eapHaii dni epi in he modi - videlies ut ipi taq‘m indicef delegati de
Pada ta appllde remota cdgnoftent +7 ea fentneia diffinitia Pminarét + ut
amicabilit’ 7 legitime ppondt in? ptet’- Ci ati cord Pao ardeacono 7 fnit’
collegif de Pdta Ga Get aliq*mdiu agitatii / ptef Ptate itato de comii
afféfu unanimit fe fbiceerit ordinaddi fire 7 Pdtoy electoy fide media
firmit pmittétef qd rati 7 grati: inppetua herent - Qteq'd nof una cit
ardeacono 7 collegif fuis duéem? ordinadii » Nof ati de cdfenfu 7 auc"
venabilif’ prif fri. Wilelmi epi {ti Andree loci diocefani 7 pat°ni ecée de
difard hito niroy prudnti eSfilio Tt eetam de difard 7 ectam de Kireald
fie ordinauim? 7 ftatuim? ippetua p bono paeif’ ob8uadi - feilies qd ecéa
de kireald finglif annif ecte de difard - Cctii fot felingoy ploltvet p firma
pace hnda int d@af cetaf ad - ii. Pminof’- f+ medietaté ad feltii sti


--- Dunfermline_page194.png ---
2206,

142 REGISTRUM DE [st

. NUL

martini. 5 med ad pétecoft> - ftatuim? % 7 firmi? phibem? ne ecta de
difard aliq'd iurif i cota de kirealt PP - e+ fot Patof de ceto s* polit
uédicare - Si quid w° ab aliq” peifi 9" hane nam ordinagm alig’ the fuit
Ipet"ti viribs carcat ippetuii. Et qd Pdea foto-e. folidoy fait Emini
fint cede de difard q' p the fit Ept {ti Andy puidebit 7 fi nede fit fine

allée 7 o“dicée p céfura cecttticum » Pdéam eecam de kireald ut qui ed
tenuerit cOpHet eo excepto qd q*m din magi? Wilelm? de grélau tenuerit
Bdgam cetam + abbf 7 dust? de dinferfi Pddof fot pfoluent . Et h fe'p-
tura T modi c¥rog“fi pcepta + ce? una pf ct figillo capituli de duntiti
remanebit penef diim epm {ti Andy + Alfa ue é figillo dni epi fei Andy
penct monachof de difii robur ppetue f'mitatif obtineat - Nof cam figit
frif vna ¢ figi Pd@oy ardeacoti 7 alioy & eo electoy roboranim? » Hit
teftihs - caiiro Thoiti de !

emu» oagre Ricardo de donnir - wagre
+ Wilelmo de
moford » Hug de nid - Rig de lidet - magro pat'to de 10 Andy - Wilelmo
de nid 7 multi’ Aliis -

@ichacle - Pet® eapHano - Wilelmo de Golin « Ri& cama

Publicatio ct Innouatio quarundam excommunicationis fententiarum -

In noie pris 7 filii + {pt fi amen - Cum ficut timet® q°mplures hiis diebs
tam clici q* laici ti p n'ligéciam - ti p ignoranciam i candes Jatara fitiari
sufPnsionis 7 exCbis filtiply incideft ¢ nos volentes tali pieulo remediit
quod poffum? adhiBe « ranimari faluti ptpie f@ ad ntm fpttat officit
q‘fdam e
follempnit

<Gdis filias a {tis patribs 7 Pdecefforihs fri

olim latas puidim?
publicandas 7 inouandas - vt p hoe meli? euitétur - 7 fi qui in
iPas inciderit ad refurgédii ab iH excitent® ne fang’s eoy de manih3 iiri
req'vatur » Autto’ g* dei offipotentis ac gtofe v'ginif wat 7 boy petri 7
pauli afloy - > bi Thome mart - 7 bi edwardi re& 7 cdfelloris - neend
factte aplice fedis 7 fira ex habidanti cautela hortam® - peipim? -
monem? + vt pturbatores iBtati ce?

eae pacis 7 t'nquillitatis dni Re&
regni - infap uotoy e"cefignatoy - 7 peg*nadédis in fubfiditt tre {Ge - rapto-
res 7 depdatores honoy deo dedicatoy + 7 eee fticari: q“rumlibet pfonari -


--- Dunfermline_page195.png ---
sec. Xi] DUNFERMELYN. 1s

ac facrilegi vnitisi 7 Pflantes opem vel opam » auxilid - cGfilit vel fanove -
p fuo pofle 7 poflibilitate fua zy de fui diocefani cdtilio lefa reformet -
ablata reftituit + 7 fua maleficia { circa Pmiffi comisint ¢ fludeant
efidare + 7a fimilibs abftinedt in futurii + ac st peurét abfolucdis hii
imptiri - Aliog’n omes illos q* feient? 7 malicole eetas p'uatit vel {polia-
Uint iure fuo - Lf offies illos q' ece"ftieas liBtates vel antiq’s regui

cit

cdfuetudies Jaudably appbatas «7 Peipuc iBtates 7 liBas edfuctudines 7

foresta a dno rege cdceffas

cotinent? in cartis cOmunit HBtati - od

arehiepis - epis + 7 cetis regni platis - comitibs ~ baronihs » anilitihs + lit
tenentibs qfeumq, arte vel igenio uiolaitint « ifregi
nt ¢ clam vel palan + £%o+ Vbo vel colilio cdt® illas vel cari aliq’m

it + diminuerit - feu

mutat
in q’cumg, articto tele veniendo - Item om
alig’m ftatuta cdiderit vel edita Suatlint  cdfuetudics int’duxerit vel
Sualiint int°dnetas - se'ptores Tt ftatutoy 7 fignatores coy - non cOfiliarios

7 exccutores + 7 eos q' fedm ca mpi indicare - lt 7 eos q' Tignorant

es illos q* cdtra ias vel ear

qeq® hoy eomisint » n* cOmoiti int" «dies a tempore monicdis fe

it + 7 arbit'o fuoy diocetanoy pene fatfetint de comiflis - Tt omes

corre

reg 7 regni Biiunpsine pturbare - follempui? niciam? i
fi
Plidio dampnabtr incidiffe - [é oifes y' de domibs - maneriis - g“ngiis « vel

illos q* paced a
maioris ex€dis

ama {Cis

patb; olim latam 7 aplice fedif cOfirmatam

locis aliis q'b3eiiq, ad are
feu q“fetiq, alias ece“ttic
aut familias eoydé@ - sen ¥ de loci

iepos + eos - abbes « pores - restores + Viearios -

pfonas ptinctes - vel eis pleno iure subivéta

ad cee™m vt ece“fticam pfonam

ptingétibs ei fint paupii 7 deo dedicata exiftat - qeq*m pe voluntaté aut
g‘tam pmiffioné dnoy - euftodiiue - feu balliuoy fuoy cape + rape - cofume
vel aufre PtumpSint + aut alias luitis vel ignorantib3 dnis rerai 7 euflodib;
ab eis deputatis attemptauint cdt%ttare - Infup omes illos q’ ad ectam vel
cimitiit imunitatis Ga confugiétes inde p te vel p alios uiolen? abi“Sint -
vel ipis cdfugis phibtint vel impedierit visti neeid miftrari - It ofties
's depditas niolen® afportatiint « sev peu

illos q? res alienas 7 locis fa

ve ve » Oe spe ogy . sto gx, n S

uint - mandauint - vel fecint aliq“lit afportari - seu ab aliis féam fuo noie

afportacdem ratam hnerit vel acceptam - aut tatr afptantib; res alienas
mous lis

eter fauore pltitint - ¢

publice vi occulte @ + opem - opam


--- Dunfermline_page196.png ---
L4t REGISTRUM DE (sec. Xur.

vel edfenft - Pretea offies illos q' uotit e%eefignatoy - vel peg*naéonit in
subfidit tre f&e impedire psumpSint vel turbare / follempnit niieiam? in
maioris excdis {hiam dampnabtr incidiffe - ae ée 7 fore hi? anathemate
fie ligatos - don® deo 7 eeée 7 lefis fatiffetint 7 abioluédis biitieit Muerit
optine «

Finalis edpoliG de abbethayn de kyrchinyhel - 7 {t*thardolf? -

Sciant offiet’- tam pfentes qm fut?i quod et contécio mota et int dim
abbem 7 couenti’ de Dunfmelyii - ex vna pte 7 Johem de Inchemartyii
filit’ 7 heredem quonda dni AleX de Inehemartyii ex alia Sr Pra quam dé
abbas 7 cOuentufad ectam fiam de ft*thaldolf* afferebant de inre ptine -
Tandem mediantibs vt'ufq, ptif’ amieif - int? ptes eduenit tub hac forma -

videlies q pdidi abbas 7 eductus pro fe 7 fuceefloribs fuis quiet elama-

taunt pdeo Jobi de Inchmartyii - 7 heredibs fais in ppetut oie inf 7
clamit quod in fra de abbethayii de kylmichel 7 de Lereuach habuerit
vel hre potueriit «Sa

uis eifdem abbati 7 cduétuj deeimif 7 oblagoibs 7
aliis que de inre canont ecte paroehiali debent® - p tribs m*reif’ fflingoy
4
coudtui de paisa tra de abbethayit ¢ ad duof Tininof’ anni - medietate
feilie; ad pentecoft 7 aliam medictaté ad feftii f%i martiii in hyeme -
Primo tino folucionis incipicnte ad penteeoften ani gfe + w+ ee’.
septuages » Nono+ Et falua padif abbati 7 cductui Pra Pdée eete adiacente
int’ duof rinulof

dés Johanii 7 heredes fui reddent annuatim inppetut pdéis abbi 7

x ut“q, pte p uallef in aq'm de ferdalf . deteendentet’ -
videlies ab orientali riuulo in pdatam aq‘m de Ferdalf defeendente p
nallem orientale - 7 ita afeendendo ufq, ad aeuos lapidum 7 puos colles
vfs boream se extendentes + 7 ita defecdendo p riuuli erentem p uallem
oeeidentalem sicut d@us riunlus defeendit in ag“m de Ferdalf* ex ocei-
dentali pte ecée + Si ue dé
ut Pnotatii é ad aliq’m {mind ultra tref feptimanas eeflailit ut eeffatint ¢
exedmunicet® ut excdmunieét? ab efio Dunkeld ut ei? ordinariis pro

s iohannet’ 7 heredes fui in foluédne facienda

tempe exiftentib; q'mdiu a déa foluGone eetftait uel ceflatint - Deni-


--- Dunfermline_page197.png ---
Xin.) DUNFERMELYN 145

ciando p te 7 heredib3 fuis omnibs - littis impet*tis 7 impet'nd yz omi
juris remedio canonici 7 cinilif. Et fi déi abbas 7 cduentus nel coy

; 5 ; Po A o. Bee tees ane
fucceffores cont® iflam eGuengdem aliq’ndo uenint - ofimili fentécie padi
cit?

epi fubiciant® donee defiftant - Et ad maioré hni? rei feetitate ¢6
hee fe'pt‘a in modi evrog' phi - Cui? parti: penet’ déos abbem 7 cduentit

refidenti ? déns Johannet’ de Inchemartyii sigilluam sui appofnit vna ci
figit doy Witt de Breyhyii 7 RoBti Cambruit de halgli®nauh militi :
q'ad inftanciam ipius iohis luie fe'pto sigilla sua appotuerit » Parti u”
penes dém iotim 7 heredet’ fuos remanéti / sigillii commune eapituli de
Dunfinet # yna cit figillif PdGoy militi & appentim -

De f'macone ftagni molédini de kyrealdyn -

Amno gic @” - ec’ + o& of - dnica px® poft fettum sé Johannis aii porta
latina fa eft h couseio int Rad abbem 7 7 oustii de Dunfinet ex vna_ pte
7 7 wichaclem feottii milit? 7 hedem tone! memorie Rig de halwery militis
ex alta. Vi idets q padi abbas 7 oust? fmabit ftagnii molédini fui de
kyrkaldy

expedi

@s s' vidint

fF tra Pati wichact 7 hedai fuoy 7 ppetu q’ei
et etm vtTuly, aque feits « aq’ crentif’ int walwery 7 InQtule -

zag’ int balwer$ 7 Pri de cilnetoii q'ete ad Pago | molédint fui poffi-
debit - pda u’- cichael miles + hedes fui toftir rogi Bit 7 7 Ses alias
tras I «ths, des Riés de nalwery miles obiit veftit? 7 fayfit? adco li

honorifice 7 q'ete sicut Pdés Rid de pldis abbte + cduentn eafilé tenuit ¢

T ppetutt poffidebiit + 7 annuati a molédinariis “pai molédini p tmpe
exiflentib; vnii par cirotecari: parifienS aut tres dena¥ ad f™ - t'nflaginis
be margarite regine peipiét - Et ad hie cSuenédsem Tuiolabili? obfernanda
veg, ps p se 7 fucceflorihs {uis 7 hedibs fe fide media obligauit - In evi?
rei teftim pti hui? fe'pti T modi evrog"phi ofeéi penef Pdgot abbem 7
cduentii + coy fuecetforet refidenti pd@s @ichael miles sigilli {ua appo-
{uit pti u® penef dm qichaelé 7 hedet suof remanenti sigillit comme
eapituli de Dunfmelyn eft appditum -


--- Dunfermline_page198.png ---
Deletur

229.

146 REGISTRUM DE [sec. xu.

Lia magift’ Witt de yetam -

Onnibs x" fidelibs ad _q’s Pfent> tre puenit Hug pmiffide diuina abbas de
Dunfit 7 eit loci conuent? salém 7 dno « Nollit* nos tenoF Pfent* oceffifle
cage’ WiHo de yeth*m clico fro totam Pra firam del Withnockes ci yna
ae® tre nup ptinente ad molédinii qd vocat* le feerrefif’ mit q* ac*
gaudeb! vfq, ad repagdem ei9dt molédini 7 ii vit* 7 ila carucata tre qa
Oxlad iacent* in teneméto firo de w%kilb’g ¢

Tened 7 hnd efi fuis reétis
diuifis de nots 7 fucceflorib; firis p toto tempe vite fue sibi vi suis aflig*tis
abfy, Oi exacdde decie 7 mult®e ¢ di tn ipas Pras vt aliq’lem ptem eardé
alio' potéciori se ¢ nd affignatlit J adeo liBe ¢ q'ete 7 plenarie : 7 pacifice ¢
sie nos eafd@ tras de dno rege aliq’ tépe tenuim? vt huim?? Saluis nob
hiis que ptinét ad corona 7 curia jira ci ptinené de eifd Pris ¢ salno %
nob bofeo iro de le Withenockes in dib3 2 qué ad op? nim dés Wits
tidetr faciet cuftodiri / Ita tn q ramoy amputandoy medietas ad op? dni
abbis 7 fooy fuoy cuflodiat® 7 7 alia medictas dé&o Witto remaneat p
voluntate fua difttbutda - Conceflim? eciai cidem p toto tpe vite fue
phédinagbem 7 s%tétagdem honefta p fe / vno clico / vt armigo q duit
eligédum : t'h; gar@dib3 7 t'bus equis ¢ vna cit camila honefta s* p se fine
cohabitage alic? altius spatr tenéd ci vno ftablo p détis garédib; fuis 7
eqs i 7 deliBagde facitda p nos détis garédih? 7 eq's dti wagri - W - sict
fit deliBaé® ¢ garébibs ¢ palef'dis ¢ 7 sumMariis abbis - Ifta Pnoiata heb!
dis wagr - W- toto tépe vite sue p fideli seruidd tuo? confilio ? 7
auxilio nob 1 dib; negociis 7 caufis monafterii fri impentfis 7 sumptib;
Bris fidelit p poffe suo ? ppetuo impédend - Volum? tamen q¢ si ptigat
d&m magim Witm 7 Epm promotij : d&@e Pre ad nos 1iBe retitant® . Et
extiie ¢ a phédinadde pda penit? ci fuis fit exclufus - Nos vero diétas
Pras cf ptineneiis 7 iBtatibus Piétis 7 déto wage’ Witto vt fuis aflig"tis ¢
vt fup" d@m eft p toto tépe vite dd magri Witti # cont* oiies hoies 7
feminas warédizabim? acq'etabim? : 7 defendem? - In cui? rei 7é -
Dat» 7é -



--- Dunfermline_page199.png ---
230.

SEC. XU] DUNFERMELYN. 147

Couendd de Halis f&a in? Abbem 7 dim de Lattalvik -

Anno ge «’- co’ - ofogefimo « q"rto - die Joti px" poft feftum séi Pet"
aduinéla fa eft hee cSuencd in plena euria dni rad - dei gia abbis 7
Conuent? de Dunfmelyii ap" oufekilb?g in? dém ditm abbem 7 Conuentii
de Dunfmelyn ex pte vna 7 diim Johem de Laftalrick milit? tenent® dzi
dni abbis 7 Conuat? de tra de Haljs 7 Symoné filii 7 hered® dé dni
Johis ex alta « videlicet q ds Symon tenebit Pram de Halis et ptinéciis
ad fuftétagdem fam p toto tempe vite fire. Saluis Bdéis abbi 7 conventui
seéta curie - Wardis - releu'

auxiliis 7 offiib3 aliis Suiciis ad détam tram
de Halis ptinentib; vi de iure ptine valentib; - 7 saluis dé Johanni
feodo 7 recto d@i teneméti de Hat. Ita q dés diis Johes dém Symoné
nf aliq'm alii sine licencia 7 confentu déi dni Abbis 7 Conutt? de Dunfiti
aliquo tempe inpoftum infeodare poflit - In c9 vei teff huic se'pto 1 modi
evrog“ffy cdfé&o parti pencs dém diim Abbem 7 Conuétii refidenti sigilla
ditoy dni Johis 7 Sfmonis filii sui ¢ vna et [figillo] dni Wiki de Séo
Claro tiie vicet de Edinb’g ? qui ad inftanciam 7 petiédem ptit vtriq,
pti hui? cyrogfli sigillum suit appofuit ¢ s
dém diim Johem 7 Symoné filit: suit refidéti
ett appenfium -

it appenfa ? Parti vero penes
gilli ede capiili de Dunfiti

Carta @olédini Viceco't

. Oifiibs ste mat’s cectie filiis Pens sc'pti vifuk vt auditu ¢ W - dei gfa

abb*s ecetie x‘ de Dunit 7 ei9@t loci humit Conuét? etna in dno fal -
Notié nos dediffe ¢ concefliffe 7 he carta fira conftmaffe Alano de
Swinton" vnii loci ad hnd molédinii fini Sr aq* de Efek 7 occidétali_ pte
molédi firi de Withenock> Sr eid eurfii aq? ci aifiaméto cdis paft?e cea
Pfe'ptii loci ad eq’s illne bladi deferentes 1 Hend 7 tenend s 7 hedihs
suis de nob 7 succefforih; firis Be 7 gete ab Gi Suies 7 exacéone -
Reddédo inde nots 7 sucé iris aiuati vni m*ré argéti ad duos Pmios- vids,


--- Dunfermline_page200.png ---
r

148 REGISTRUM DE (Sec. xu.

dimid m*ré ad Pent 7 difi mré ad f” séi wartii - ponédo % molédin’ fut
i plegiag q dém molédini nfm de Withenock nig* Taliq® occafide fui
molédi impediet® p bac flod ¢ Ipe vero Alan? 7 Redes sui suceeffine nots
7 succefloribs Bris homagiit de t&o teneméto faciét 7 fidelitaté in ppetui
nob 7 domui fire obSuabat » Ci a molédint brn ‘de Withenoch - t p
defétu aq’ vt frac ‘a fligni mole no potit 4 omes hdies de Elfinifton® q°
d&o Alaii opa molédinaria debit » cit hoib3 firis de feira de InQectek
omes defeétus tam ftangni q* aque reparabat - Si auté dtm molendini
de Withenoch p f'&%a lapid vt alic? altius rei no deficiente aq" ire nd
potit : molédinarii firi maliGofe nd sbt*hent ag* molédino sepefati Alani

qn ad itd liBe veniat don’ molendini nim repet® » Teft capiilo -

Adthangy -

(1) emorand q die venis px" pott Dnicam qua eantat® ¢ Quafi m” geniti -

Anno ani willio . Meentefimo Nonodecimo ¢ in pfencia dni Rogi de
@oubray ¢ Jufticiat p diim RoBtum dei ga Regé Seocie Mluftrem ad hoe
fpeciatr affignati apd Kynro8 facta fuit pambuladd fup r'tis diuifis Pre
de Authangy / que eft Reéttoris ecde de kynro$ in vicecomitatu loci
ei9dé + 7 sup cOmuna Tse eidé terre ptinéte Infup Sr exitu 7 int’itu de
d@a tra ad paftura s' ptinétem fitr fiebat Ing'ticd sr rtituilie q'm ht
Reetor ec&e Pnoiate in pifeariis Laci de Levyn - Ad que fidelit facienda -
lice {iit noia iuratoy - Scit; Bni Dauid de Wemys - 7 Roger? de wegten
wilites » Hugo de LouchoF - Pat'ei? de Crambeet - Witty de Crainbeth -
Aaeth de Kynros - Gy Bee fi ei9dé - wich Pagebrech - @omenauch medic? -
Aud¥ Gallelach - Herneus car? - walifi? Kenytt- Keffy de Culecarny -
Ruthricus de Balhathy . Crittini? Gayelach - Thomas faB . Jobes aac
- Andi clic? . Johes fi? Egok ¢ Gylys buy - 7 Cuben caugenach -
Qui iurati diXunt in vitute fac‘menti preftiti . f- q tra de Authangy
collata fuit eee Pd&e p Reg
tépe bone memorie ¢ Re§ Alexandri diuifis sbfe'ptis pacifice gaudebat
-f-ab auit'li pte wontis de Ardeno fic! vn? vet? pons fuit q*’nda 7 s'

s Scocie fucceflinue - 7 qt R*tores eete Pdte



--- Dunfermline_page201.png ---
sec, xiL.] DUNFERMELYN. 140

afeendendo p vni warifium Vtus boream + 7 occidenté p vai S¥ehetit se
extendenté apd Le Aly ex pte autt‘li de Inchehoch + 7 s° ab illo sycheto
q’ vocat® Very = fieut antiquus curs? illi? Syncheti erebat inf" le Aly +

s® afvendendo ad antiq* vii Regiam - 7 s°
aq"m de Northchuy
orient® ficut patet p metas faétas p pambulatores pfe'ptos vi} in tact de
Leuyn afidicdtum Jé id’ diXunt q Tra de Autangy het cOmuna paft‘e in
«ora de mauchehuy +7 ad déam pattura - exiti 7 int’iti - seit; - Lonyng
p lat? aquilonale de le Aly - [té diXunt q Reétores eete aiid&e huerunt
ab antiqe + 7 here debent de jure vnii cobelli 7 duas pofigdes yuatuor

Regia vt aq'loné ut, ad

7 8° p antiq’s ep _ Bnoiate deteendendo vs?

retium in pifeariis feped@is - [1 diXunt q tenentes tre de Athangy hebat
omioda foeale in déa mora quale alii vieini hut 7 eadé -]

Carta de yna ae* @ yna ptieata tre dat Sym fturi -

R. dei:
ste mat’s ecetie filiis han cartam vifur vt auditu® Salfm in dno - Nowitis
nos vnanimi confenfa 7 affenfu capitli fri dedifle concefiiffe 7 hac pfenti
earta fira confirmafle Symony fturi burgenS de wufk - filio qonda Johis

- Abbas eectie de Dif 7 ei9dem loci Conuent® humit - Omibs

fturi bur r eidem uille 7 heredibs fuis vt fuis afliguaf vna acra et vna
pticata tre iacét ifra tra q voeat® - le flucyiland - ex aquilonali pte de
Etk ite iro de wufk - Tei 7 hid d&o Syii -h- fuis 7 suis affigh de

nobis 7 s‘cefloribs -1iBe qete bit 7 in pace » Reddendo if annuatym
déus Symd +h - tui 7 fui affignati - nobis 7 s‘cefloribs fris vn denaiit
galis monete.ad f" Nat? bi J - baptifte « p Gi fuicio - exadide edfuetudie

vt demanda - In cui? rei 7% - telte capitto -

le

Carta de dereth [hoe & off faiandi -]

Omiibus hoe fe pti vifu vel auditu RoBtus dei gta abbas de Dunfinels nl
= ciufdé loci eSuent? saluté in duo Noflit vnitifitas
dediffe concefliffe - 7 hoe ite

Hos vuanimi confentu
se'pto conf maffe Symoni d&@o Dereth



--- Dunfermline_page202.png ---
235.

150 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xm.

tilio_q’nd Thome Dereth de Kynglaffy - officiti vel Dereth loci Bnoiati 7
annuos redditus eidem officio ptinentes in omibus 7 singut -Tenend 7
7 habend pdéo Symoni 7 heredib; fuis de corpe fuo legitime pe'atis de
nob 7 fucecfloribus noft's bit - 7 q'ete - Si tn heredes fui ad dém officit
gpeten? facienda / digni inuenti filint sufficientes 7 vtiles - Si ve ad illnd
faciend fuint inutiles 7 abbas qui p tempe fuerit de déo officio put melius
viderit expedi¥ / pnideat 7 ordinet - Reddendo inde déus 8
fui nob abbi 7 fuccefforib; firis annuatim vnii par ey

ymd 7 hedes
otheeay, albay
pifienS vi q‘tuor dena¥ argenti tanti ad feftt t*nflacdis beate w*rgarite
regine - In cni? rei teftimonii pfenti sc'pto sigilli: eSmune capli fri eft
appen§ - Tefte Caplo -

Carta de - feptem acris dat» Simdi Stury -

Omnihs x" fidelib; Putem Carta vifut ut audituF - AIX dei gia ABb ectic
Ste Tnitat de Dif . 7 ciuft loci ouétus hiilis Salm i dno - Noftit
yninfi - nos vnanimi ofenfi 7 affenfu - dedifle - oceffifie . 7 hae pnti cart*
fra oftmaffe Simoi Stury - Burgeii de wutk> - 7 Alicie vxori fue - Si virit
fui fup‘uifit p fideli fuid® dé Sift - a&en? tpento . et dai nots fuierit
impédendo - illas fepté ac*s Pre p finas r°tas difas 7 metas - q“s Robt? de la
hul de moft fire 7 aiicefforihs iris quod tenuit 7 poffedit - jacent int
aqua de Efk- ex occident*li pte 7 via fe extédenté de Burgo de mutk
Vfus Nudreth quas quidé - fepté ac‘s ci ptineii - Idem - R- p fe hedibs
fuis 7 dibg ei q’eiis iho attigentib; - p fufti 7 Bactm nob furfii reddidit -
in capto mo* {tii fri. Tendd 7 tind dis. S.et-A- 7 hedibs fuis in feodo
7 heditate - de nots 7 fueceflorihs firis ideo liBe - quiete - plen‘rie - bi -
Tpace fit Pdés- R- 7 aiiceffores fui de mo*ft- fro 7 aiicefloribs iris
Sib; tenueft 7 poffideFt - Reddendo inde Siméd 7 A - 7 f‘sores fui nob 7
{*cefforibs firis fexdeci denarios noje albe ftme ad duos anit Pmios - videt;
o&o dena¥ ad Pentecoft: - 7 ofto denff ad f™ sti w*rti in hyeme - p di
fuicd coniuetudie exacéde 7 demanda @ p nos ut f*ceffores fros exinde
peti potint uf req'ri - datum in Caplo iro fub sigillo comuni Anno dni -
co™ » 78 + xI™- Tefte cafio -

7
i


--- Dunfermline_page203.png ---
236.

Rom. ] DUNFERMELYN. 151

Alexander pp" - iij? - de Ecéa - {Ge Trinitatis de Dunkeld - 7 de tris ad
eam ptinentibs -

Alex Epé Suus 2- di dil@if filiis Giffredo abbi ste Tnitatif de Dunt
ei9q, ffib3 salt. 7 apte biid - Juftif petétiti defideriis diguii eft nos facilé
Phere pfnfum - 7 nota {a fonis tmite nd difeordant eflectu ft ptequte
cdplenda - Eapp? dil@i T dno filij tris iuftis poftuldib; g*to ocurrentes
affentu? Ectam ste Mnitatif de Dunkeld ab andy Epo katet et affentu
illuft's Reg Seottoy Fonabilit’ monaftio firo geeflam - ci vit ad eandé
Ecé@a ptinentib; ? vot 7 p uof ecte Fre auc aplica ofirmam? - q‘s pp*is
ndibs duxim? exp'mendas - Forduuin - Dininet - Bendachtin - Cupma-
cultin - Inchethurfin - Kethee - NHi g® of
jire pf'maddis inftnge ? ut ei aliytenus pt“ire - Siq'f ait hoe attéptare
ptt Sit 2 indignaéém dipotentis di - 7 boy Petri 7 pauli aploy eius: fe
nowit incurfurum - Dat - Senofi - vi» kt - Auguft> «

no hoii lice:

at hane pagi

Alexander ip* - iij? - de Eeetiif 7 Pris 7 cetis poffeffionibs -

. Alexander Epé Quus Suoy di- Dildif’. Galfrido abbi monattij ste Tri™

de Dunf . ei%q, fiibs tam pfentibs qm fut?is reZlarem uita pfeflis -
aplicum cduenit adée Pfidium - ne forte
+ aut eos a ppdito renocet - aut robur - qd
is inftis pofluldibs,

Religiofam uitam cligentib;
euilib; temeritatis ineurs
abfit facre religionis infringat - Eappt dilG in dno filij
clement annuimus - 7 pfatum monaftium 7 quo diuino manecipati eftis
obfequio - fub bi Pet* 7 Hira ptecGdne fufcipinms - 7 Plentis fe'pti ptuilegio
eémunim? - In ptnis fiq'dem fatuentes - ut ordo monaftie? q' 7 Fro cenobio
Sedm di timoré 7 bi bidzi re&lam nofeit® inftitut? - ppetuif’ ibidem tempib;
juiolabli? obSuctur - Prevea q‘scumg, poffones - Geiig, bona idé monaftium
iprefentiay iufte 7 candice poffidet - aut in fut°um gceflione pontifica -
largidde regit - ut p'ncipii - obtone fidelid - teu aliis iuftif modis deo ppitio
povit adipifei - firma vob - trifg, fucecfforibg 7 illibata pmaneant - In quibs



--- Dunfermline_page204.png ---
152 REGISTRUM DE

EC. X11.

hee pptis duxim? exp'menda vocabulis - Pardusin - Petneurcha - Petcor-
thin - Petbachalin - Laver - Se¥ram de Kircalthin - 7 ectam ei%dem ville -
Munaune - Duaf Lutkref’- Seyram de Gillald - Hale 7 cetam ei2dé ville -
Primros - Syram de Gatemile » 7 Ectam - Peteonmarthin » Baleherin -
DrnmBnin - Dnas chet - Beeth - Dunf ex pte monaftij - Seyra de King -
foet « Innirete - ei omib3 ptinenciis fuis - 7 ectam ei%dem ville ei caplla
de Coufland . Wymet @ ceéa - Fotheros - Pethenach . Hureard € ptinenciis

fuis » Petchoehar - Nidbren ei ptinenciis fuis 7 ectam - Bale'ftin - vna
mantura T Bowich « vna i Rokesb - yna i [adigtuii - Duas 7 Edenb?g - vnam
in Linlity - vna 7 Renfru - vna in Claemaii - vnam in {@nelin inx* ectam .
7 duas ectas 7 eadé uilla - vnam carucata fre adiacenté ecde civdem ville -
cantionel Rogij psbri - CapHam de caftello de Dunipatt- - Totam decimam
Sium dnioy Reg in St'uelin - 7 decima redditu
Can Regif ei#?dem puincie + 7 ynii rete 7 dimidia tbidem - vni manfioné
in burgo de Inuirkethin - ei capa ei?dem ville - 7 manfioné q adiacet

ei9dem burgi- 7 toci?

eidem capHe + 7 decima firme ci?dem Burgi + Decima motndini 7 dium
dominioy Reg de Dun? . yn manfiené 7 Pth & Eeta . 7 vnam manfioné
ad cam ptinenté- CapHtam de Caftello - Eeéam {ti Leonardi - Eetam de
Balglinen - Tota decima dium dnioy Regis de Pth - O&and ptem de
5 placitis 7 lucris de fif 7 de fothif. Tota decima toci? Can Re&
earumde puinciay - faluo jure Dunkeld cete - Decima de fiiches - Deeima
yenadonti G capiunt® inter LamBmor 7 Thei - medietat® Gium corioy 7
fepoy ac fagiiiif Sit aialit q occident? ad feftinitatef tenendas in St'uelin -
+ int forth 7 Tei - Otia nectia monaftio tro 7 nemoribs Regif’ fieut 7
ipe Rex - ad ignem 7 ad edificia facienda - 7 hdibg tris ficut hdibs tuis -
Ofiis obtones maioris altaris ecte Fre 7 Septimes seléf q eapiunt® ad
Kingorii / poftq” decimati faint - Decima falis 7 Pri Regif q afferent? ad
Dun? . Totam pochiam de fothif - Traétum de aldeftelle - 7 quiequid ad
illum infte ptinet - Offis hoies Vrof 7 Cumelachef ci omibg reb3 fuis -
Omné decima Regis de filirih; equif’ fuif de fif 7 de fothif® - Teloneti p
tota tram Regis quietii T omib; ad ecée ufum pp'um ptinentib; - Dimidiam
pt® Patlagij de Innirketh : ficut Rex 7 fuo dnio huit - Decima toci? Can -
de Claeii . Dimidia pt@ toci? decime Regif de Arregethil 7 de Kentir -



--- Dunfermline_page205.png ---
238,

PONT. ROM. ] DUNFERMELYN. 153

Vna pifeatura ap Pth - 7 Ledmacduncgil . Viginti 7 t'a iugera tre. 7
qddam p*tum inx* Dunk - Omiia capita cetui q capta fhint T dnio Reg
in? forth 7 Tei! pe ling*m - Eeti de Kellin - CapHam de ABerunt -
Ecéam de Neutnii - 7 ceéam de Kaledure » Ex gccffide Kmi_ filij iri
ealcolmi Illuft's feottoy Reg # offis hoies trof TiBof ab omi ope caftelloy
pontit +7 oMid ad Taiea negotia ptinentii - LiBtatef q? 7 ofis regias
oluctudines a feottoy Regibs vob indultas fit coy earte teftantur vob
nichomin? ofirmam?- Obeunte n° te nie ci2dé loci abbe - ut tuoy quolibet
fueceffoy nts ibi q“libet fubrepédis aftneia fen uiolencia Pponat? / n' qué
f¥es cOmnni pfnfu t fratrit pars ofilij fanioris fecm di timoré 7 bi Biidéi
reflam preuiderunt clegendum - Deenimus g° vt ni omino hoind liceat
um monaftiam teme pturhare aut ei? pofllones aufre + ut ablatas
retife - minnere - feu quibslibet nexaédibs fatigare - S3 illibata omia 7
iteg® oferuentur -coy p quoy guBnaéone ac faftentagone geefla fit:
nfibs Simodis pfutéa - Salua fedif aplice auc’ - 7 diocefani Epi candica
iufticia - Siq’ gti fut?um ec@aftica - feenlaris ue pfona hane ire oftitn-
cionis pagina feiens p* eam temere venire téptatit - Sedo - Peio ne

monita +n" ptapeom tnam pga fatiffacéde correSit ¢ poteftatis honoris
q, fui dignitate careat - reamq, fe diuino iudicio exifte/ de ppetrata
liquitate cognofeat - 7 a facratiflimo corpe ac fang'ne di 7 dni redemptoris
firi ibu x" aliena fiat - atq, 7 extremo examine dift't&e ul€oi fubiaceat -
Cundis at cidé loco fua jura Snantibs ? fit pax dni fri ihn x*- Q ten? 7
hic fru&um bone acénis peipiant «7 afi diftétum Jndicé pmia etne
pacif inueniant «aii. Dat Turof p mani hmaii s° Ro" ecte fhdiag 7
notarij - vij - 1d? Jui - Indicé - x - jearii (nice Anno «w”-¢”- Ixiij’ - Ponti-
ficat? u? dni AleX Pp - iijs ammo - itij’-

Lyeius pp* - de ecclefiis et terris -

Lycius Epe Sunt Snoy di diléis filiis Erchenbaldo Abbi monattij {%e
T a * i)
Tnitatif de Dunf . ci9q, fib; ta pfentib; q*m futtis Reglaré vitam
pfeflis IN PPa)- Etftm infta poftulantibs indulgere - 7 vigor equitatif’ 7
ic



--- Dunfermline_page206.png ---
154 REGISTRUM DE {sec. x11.

ordo exigit Tonis - Ptertim qi petentum voluntaté 7 pietas adiuuat - 7
flitas no relinquid . Eappt dilti i dno filii trif iuftif poftuldibs clement?
annnim? 7 felicis memoric Alexand* pp Puccefforis fri ueftigiif inherentef
fata monaftid 7 quo diuino mancipati eftis obfequio? fb bi Pet’ 7 fira
pteecione fufeipim? - 7 Pfentis fe'pti p'uilegio cOmunim9 - In p'mif fiq'dem
flatuentes ? ut ordo monaftienf qui fedm dni 7 bi Biid@i Ram i eodem
loco inflitutus Ge dinofeit® / ppetuif hidem tempibs inuiolabli? obSuetnr -
Peea q‘scumq, poffones Feumg, bona ab illuft's memorie « @alcolmo -
Edgaro - AleX - Danid - 7 @alcolii q’ndam Scottoy Regih; - feu aliis di
fidelih3 eidem monaf tio deuodduis intuitu Fonabili? fant collata - quecumq,
% hodie in tris cultif 7 ineultif’ aquif. pafenis 7 filuis candice poflidet aut
in fut?um conceflione Pontifieum - largigdne reguin ut p'neipi - oblagne
fidelium - feu aliis iuftis modis pfante dno potit adipifei/ firma vob -
iirisq, fuceetloribs 7 illibata pmancant - In quis hee pp'is duxim? ex-
p'menda voeablis - Locum ipm in q’ monaftium vim fundati: eft» 7
fepultura regum Seoé efi omih3 ptinenciis fuif- 7 burgii ex illa pte
aque? q* 7 monaftium fitum eft - Eetam de Inuirketit - villam de King
oecidentaii - Ectam de Kellin - Vill 7 Eeéa de Kirealdin « Villam 7
ecéi de Nithby ++ Eeta de Pt 7 Capella de eaftello - ci Pris 7 manfuris
4 omib3 qne habetif’ inf* burgi 7 ex® - Ecca de St'uet 7 CapHam de
calteHt - Eetam de Weftealedoure « Ecdam de Neutoii » Inuerefe maioré
et ecta ci%dem ville - 7 capa de Contland ab ea dependente - Innirefe
minoré- Villa 7 Ectam de Wymet - In morauia- Vrehard ci ecta ei?dem
loci. 7 Pris 7 decimis 7 omih; ptinenciif omit 7 finglay Bnoiatay ec&ay
7 capHa® - Terras 7 aq"s + p‘ta - pafturas - filuas - aifiaffita - liBtates - 7
omia ] habetis in omib; 7 finglis Bnofatis villis - 7 alibi cf earam minis
7 vettis diuifis - 7 cit toftis » manfuris 7 redditib3 1 BPwieh 7 Edenbég - 7
aliis burgif regalib3 - Pifeaturas 7 retia i mari 7 fluiiibs - 7 capita Ginm
pifeit qt dieuntur Crafpef nbieig, capti ftint ut applicttint ex pte Scocie
in? Forth 7 Thai - atq, 1iBam curiam i tota Pra Fra - 7 alia omia Geumq,
hetis - fieut Carte Pdéoy Regum 7 eoy donatoy teftantur - Sane noualiii
troy J pp manihs aut fiptib; colitis - fiue de nut'mentis aialium Froy
nHs a vob decimas exigere ut extorquere pfumat - Liceat q° vob clicos ut


--- Dunfermline_page207.png ---
PONT. ROM. ] DUNFERMELYN. 155

laicos e feeulo fugicntef + LiBor 7 abfolutos ad conifioné tr:

scipe «7

eos abfq, o“die@ne aliq® retinere - phibemus infup ut nulli fratri troy po

fam I codé loco pfeflioné faf fit abty, abbis fui licencia m' areioris religionis
optentn difeedere - Difeedenté u° fi eOmuniti littay eaucine ns audeat
retinere - Ci ati genale intdi@um tre fuit? liecat uob clanfis januif’-
catis 7 intdi&is «nd pulfatif campanis - fuppila voee diuina
oflicia celeh“re + In poehialibs ati ecttif q's hetis! liceat. vots faldotes
clige « 7 diocefano efo Plentare « quibs fi idonei fiint cp& curam animay
ecdmittat - ut ei de {pualib; - uob ue de tempalib; debeant rdere -

exclufis ex

p crifinate u° + oleo féo - pfeeraddibs eetay « ordinibs clicoy q' ad frerof’
ordines fuint pmouendi: p biidicendo abbe - ant deducendo ad fedem -
uf q'bslibet aliis ectafticif fac*mentif nts a vot aut fab optentu ofuetu-
et alio modo q'eq™m andlene poftulare « Siq's afi 9* hoe

dinis -

aut quo
venire Pfumpferit # # porcom & gvezi fe nowit hitura- ni? fm exaccone
turpif muaif’ imitatur - Sepultura pe ‘ea ipi? loci TiBam ge denims - ut
eoy deuoéoni 7 extreme voluntati - q' fe illic fepeliri deliBatint - n* forte
exedieati ut inbddi fint ? nits obfifiat + Salua tn juflicia lay ectay /

qbuf mortuoy corpa affumuntur - Porro UiBtater 7 imunitatef’ a Bato
Rege DD 7, aliif feottoy regib3 monaftio ro geeflas 2 auc’? aplica
oftmam? + Tnticim? % ne q's 1 vos ut monaftium vim - exedieaé
fufpenftdis - aut intddi fiiam fi) manifefta 7 Fonabli Ca audeat pmulgare -
Nonas qy 7 indebitaf exac@nes feu ofuetudines ectiif aut capellif’ trif
nullus iponat - Tuf* claufiuras monattij Fri nemo icendii t furti cdmittat -
rapinam faciat - hoiem eapiat t oceidat - NHi dino ectaftice feeulari ve
pfone liceat inf* terminof pochia¥ fray - monattium ut candieam abiq,
diocefani Epi 7 tro affenfu q’modolibet iftituere - teu Temi inclufoy vot
reclamantibs T cimiteriis trif ordinare - Obeunte u’ te nie abbe 76 - ficut
i pluilegio Peedente {bo ad thum uf, 7 fine - AmeN - Dat uellet? p
manii alBti fe Romane Eete pPfbri Cardinat 7 Cancett - ij - kt aii -
IndicdGe xv - Incarnacdis dnice anno - «’- ¢° - Ixxx°ij’- Poutifieatul u° dni

Lueij pp - iij/ anno - j°-



--- Dunfermline_page208.png ---
5 Lyeiuf epe 2 8-8. di dild

156 REGISTRUM DE (SEC. XI.

Item « Lyciuf pp*

{ Erckenbald abbi monaftij de Dunf- ei¢q,
fTibs ta pen’ q* fu" Rrem vita pfeflis IN PPQ)- Pie poftuto voluntatif’
effén debet pfeqnte edpleri - ut 7 denoddis finceritas laudadlit’ enitefeat ¢
7 utilitas poftulata vires indubitant affumat - Eappt diléi in dno filii
rif iuftif’ poftutonibs cle ment annuim? - 7 felicis recorda@dis AleX pp*
inherentes - pfatum mona ium de Dun? {bi
7 Blentif fe'pti_ p’ “uilegio eSmunim? -

Pdecefforis iri ueftigii
Pet' 7 fira pteedne fufcipimus

Statuentes ut q“ftq, poffonef - Geiiq, bona plat monatrium ipfentiay
i%fte 7 candice poffidet - aut 7 fut?um geeffione Pontiticd - largicoe reg t

- obtone fidelid - feu aliis i%tis modis Pftante dno potit adi :
7 illibata pmaneat - In q'b3 h pp'if’ duxim?
ym iq? pfatir monaftia fit é- bibs 1Bee
1 pte aq q* ae monatt fit &

p'nei
f'ma vot rif q, fueceflorils
exp'menda vocabtlis - Loe
7 ptineneii is Burgi’ ex i
obtonef maioris altaris tri - Ectai de Inuirket - +7 tref ac's Pre 7
q@da p*tum ius” Dun? . Dimidid paflagij § arg Regine Toté King
oecidentalé & ecta - Tota Kirealdi ci ece* - Tota feyra 7 ceta de Nithhy -
Sevra 7 ecta de Gatemile - 7 Fotherof. Ecta de Kellin 7 capttam 7
aBerumb - Eeta de Pth- 7 capttas de caftello 7 hofpitat $ Leonardi -
Balmacglenin ci omib; eay ptinenciis - Eccé § Trinitatif de Dunkeld -
7 fordouin - Dinfnach - Bendachin - 7 Cupmacultin - Incheturphin « 7
Kedeth + € dibs cay appendiciis - Cellam de Vrehard i woraii ci ecta 7
Pris 7 iby ptinenciif fais - O&ana pté de dibg placitis 7 luc’s de fif 7 de
fothit Decima fruifiti 7 Pbende Re& de King 7 Kellin 7 Karel - xx -
fot annuati de firma Re& de fithkil- 7 decima b*sei 7 Pbende Regif de
Clacii - Et toté medictaté decime luc’ 7 Gium reddituti Reg de Ergaithil
7 de Kentir - Decima dit venaGoni q capiunt* in? LamBmor 7 they +7
medietaté Siti corioy - fepoy - 7 f is Sit aialii, que occidunt® ad
feftiuitates Reg tenendas i ft'nelin 7 in? forth - 7 Tay - Ex pte Scocie
ult lamBmor i tota regia poteftate finglis fabbis uni corit - 7 vnoquoq,
sexto fabbo duo coria . 7 duas ptefde fepo - 7 fextam parté pellit arietii

+7 ons



--- Dunfermline_page209.png ---
PONT. ROM. } DUNFERMELY 157

7 agnoy + Auleiiq, Cete capta, fit fiue applictit ex pte Sec
pe ling*m peu remaneat - 7 dimidiit toeius fagiminis Git coy q q'ndolibet
eapiunt? in? forth ” Thei? Koti de St'uel ef vna carucata tre ad cam
ptinente - CapHam de Caticllo 7 tota decimam dit dnioy Reg 7 ftrinelin -
7 redditus ei%dem burgi - 7 toci? Can Re& 7 eadem puincia - CapHam de
Caftello de Dunipatt - Inuirefe maioré ci ecta 7 dib3 ptinenciis fuis -
Inuirefe minoré - CappHam de coufland - Burgi 7 portum de wuskilburg
et dibs LiBtatibs fuis - Totam Wimet 7 ceca ipi? ville - Crebbarrin 7
Smithetun - Villa 7 f & de Weftcaledoure «7 Eeta de
Neutoii - Et redditi - C - folidoy annit? 7 Edenbég? ob fepulturam Reg
@aleolitt - w@anfuras 7 7 tras q's hetis T ecodem burgo 7 7 Madigtut 7 i
Reketb 77 Bowich 77 7 Stneli - 71 Pth. ci pifeaturis q"s hetis 7 Bw ich
7 PL ediacdunegil 7 oimia loca tra - eum Pris - deeimis « -
omibs ptinenciis fingtay Pnoiatay ectay - Terras 7 ag’ s+ p"ta » pafturas -
filuas aifiafita libtates - 7 omia q hetis In finglis Pnoiatis villis 7 alibi
en carum tninis atq, diuifis - Et dia necéia tro monaftio in nemoribs,
Regif’ ad matiam 7 igné vob fieut ipi Regi. 7 hdibg trif fit hGibs Reg -
Libertatef 7 Iman Edgaro -
BD -7 ein fedo q’ndam Scottoy Regib; vot 7 monaftio fro pia
deuodone oceffas ¢ auc aplica pfirmamus - 7 vt ofia ad ufuf tros_pp*os
ptinencia - q'eta fint de Tolnco Z, de omi fectari ofuctudine p totum
Regni Scot - Et Ss hominef Fri HBi ab omi ope caftelloy ponciti 7 ofum
ad laica negocia ptinenciti - fi T autenticif ipoy Regum ptinetur - Sane
troy G pptis manihs aut ftptibs colitif’. fiue de mut ‘mentif aialitt

¥¢ totit eapd

a de Halis - Ke

ef a bone memorie oaleolmo p'mo - AleX

noualii
py - nis a vob decimas extorqre pfimat - Ci aii genale intdém tre
fuit  Liceat vob elaufis ianuif’ nd pullatif cApanis - exclufis excdicatis +
intdéis : fuppifa uoce dinina officia celebrare - In pochialibs ait ecti
quaf habetif’- Liceat vots captinof elige - 7 diocefano efio pfentare « QDs
{i idonei fuint cfs euram aiari cdmittat - ut ci de {pualib3 vob ude
tempalib3 debeant adere - p c'fmate u° - oleo {Go + pfecragdih3 altarium
ut ccéay Tray + p biidicendo abbe - aut deducendo ad fedem + ut p quibs-
libet ectafticif fae“fitis - ns a vob aut fub optentii eonfuctudinis aut
quolibet m° q'eq*m audeat poftulare - Siq'f aii" hoe venire rapsit ?



--- Dunfermline_page210.png ---
240.

158 REGISTRUM DE (sec. Xu.

poréom ci Giezy fe nouit hitura - Cui? fm exacédne turpif muneris
imitatur - Sepulturam prea ipi? loci liPam &e de€nimns - ut coy deuogoni
7 extreme voluntati q' fe illie fepeliri deliBafint « n' forte excdicati ut
intdéi fint ¢ nts obfiftat - falua tn infticia illay eccay ¢ a q'bs mortuoy
corpa affumunt® - Nouas q," 7 indebitas exacédnes feu pfuetudines monaf-
Pio Fro - Ecdiif - feu aliis poffionibs tris nullus imponat - Inf claufuras
monaftij Fri feu grangiay fray + nemo icenditi ut furtii cOmittat - rapinam
faciat - hoiem capiat vt occidat - Obeunte u? te niie ei%dé@ loci abbe
ut p'? ufq, in fine - Am - Dat - Verofi- p mani Hug fe Romane ecée
notarij - xiiij? - Kt Nouemby - Indicéone ¢ iij" - Incarnadoif dnice anno -
<x° + iiij? - Pontifieat? u’ dui Lucij pp - iij ¢ anno - i

Urbanuf fip* de ecdiif nd ofendis -

Urbans Ept §- 8+ di dildis filiis Abbi - 7 Capiilo de Dun? Satt - 7
aplit Biid - Religiofis locis adée ynittalif regiminis adminift‘Gone edpelli-
mur +7 coy cSmoditatibs follicite puide ¢ caritatit zelo ppéfius pmonem? -
ut octs apti® fedif’ cox locoy cSmodis offic follicitudis paftorat tuigilet -
7 eoy idépnitati puida findeat c'eiifp’Gde cauere - Attédétes itaq, qtr
Peibs 7 potencia ecctiaftica¥ - 7 fectariii pfonay monaftii yim 7 ectay
Fray gceflione g*uet® - ci ad Peef eaydé p*y vacantes ecéa ibdi timore
pocius q" uoliitate fuis clicis dare cogaini - unde idé monaftit egeftate
fi dicit? nd Mita patit® - 7 a ofueta hofpitalitate aliqi renocat? - auc"
aplica phibem? - ne liceat vob f aliq'h; fucceflorih; tris optétu alic?
ectaftice fectaris ve pfone ecéay fray biificia nde monaftia vim fui
juris fuftineat det'iiti gcedere - {3 eedem ecte 7 eay bificia vot 7
fuceefloribs tris 7 ppetua oferuentur - eo} p quoy gubnage ac fuften-
taéde ocefla ft 4 ufib3 Simodis pfut’a . phibem? ifup ne q's Epé t
archid feu q'libet officiales eoy - aut alia q‘liféq, p* vos ad dandum ut
faciendi qd pfenti pagina phibet* alig® diftegdne cdpellat - NHi g° dino
hdinu liceat hane paginam fire phibiddnis inftnge vt ei aufu temario
cont*ire - Siquis aut hoe attemptare PfompSit ? indignaéom omipotentis



--- Dunfermline_page211.png ---
PONT. ROM. ] DUNFERMEL 159

di 7 beatoy Pet’ 7 pauli aploy ei? fe notit ineurfurd - Dat veroii - xij -
kt Januar -

Proteéio et confirmatio Clementis IIT.

Clemés Epis Suus Snoy dei + Dildis filiis ADbI 9 Conuentui wonatt ij de
Dunfimelyn ordis sti Biid@i sti Andi diog ¢ saltm 7 aflieam biidieéem -
Cum a nob petit? qd iuftum eft 7 honefti / ta vigor eq'tatis quai ordo
exigit rdis vt id p sollicitudiem oflicii firi ad debiti: pducat* efftm - Eappt
dile@i in dno filij tris iuftis poftulacdib; g*to edcurrentes affenfu plonas
tras 7 loci in q? diuino eflis obfeq'o mancipati ci omnib3 bonis que
impfentiay Fonabili? poffidet ¢ aut in futurd iuftis modis preftante dno
poteritis adipifei Sh bi Pet' 7 jira ptecédne fufeipim? - Speiali? ante
decias 7 poffefiiones ¢ domos ¢ p"ta ? pafeua / nemora ? pifearias / g“ngias =
7 alia bona Fra sic' ca dia i%te 7 pacifice poflidetis ¢ vot 7 p uos eidem

monaftio anctoritate aplica of'mam? ? et Pfentis fe'pti pat’cinio cSmu-
p : = Dyas = a ere De fore
nim? 7 Salua i Ppddis decimis moderaédne concilij gerlalis / Nulli g’ oi
hind liceat hae pagina fre protecéis 7 ofmaddis infringe ? vt ei autu
tetlario cont‘ire 7 Siq's aut® hoe attemptare Pfumpferit ¢ indignacoem
pon Aa EP Aon ; os a :
Sipotentis dei 7 batoy Pet 7 Pauli aploy ei? se notit incurfia 7 Dat
Se ree  ) Dont St ont Doi

Pigauis Noi Janua¥ ? Pont tivi anii teio -

4¥ no licet inuadiare -

. Clemés Epis Suus feruoy di Difetis filiis ADbi 7 Conuentui wonatterij de

Dunfmelyn ¢ ordis ft Benedidi Sti And# Diod ¢ Salé 7 aplit bud ¢ Ex
parte tra fuit ppditi cori nob qd ndnulli Religiofi ? clerici flares : 7
laici afferttes se edt vos aliqnid queftionis hre aliq*ndo @onachos int-
dum u? cduerfos et néniicg” aialia 7 alia bona monaftij tri Ptextu
eui%dam p*ue cdfuetudis temitate pp'a? vadiare # eapere ac ti diu detine
Blumiit don® sit eis de huiufmodi queftionih; iux* ifoy biiplacitir tatfacta


--- Dunfermline_page212.png ---
243.

244.

160 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xi.

an ; 7 = 9) 7 aa
q'ing® iufdigdem in vos nd habe&t 7 qua hoe fa¢e poffit ordinaria vt
etiam delegat - Ci. itaq, indicialis ordo ideo fit in medio conttitutus # vt
nemo s* audeat fuite vidsem #7 ob hoe dita gfuetudo tag” nullo iuri

submiffa nd fit aliq"ten? toleranda » Nos volétes paci 7 q'eti fre cdfule ¢

7 Pdidis maliciis obuiare / auctoritate pfentid difttins inhibem? ne q's

7 bo® monattij
Paid abfq, inf ordie ¢ vadiare ? cape ? feu quomodolibet ¢ detite pfumat -
Nulli g’ Gino hdinii liceat hae pagina fire inhibiGonis inf'ne vt ci aufu
teilario cont“ire - Siquis aut@ hoe attemptare prefumpferit ¢ indignagem

oceatione Piite pfuetudis vob memoratas infre molef

Sipotentis dei ¢ 7 hatoy Pet* 7 Pauli aploy cius fe nouit ineurfira » Dat
Pidauis Noi Jannat - Pontiticat? firi Ani tercio -

De fueeeffione fraty -

Jil@is filiis Abbi et Conuentui conaftij de
i badiGi / sancti Andree dio / Salim 7 apliea tnd -
hs inelinati vt poffeffiones 7 alia bona mobilia et
— Rae mae

imobilia que perfonas libas frat™ Troy

Clemés Eps seruus Suoy d
Duntinelyn ordis s

Deuogdis tre pre
1 @onafteriid. vim coundi vani-
7 pfeffioné fa si remafiflent in
feculo inre succeflionis ut alio infto titulo cétigiflent 7 que ipi exiftentes
in s¢lo potuiffent uobis liBe erogare ¢ petere ¢ recipe 7 ae retine TiBe
valeatis ¢ fine iuris pindiG& alieni auctoritate vobis prefentii: indulgem? -

tate relicia couolantia tium in eod

Nulli g° dino héinum liceat hue paginan ire oceflionis infringere vt ci

Gen - aa ~ Pech) ar
aufu temario cont"ire 7 Siquis aut? hoe attemptare prefumpferit ¢ indig-

nacdem oi

votétis dei + heatoy Petri 7 Pauli aploy ci? fe nouit ineurfu-
rum - Dat Piétanis - xv - kt - feby / Pontificat? fri Anno Tertio -

Confirmatio privilegiorum - jndulgée 7 exempéonii -

Clemés Eps Snus fernoy dei Dildis filiis ABbi 7 Conudtui monaftii de

Danfmelyn ordis Sti Bidei Sci Andi dioé Salt 7 aplica tnd - Cum a



--- Dunfermline_page213.png ---
PONT. ROM. } DUNFERMELYN. 161

nob petit? qd intftum eft 7 honeftuin / tam vigor eq'tatis ¢ qua ordo exigit
Fonis vt id p sollicitudiem oflicii fri ad debitii pdueat® effem - Eappt dite”
hs gto cdcurrentes affentir Ges LiBtates
fiue p p'uilegia sine
7 monattio tro conceflas ¢ neend liBtates ”
uliis x' fidelibs

in dno filij veftris iuftis poftula
7 imunitates a Pdecefloribs iris xomanis pontitici

alias indulg@cias vobis

exempéones feeulariii: exacCbnii a Regib3 7 p'ucipib3 ac

Fonabilit’ vob 7 coonattio Pico indultas sieut eas infte ae pacitice
obtinetis ¢ vot 7 per vos eidé wonattio aétoritate aplica cdftmam? 7
Pfentis feripti pat’cinio cOmunim? - Nulli g° dino hdini liceat h*ne pagina
fire of madis iftnge ? vt ei aut temario edt“ire « Siq's auté hoe attéptare
Pfampferit indi auli aploy eius fe
nouerit ineurfurii - Dat Pictauis - viij - 1d? fy ? Pot Tri - Ani ew

Coem Gipotétis dei 7 batoy Pet* 7

Innocencius pp" - iij? - de protectione -

Innocencius Ep& Suus Suoy di dildif filiis - Pat’ abbi coonat tj Dunf-
cig, fFibs tam plentib; q"m futuris reglarem vitam pfeflis IN PPO). Pie
pottulaG uoluntatis cffe&u debet pleqnte compleri - ut 7 deuocnis
finceritas laudabliter enitefeat / 7 vtilitas poftulata 7 vires indubite e
affumat - Eappt dilGi in dno filij trif iuftis poflulagoib3 - clement?
annuim? « 7 felicif’ recordacoif’ Alex 7 Lucij Bdeceffoy iiroy Romanoy
pontifieum veftigiis inherentes Pfatum monaftia de Dun? fub ti Pet* 7
fira ptecGone fufeipim? . 7 pfentif fe'pti p'uilegio cSmunim? - Statuentet’-
yé- verbo ad thum fient i ptuilegio px’ Peedente ? (Bulla Lucii IIT.

Supra N. 239) fapaddito tam hoe Ecta de @olin cum tra - 7 Ecta de

Strathardolf . 7 addita hac claufula - Phibemus % ut nHa cc@aftica fectaris
ve pfona v
plumat - 7@- AmeN -

Dat Lateraii p mani Johis ste warie in Cofmidin Diacoi cardinal tte
Romane Ecée Cancellarij . v - kt aprit - Indicéone - ix* - Inearnaédis
+ Pontif’ - v°- dni Innocené « pp* - iij’ - anno

indebitis 7 infuetis peuracoib; feu exacédib3; moleftare

ee Anno + w+ ec? -

decimo -


--- Dunfermline_page214.png ---
246.

290
=
2

162 REGISTRUM DE [seEc. X11.

Idem - Lita pteéoria «

di- filiis Abbi 7 Cofitui de Dun sat - 7 ap - 3

Cvm a nob petit? qd iufti = 7 honefta ¢ cm vigor eq'tatis q*m ordo exigit
Fonis vt id p follicitudiem officij ri ad debit pducatur effém - apy
juftit’ poftutonib; gto ocrentes affentir ? wonaftium
7 pfonas Fras ci omibs; bonis 4 pte ntiay Fonabli? poffidetis « aut in
fut?um iuftis modif pftante dno potitis adipisei - fub bi pet’ 7 fira ptecébe
cipim? » Speciatr ait loot ipm 7 quo idem monaftium fundatum eft -

cii ptinenciis fuis 7 vnitifas poffSnes 7 alia bona fra ficut ea infte ac
pacifice poflidetis 7 auc vots aplica pfirmanms - 7 Plentis fe'pti patrocinio
cémunim? - Ni cio» ho. is hae pind fire pteeddis 7 ofirmaddis

infnge +t ci- au te™ pire - Siquis aii fod attép - 7¢- Dat - Lateraii -

Tanod Ept 3

ij - kt Decemby - Pontificatus firi anno - x

Idem + Inhibicd de peuraddibs indebitis -

Lino? Ept - di dildis filiis abbi 7 Coiitni de Dunf Sat - 7 afi - bi -
Ci ad sefrenan da jfolencia malignoy moderaiti fit fedis aplice adhibendi :
auc plentia inhibem? ut nis a vob ut pers abnes ifolitas pfumat exigere ¢
fie vob de novo confuetudines impone ottofas - NHi_g? ofo honii - li -
hae - pagi - fire ihibicvif iftn - vt ei - aufu - te™- p*ire « Siquis aii - 7%
Dat Latait - vij - 1d? decemby - Pontificatuf firi anno - xiiij’ -

Idem de prefbris Pfentandis -

. Innot Epa 2. 2. ai dil@if filiis abbi 7 Cofitui de Dun? sat - 7 ap. tnd -
r Tap:

Cvm a nob petit® qd isfti ¢ 7 honefti : tam vigor eq'tatis q*m ordo exigit
Fonis ut id p follicitudiem officij firi ad debitum pdueat? effGn - Eapp?
dile&ti i dno filii tris iuftis poftutonib; g*to gcurrentef’ affenfin ? deuoddi


--- Dunfermline_page215.png ---
ie
s

250.

PONT. ROM. ] DUNFERMELYN. 168

Fre auc” pfeneiti indulgem? - ut 7 parochialibs tris Eetiit’ q's habetis -
liccat vob facdotef clige - 7 diocefano epo Pfontare « Qh; fi idonei fuerint
Epé curam aiay cOmittat - ut ei de {Pualibs - vob u’ de tempalibs debeant
adere » Nvlli_ g’s oi0 - ho + dit. hae pas no - indulgencie inf nge «ut
ci-au-te+ ovire- Siq't 4+ 7% - Dat Lakai - iij . 1d decth - Poiit? . it -

Ano - xiiij’ -

Idem - Confirmacd de Vueth -

Tnnot ept . 3-9. di dit. filiis abbi 7 Cofitui de Dunf Salt - 7 aplica
bit - Cvm a nots petitur qd@ iufti eft 7 honef tam vigor equitatis q*
ordo exigit Tonis- ut id p follicitudiem ofticij firi ad debitum pdueatur
efftm - Eappt dil@ 7 dno filij tris inftis poftutonih; g*to concurrentet
affenfu - foreftii de Vueth » quod notilis vir Rots de Londoi - kmi 7 xpo
filii fri jlluft's Regif Scot natus tro monaftio pia denogne gveefiit - fieut
illud iufte ae pacitice poflidetis « vob - 7 p vos eidem monaftio Fro auc
ailica of'nam?® + 7 pfentis {e'pti patrocinio cOmunim? « NHi g° dino - ho -
li. hae « pina - fire ofirmaddis inf'n™ - t ei aufu temario ore Sigf i. h-
attép - 7é- ut p'us- Dat Latait « xiij kt Jait » Pontif’ iri anno xiiij? -

Idem - Confirmaéd paflagij -

Inno® 72+ Cum a nob petit? q inftti é 7 honeftii ¢ tam vigor equitati

7 I q 7 ig 1

qm - or + ex + fonis - vt id p follicitudiem officij fri ad debiti pducaté
efftm . Eappt dil@ in dno filij tris iuftis poftutonibs g*to pcurrentes
affenfu - paflagii’ Regine - 7 iux* Inuirket q*mda tram - g tra hofpitalis
voeatur - 7 in auftrali pte paflagij q*sdam Pras q*s clare memorie - ) -
Rex Seoé - cit liBtatibs fuis hofpitali de paflagio Regiti ad vof' fp*tanti
contulit intuitu pietatif - fieut ca iufte ac pacifice poffidetis ¢ vot 7 p vot
cidem hofpitali tro aue® aplica ofirmamus - 7 Pfentis fe'pti_patrocinio
cémunim? - NHi- g° - ofo - ho- li. hae - pa- ii - confirmaddis - inftn - t -


--- Dunfermline_page216.png ---
252

164 REGISTRUM DE {sEc. x11.

ei-au- te - p%ire - Sig's afi hoe at - 7@- Dat Latati - ij - kt Januar -
Pontif* firi / anno xiiij’ -

Tnnocencins fp* - iij?- ne fentencietur cont™ nos - feu nouif 7 indebitit
exacéonib; aliq'f agg“uet -

Tnnocenci? Ept . 8. 2. di diléis filiis abbi . 7 Contintuj de Dun?» sat - 7
apt bud - Ci a not petitur quod iuftum ett 7 honefti / tam vigor equitatis
q*m ordo exigit fonis ut id p follicitudiné officij firi ad debitum pducatur
effém - Eappt dil@i in dno filij tris iuftis poftulaédibs grato ocurrentet
affenfu - ut nHi liceat T vos - fen clicos + vt ectas 7 CapHas Fras abfq

5 — 5 i payee
manifefta 7 fonabli canfa excdicaddis - ut intdi&i fitiam pmulgare - feu

nouis 7 indeb

exacconib; agg“uare ; anétoritate Pfentit inhibemus -
NHi g° oMino hdini lieeat hane paginam fire inhibiGdnis infngere - vt ei
aufu temlario contTire - Siq'f aii hoc attéptare BfiumpSit ? indignaéom
Sipotentis di- 7 beatoy Pet’ 7 Pauli aploy ei? fe nouerit icurfurt - Dat
Lataii Noi Januay - Pontificatus firi anno - xiiij’ -

Idem - Confirmadés liBtatum Regum 7 alioy -

Limoé Epé diltis filiif . 7% . Juftis petentiti defideriis dignii eft nos
facilem pbere aflenfum - 7 uota | a Fonis t*mite nd difeordant effedtu
profeqnte complere - Fapp? dil@i in dno filij tris i%ftis poftutonihs g*to .
geurrétet atfenfu ? liBtatef - imunitates - jnra - 7 appbatas confuetudines
a Regih3 Scoé ae aliis x’ fidelibs monaftio tro pi liBalitate concefla fient
ea iufte ae pacifice optinetis / vob - 7 p vos eidem monaftio auc® aplica
ofirmam? - 7 pfentis fe'pti patrocinio cémunim? - NHi g®- ho - li. hae -
pa- ii - ofimaddis - ifn t- ci - au te- o*ire - Siq's aii hoe at - 7é- Dat -
kt ap"t - Pontificatus iri / anno - xix’ -

Lateraii - xij’ -


--- Dunfermline_page217.png ---
PONT. ROM. ] DUNFERMELY 165

Idem - De Situ loci - De St*hardolf - De @olin - De ABerumbi- 7 De
decimif de Tmnirkethi -

Tint Epe 7@- Cvm a nob petitur qd iufti eft 7 honeftum / tam vigor
equitatis q* ordo exigit Fonis - ut id p follicitudiné officij firi ad debitum
pducatur effém - Eapp? diléi in dno filij tris inftis poftutonibus gto
geurrentef affenfu  pfonas tras 7 conaftium {te Trinitatis 7 quo diuino
mancipati eftis obfequie et omib; bonif tam ecéafticis q'm mundanis 4
inffentiarti Fonabliter poflidetis - aut in fut?um Pflante dno inftis modis
potitis adipifei  fub bi Pet* 7 ira pteeGOne fufeipim? - Speciatr ait eetas
de S*thardolf - de Abircrumbi - 7 de olin - ci ptinenciis earumdé :
Deeimas quoq, bladi Eeée de Inuirket - ac alia bona fra - ficut ea omia
iufte ac pacifice poflidetis - vot 7 p vos wonattio fro auc" aplica ofir-
mam? - 7 pfentis se'pti patrocinio comunim? - NHi g’ o¥o ho - li- hie

pa- fire pteeGdis 7 ofirmacdis inf'n . tei + au. te + p*ire - Siquis aii hoe
7» Dat - Latait . v - kt Apt - Pontificatus firi anno - xix’ -

Idem de Ecetiis non pfen¢

Tnnoe Epé & - 3. [ai] dilzif filiis abbi 7 Capiilo de Dun? sat 7 aped
bnd - Religiofis locis adée vniufat regiminis Aminift’&e cSpellimur Et eoy
cdmoditatib; follicite puidere caritatis zelo ppenfi? cSmonemur - vt oenlus
aplice fedis eoydem loeoy cdmodis ofiGd follicitudinis paftoralis inuigilet -
7 coy iépnitati puida ftudeat c'eifp'Cone cauerc - Attendentef itaq, q'lit
Peibs 7 potencia ectafticara 7 fecularid: pfonay monaftinm vim in ectay
Fray gceflione guctur - ci ad Pees carumdem pfona¥ vacantef ectas
intda timore pocius q"m voluntate fuis clicis dare cogamini - vnde idem
monaftium egeftaté fié dr n6 imerito patitur - 7 a confueta hofpitalitate
aliqi reuocatur / ad exemplar felicis recordacdis Vrbani fp Bdecefforis
firi auc aplica phibemus ne liceat vob vt aliq'b3 fucceflorib; tris optentu
alic? ecéattice fetlaris ve pfone ectay tray bificia vnde monaftium vim



--- Dunfermline_page218.png ---
56. Honorius Ept 3.9. di- veratili fF

166 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xm.

fui juris fuftineat det'mentii ocedere - 53 eedem Ecée 7 eaF biificia vob 7
fuceefforib; tris in ppetuii oferuentur - eoy p quoy guBnadone ae fuften-
tage concefla funt ¢ ufibs oMimodis pfut*a - phibemus infup ne quis
Epé - ut archid feu quilibet officialef eoy aut alia q‘lifeiiq, pfona vof ad
dandii ut faciend’ qd Pfenti pagina phibetur # alig* diftecoe compHant +
Ni g? Gino h
temario conti

i lieeat hane paginam fire phibiGbis inftngere - ut ei anfu
Siq's aii hoe attemptare pfipsit - indignaésm oimipo-
tentis di - 7 beatoy Pet' 7 pauli aploy eius fe nowlit ieurfurum - Dat

Laval. v’- kt ap'lif’. Pofit? i - anno - xix’ -

Idem - &d 9° indulgencias 7 p*uilegia fedis aptice nd debeamus moleftari -

. _Innot Ept 2. § - di Diltis filiis de welros 7 de Keleh abbibs f@i Andy 7

Glasg diot - 7 archid Glas - Sat. 7 aflit bud - Diléi filii abbs 7 Coit?
{te Trinitatif de Dunf nob gait funt oquefti qd nd ntti Clici 7 laici Sti
Andy 7 Dunkeld diod - indulta cis 7 eort conattio p fedis aptice p*uilegia
7 indulgencias liBtates 7 Imunitates teble inf'ngentes {¥ hoe eof agg“uant
multiptr 7 pturbat - Q’eirea diferecdi tre p aplica fe'pta mandam? q*tinus
abdbem 7 Contintii Pd&os nd pmittatis o* fedis aptice p*uilegia 7 idulgen-
eias moleftari - woleftatores

p cenfuram Ec@aftiea appHone poftpdita
edpeteentes - id fi nd offis hiis exeqndis potQitis intSe ? duo ytm ea
nichomin? exeq*ntur - Dat Lataii - iij- kt Ap"t - Pontifieat? jiri anno

+ xix? +

Honorius de molendinis de muxilburg -

i - 7 diléif filiis abbi 7
Cofitui wonaftij $ Trinitis de Dim? sat - 7 aplid bnd - Cum i motndinis
q in bit a vob tenuit bone mefii wagr Acunei? fubdiat 7 eapHs fir
dildo filio Stepho elico noblis viri Johis cancifi ciuis Romani Redditi
xx" ard ad Beef’ firas liberalit contuleritis quem eidé cflico duximus



--- Dunfermline_page219.png ---
2

est

PONT. ROM. ] DUNFERMELYN. 167

ofirmanda 7 nos ne inde icurratis difpendifi nnde debetif gran puleri «
denogdi tre aue Plentiii indulgemus ¢ ut ea oeeafione qd dés wagr
tenuit motndina pdda 7 vot redditum ifm oeefliftis i cis clieo memorato «
nd teneamini poft deeeflum ci%dem molendina ipa in bificiti ung*m
eoneedere + vt in iH penfioné aut redditum affignare . Ma q? ei dés
ftephs debitum nature pfoltli¢ 2 ad ufuf ¢ros 1iBe deuoluant? « NHi g’ vio

ho- li- hae + pa. no - gceflionis - 7fn- t+ ei - au - te + “ire - Siquis
ze. Dat Reate - Id? Januar - Pontif* fri anno - x’ -

Idem - Confirmaé de Halif 7 de Kilglaflin -

Honoy. Ep. 9. 2. di dileif fit - AD". 7 Cofitui de Dunk - 72 -
relabne fra pleni? intHximus qd ci ad diuini eult? augiiti monaftii

ufm tam numo pfonay q* 7 nobliori ftrudura fab'ce duXitis augmen-
tandii - p fuftenta@one fratrii 7 hofpiti: vols nd fufticiunt facultates - q'n
pleriq, ppe hoe fubire vot oporteat ona debitoy - Vnde ei multa Beun
iftancia poftulaftis ut dignaremur uot ad hofpitalitaté Peipue o8uandam

geede » qd i de Hat 7 de Kinglaflin ectiis tris fi And diod - qs a ueris

patronis vot geeflas 7 pfirmatas p loci dioeefanii de Capli fui affenfu
pacitiee obtine

i ufuf fros hte Bum tiie de tira pmiflione habendo ingflam i ectas
memoratas » Nos u° laudabile i vot hofpitalitatis (dia: fauorabili?) pfe-
qntes ¢ denoddi tre auc! pfenti’i ocedim? poftulata - Sie in vt honeflam
habeant fuftentacom Eetay ipay viearij - q’s dioee
{Pualibs - vob aii de tempalibs refpondeant Pfentetis - Nulli g°
gectlionis - Sig's aii 7é + Dat Reat Id? Janua¥ - pontif ri anno - x° -

is - cedentibs t deeedentib; eay pfonis puentus ipay politis

no epo vt ei de

Idem - De deeimis de Seoii -

Hono¥ Ept 7@- Crm a not petit? q imi & 7 hOfti . tam vigor eq'tatis
q’ ordo exig Fonis ut id p follicitiiné offieij firi ad debitii pducatur efftm -


--- Dunfermline_page220.png ---
260.

168 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xin.

Eapp? dil@ 1 dno fi is iMftis poftutonib? g“to ocurrentef’ affentu
opdm 4 in? vos ex pte vna - 7 abbem 7 Candicos de Scofi § And diot ex
alta fup q'bsda deeimis - mediantibs abbe de Keleh 7 collegis ipiuf quib;
edmiffa fup hoc a fede aptica Ga erat amicabtr inPuenit - ficut 1 pruitate
puide fa eft 7 ab utraq, pte {ponte recepta - 7 ha&ten? pacifice obSuata -
ac in cdfeéo inde autentico dr pleni? otineri aue® aptica ofirmam? - 7
Pfentis fe'pti pat’cinio pmunim? - Ni g* 77 - confirmacdis - Siquis ait -
7@- Dat Reat - xviij - kt feby - Pontif* iri anno - x° -

Idem - Inhibig de procuraédibs -

Honoy epé 7@ - Cvm ex indebitis g*uaminib; plerumq, ptingant i regla-
ribs f&e ptemplaconis otiii pturbari / uos quieti fre puidere volentes -
aue® Pfentit diftri@ius inhibemus - neq's Epé aut officiat ipius vos ut
ectas Fras audeat fup peuragdoibs ult® taxatum 7 Lataneii gcilio pfonay
7 euecéinii nniium agg“uare + NHi g® 7¢- inhibiébis « Siquis ati - 7é- Dat

Lab) aii - x + kt ward. Pontif: iri - anno - x° -

Gregorius pp* - ix? - De Ecctiis de Abirerumbin 7 de Inuirkethin -

GRegorius Ept $. 9+ di Dil@is filiis abbi 7 Coiitui de Dunf - ordinis
sti Bid@i Salé . 7 apt - bnd - Solet annuere fedes apliea piif uotis - 7
honeftis petentit Peibs fanore | Dniuolum imptiri - Vob fiq'dem infinuantib;
intellexim? qd@ orta olim int vot’ ex pte vua + 7 @onachos de Culenros
cifPeiei ordinis - Dunblafi diot ex alta fup ara decimis Eceée de
AbDirerumt queftione / mediante tandem diocefano Epo amiecabli fuit
compone fopita « Et ei caufa fF eeta de Inuirk
noblem viri Ph de wubrei 7 G . vxorem ei? Sti Andy divé ex ala
Utebatur abbi de Keleh 7 coniudicihs fuit’ fuiff ab aplica fede cdmiffa -
eis tandem mediantibs fup hoe cii illis ad compdm amicabilem deuenittis -
N

9
int vos ex pte vna- 7

g° tris inftif Peibs inclinati eompdnes eafdem ficut 1K p*uitate puide


--- Dunfermline_page221.png ---
261.

Pont. ROM.] DUNFERMELYN. 169

fée funt 7 a ptib; fponte recepte - ac haétenus pacilice obSuate - non de
S*thardolf 7 de wolin eetas Dunkeld Dioé - LiBtatet gy ac imunitates 7
antiq’s ae Fonatilies confuctudines ipi? monaftij haéenus obSuatas- 7 alia
bona tra ficut ea omia intte ac pacifice poflidetis 7 in littis inde ofectis

Ate

dr pleni? contineri - Vot 7 p vos cidem monaftio auc” aplica ofirmam? -

7 Plentis te'pti patrocinio cSmunim? - Nulli g® ofo - ho- li- hic pa- ii -
ofirmaddis - inf'n . vt ei - au. te® - pire - Siq's aut hoe at - 7@ - Daf
Lataii - xvi - kt waij - Pontif® iri anno - iiij’ -

Idem + ConfirmacS compdis de eeta de NKirealdin - 7 De decimit

motndinoy de Perth -

Gregoy Ep 7é- Solet annuere fedes aplica piis votis - 7 honeftis
petentiti Peibs fauoré bniuoli imptiri - Ex tra fane infinnagone aecepim?
q é olim int vos ex pte vna- 7 reétoré cete de Difart dioé § Andy cora
Dunblaii Efo 7 conindicib; fuis - 7 abbem 7 Coiiti de Scoii civdem dict
ex alta - cori abbe de Kalch 7 collegis ipi? fup Ecéa de Kareald 7
decimis motndinoy de Pth aue ajliea go Qteretur / eis tandem median-
tibs - 7 diocefani efi accedente ofenfir / ad compdnes amicatiles ci padis
adilariis deucniftif. Not’ g® tris iuftis Peibs inclinati - copdnes eafdem
fit {i p*uitate puide f%e {at 7 a ptibs fponte recepte - 7 haéen? pacitice
obSuate - ae in littis inde pfectis pleni? dr otineri : auc" aplica pfirmam? -
7 plentis fe'pti patrocinio cOmunim? - NHi g’-o-ho-li-h-p-n-o9-
ifn. 7é + Sig’t & 7é- Dat Lataii . xvi + kt coaij - Pontificat? firi_ anno

Ea

Idem - de oferuatoribs p'uilegioy -

Greg Ept $-§- ai dildis filiis de Lundors 7 de Seoii abbib3 - 7 Port de

Scofi § And dioé sat - 7 aplit bi - €¥m nimis difpendiofi éet 7 g*ue dilz

filiis abbi 7 Contintui Ste Tri de Dunf f% And dio ci fiut 7 remotis
7



--- Dunfermline_page222.png ---
170 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xitt.

ptib; pftituti p finglis Grelis aplied fedem adire - et freqn? amultis ta
clicis q® laieis g“uibs fint dampnif’ 7 iniur
coy fup hoc eis dignii duxim? pnidere - Qvocirea difereédi tre p ap -
te'pta - maim? - q“tin? q’eiens a Pdzis abbe 7 Con flitis req'fiti - male-
fSoref coy TfZi Andy 7 Dunkeld diocefibs pftitutot’- ut cif ablata refti-
tuant - 7 de dampnif’ iuriis irrogatis fatiffaciant epeten? + ut T alig’s
cdpmittant - q' appHone remota i%ticia mediante peedant ¢ p centiuran
ectaltica - fublato appttonis diffugio eompellatis - d fi nd ds hiif ex" -
po. indde / duo vim ea nichitn? » exeq™nt® - Dat Lata - vj» 1d? Junij -
Pontif? fri anno - iiij’ -

s laceffiti / ad fupplicacom

0

Idem - @ De abfolucde ex: f.

Jieak

D difpentagde irregularitatis «

Gregoy Ept 3-3. di- veriabli fri efo ¥ Andy 7 diléo abbi de Dunf
sti And diot sat. 7 afea bnd - Ex pte tua fili abbs fuit ppditi eoram nob
q nonHi fat 7 monaftio tuo @onachi - quoy q'dam p uiolenta inieecone

manui i fe ipot' 7 aliof clieos feefares 7 canoné ineiderit fiie pmulgate -
Quidam u° p iobedia 7 aliis exceflib; o* ordinis fui ftatuta omiffis - Latam
a te alibs ac pdecefforil
abtoldis bifiGd p Gmpli
Q'mples t exedicati int
yi reeepunt

tuis exedicacdis {hiam icurreriit - 7 16 obtento

taté 7 juris ignovancia : diuina officia celeb“runt -
flunt monaftium - 7 fimplicitate duécti ac juris
ordines - 7 minifi‘uerunt ifup i eifdem - Aliq' q?
ifio monaftio fimoniaee ft reeepti ? p quibs omihs aplicd Miam imploratti -
Nof g° aiay falute in? omia defideral difereéoi tre p ap™
fe'pta maim? - y“tin?® exedieatis eifdem - dum m® fiectores mannii pgrue
fatiffecerunt paflis iiuriam - feq, inobedientet’ correRint_/ n’ eoydem
mannii Tiedtoy exeefful (lit dificilif 7 enormif- pp? @ ilito ad fedem
aplied ft mittendi inx" forma ecte - abfotonis biifieii: impendatis - Et fup
eo qd excdicati eelebTuere diuina : 7 fac’s ordines recepunt
ei ipis - put faluti coy videritis expedire - faduri ef

igna

a cupientes

difpenfetis
Ymoniacis ? fient T
genalis conttitu@ne coneilij continet® . Eis v° quof in ptemptu eetaftiee
difeipline C conftiterit celebraffe dinina ¢ p biennia ab offieii ex’

ncone



--- Dunfermline_page223.png ---
20k

265.

206.

Pont. Rom.) DUNFERMELY? 171

futpentis ¢ ¢ pott modi fi bone flint conttaconis 7 uite fup hoe Aifpe snfare
potitis et eisdem - Dat» Latai - yj kt Julii - Ponf iri Anno - iiij’

Tdem de ectiis de Striuelin 7 de ouxilburg -

Bidéi -

Greg opt $-3- [di] dildis filiis abbi 7 Coittui de Dun? - ordini
Sei Andy dioé sat + 7 apea tnd - Juftif petentii defideriis digni eft nos
facilé Phere ofenft - 7 wota qa Fonis U'mite nd difeordant eflectu pfeqnte
complere + Eappt diléi 1 dno filij tris iuftif poftuldih; g*to coneurrentes
affenti- de Stuelin 7 de cutkilb cetas q*s de peeflione vetlabit fiis fri
epi {Gi Andy Capifli tui accedente ofenti - candice pponitit vot bai
ca ptineneiis fuis fieut eas iufte ac pacifice poffidetis ¢ vob 7 p vos
monattio Fre auc" aplica ofirmam? 7 pfentis fe'pti patrocinio omunimus -
N#i 2° ofo - ho. lish. pa- i+ oftmat ifn - t ei-au-te™ ofire -
7é- Dat . Spolet> . xvj - kt. Julij - Pontif fivi anno - yj° -

Tdem + De Pth - de Kellin - 7 de Nithbren -

Greg epe 7 - Juftif’ petentiii defideriis dignii eft nos facilem phere
ofentum - 7 vota que a fonis t*mite nd difeordant / effectu pfeqnte
is iuftis pottutonibs g*to ocurrentes
s q°s de gceflione vetla-

complere - Eappt dilGi in dno filij tr

affenfu - de Pth - de Kellin 7 de Nithbren Ee

blis fFis fini. ye - Sino - fit in ofirmaGne pximo Peedente - Dat Spolet
xvj- kt Julij - Pontifieat? fri Anno - yj’ +

Idem » De Kingorit - pe Wymet 7 de Neutun -

tam vigor

Gregoy Ep? 7% Cvm a nob petitur qd iufti & 7 honef
iiri ad debith

equitatis q"m ordo exigit fonis ut id p follicitudiem ottici
dedueatur effém - Eappe dilGi 7 dno filij tris iuftis pottutonihs g*to peur-


--- Dunfermline_page224.png ---
29
a
=i

ss Eys . 2 .
» Gres Epe . 8.9. di

172 REGISTRUM DE [sec. xu.

rentes affenfu - de King - de Wymet 7 de Neutun ecéas ci ptinenciif’
eariidem q‘s ex peeflione vetlablis ffif firi Epi Sti Andy fp*tantes ad ipm
Capitli fui aceedente pfenfu candice pponitis vof adeptof put i litis
ofecis exinde pleni? dr fiero ? fieut eas iufte ac pacifice poflidetis - vots

7 p vos monaftio Fro auc” ap* - pftmam? - 7 pfentif fe'pti pat°cinio
cdmnnims - NHi g°- 78 - Sig's ati. 7% - Dat Spalet=- viij’ kt Julij - Pontif

ri anno - v

Idem - De Kinglaffin - de Kirealdin - 7 de Abirerumbin -

Ivftis petentit defideriis dignii € nos facilé
Phere ofenfa 7 vota {a fonis t*mite no difcordant effeétu pfeqnte com-
plere- Eappt dili 7 dno filij tris iuftis poftutonibs
- de Kinglaffin + de Kirealdin - 7 de Abireritbin e

sto oeurrentef affenfu
ed ptinenciis eari-
dem + q's vetlabit fr fir Ept {ti Andy diocefan? tr fpttantef ad ifm
Capiili fui aceedente offifu monaftio tro pia 7 puida lBalitate geeflit -

fi@ eas infte ac pacifice poffidetis - vob 7 p vot’ eidem monaf' Pio auc! * aplica
ofirmam? ? 7 pfentis fe'pti patrocinio cOmunim? + Nulli g® . 7 - Siq’s aii
7é@- Dat Spolet> Noi Julij - Pontif firi anno - vj’ -

Idem - De hofpitali de paffagio Regine -

. Gree Efe 9-8. di dildif filiis abbi de sta ctce - de Neubott cifteiei

ordiii 7 de § eee porib;

§ Andy dioé fat - 7 afea - bii - Dil@i filij rettoris
hofpitat de paflagio Re’ eibs inclinati - pfentii auc vob mandam?
q‘tin? ea ¥ de bonif eiedé hofpitalis alienata Tuenitis illicite t diftraéa
ad ius 7 pp'etaté ili? legitime reuocetis - cont*dZores p cenfura ectaftied
appHone ppdita compefcendo - Teftef aii - cle -fu-no-fi- fe + g*-od-t-
ti fab ? p cehira eand - ces" - ap™ - cog" - tik. tof - + phi® « Qd fi ii. Ss -
hiif ex - pot - itée ? dno vim ea niehominus exeq“ntur - Dat - Spolet> - ij -
Tdus Julij - pontif: iri anno - ¥j° -



--- Dunfermline_page225.png ---
1
a
S

Pont. RoM.] DUNFERMELYN. 173

Idem - De villa de halis -

- Greg Epé 7@- Cvin a nob petitur qd iufti & 7 honefti . tam vigor

equitatis q'm ordo exigit Fonis - ut id p follicitudiem officii iri ad
debitum pdueat® effém - Sane porreéta nob fra petitio otinebat - qd et
duda - qnda- E- frat clare memoric Dauidis Re& Scottoy villam de Hales
ei ptinenciis fnis pia libalitate monaftio Fro donafl; - q’ndam Archom-
bald? Paeceflor tuus fili abbs - cam ab eodé monaftio p fua voluntate
diftraxit - q7m p2modii ad jus 7 pp'etat® ipi? p vot legitime reuocata ¢
ofirmari vob p fedem aplica poftulaftis - Nos g* tris iuftis Peibs inclinati
villi iptam fi% ef i%fte ac pacifice poflidetis - vob 7 p vof fup"déo monat-
Pio auc" ap™ pfitm? - 7 pfentif fepti patronio pmunim? « Nii g’ 72 - Sig's
afi 7@- Dat Reate - ix’- kt Augfti - Pontif fri Anno - yj’ -

Idem - De taxacdne Ecéay -

Nowe pee DO. at ea Doan ge Ps . ARM Th
70. Gres Epe 8+ 8+ di venabli ffi Epo ecandide cafe - 7 diltis filiis de

Dercongal pmonftratedi ordinis - 7 de Kilwinin Glasgueit dio  abbilys sat -
zapt- tnd. Expdita not diléoy filioy abbis 7 Cont? monaftij de Dunf
paftio patefecit qa venerabiles ffes tiri {ti Andy 7 Dunkeld efi eccafione
pltituddis 1 giiali ocilio edite q’ cauetur ut ofuetudie q“libet epi ut
patni feu cui%libet alti? nd obftante pochialit ectat pfbris de ipay
puentibs porcio fufficiens affignet® - monaftij fui ectiis 1 eoy divcelibs
oftitutis - g*uef’ exiftunt primi 7 molefti / taxaédni porédis de déay
ectay puentib; earumdé pibiis aflignande - Licet fup hoc ex tenore
oftituédis Pfate nulla poteftas fit cis t audtoritaf attributa - fibi- minus
licite nichomin? ufurpantef - i eoy fup*déi monafti ac ectay ipay
Pindiciii nd modied 7 g*uami - Qvare a not hiitr poftulabant ut fup hoc
puidere imediter dignarem’ - Nos g* monattij fup"ddi 7 déay ectay
indempnitatih; tatr Peanere volentes qd pgrue puideatur - Suitorihs
earumdem - difereéoi tre p ap fe'pta mafim? - q*tin? ipari: puentib; 7



--- Dunfermline_page226.png ---
174 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xu.

p*y facultatib; eaydem diligenti 7 puida deliBagone penfatis ¢ fufficient®
de ipay puentibs inx® Paci conftituésm concilij - poréom eay Boris auc’
iira + fublato appHonis obftatlo affignare curetis - Facientes eos porcdne
h9i manere ptentos - Cont iicorea ead’ auc! fit iuftir fit » compefcendo :
47d {i i Gs hiis exe™ potu™ indée ¢ tu fF epe & coy alto ca nichomi?
exeq‘ris - Dat Reat - iij - kt ang - pontif* firi anno - vj’ -

Idem de S*thardolf 7 de wolin -

. Gre& opt 2.8. di diltis fit. adbi 7 Cofitui de Dunf 7@ - Cvm a nob

petitur qd iuftii & 7 honefti - tam vigor eq'tatis qm ordo exigit Fonis ut
id - p+ fol - officii iri ad debitii pducat® eff¢m - Eappt dilGi i dno filij tris
juttis poftutonib; g*to os “rentef afientu de S*thardolf 7 de wolin ectas
@ ptinenciis eatdem - q“s venabit fr ir Dunkeld Ep@ {p*tantef ad ipm
Capli fui aceedente ofentir monattio ¢ ¥ro i ufuf’ pp’os retinendas - pia 7
exinde pleni? dr contineri ¢

puida liPalitate donauit - puti littis ofea
fieut eas jufle ac pacifice poffidetis / vob - 7 p vos eidé monaftio auc"
ap™ ofirmam? + 7 Bientis fe*pti patrocinio omunim? Ita tn q i eisdé ecdiis
p idoneot vicarios Quiatur. NHi g°- 7. Siq’s ati 7e- Dat Lateraii Id?
January - Pontif> firi anno - vij’ -

Gregorius - pp* - ix? -

. Gregoy Epe 9.8. ai aileit filijf - abbi monaftij $ tnitatif de Dun?

eiaq, ffihs ti Pfentib; q*m fut®is regtarem vitam pfeffif . IN PPM -

Religiofam uita eligentib3 / aptict: ouenit adée prefiditi - ne forte cuilibet
temeritatis incurfus aut eof a ppdito reuocet / aut robur qd abfit facre
religionis inftngat + Eapp? dilG 1 dno filii tris inftif poftutonib; clement
annuim? - 7 monaftinm fe tnitatif de Dun? 7 quo diuino mancipati
ellis obfequio fub bi Pet 7 jira ptecédne fufeipim? . 7 ffentif fe'pti
puilegio cSmunimus - Inp'mis fiq'dé ftatuentes - vt ordo monaftieus q'



--- Dunfermline_page227.png ---
vont. ROM. ] DUNFERMELYN. 175

fedin dni 7 bi Bide R%am 7 cod? monaftio iftitutus Ge dinoteitur :
ppetuis ibidem temporihs, inuiolablit obSuetur- Protea q’seumgs poflones
Jeumg3 bona idem monafdium Iplenciarum iufle ac pacifice poffidet -
aut i fut*um gceflione Pontifich - largigde Regum ut pneipi - obtone
fidelii - feu aliis iuftis modis preftante dno potit adipifci ¢ firma vob
¥risq, fuccctloribs 7 illibata puaneant - In quib3 h pp'is duxim? exp'menda
vocablis - Locum ipm 7 q° Pfatum monattia fitt ¢ ¥ et omihs ptinenciis
fuis - Ec@am de Pth - Ectai de St'uclin - Eeta de coufkilb - etam de
Kellin « Eeta de Nithby - Ecéa de Kinglaflin - “a de Kirealdin - Eeta
de ABerumb . Eeta de Hat - Beta de Wyiet - Ecta de Neutofi - Ket
de @aleuiH - Ecti de olin - Ecti de {nuirkethi - Ecta de St‘hardolt -
Ecéa de Kingorii - 7 Ectam de Dunkeld - cit cape 7 ptinenciis aliit’
caydé » Burgi de Dunf ex illa pte aq iq” monattium fitt cit - 7 oMis
obtones altaris tri maioris - xx". 7 - jij - acras tre 7 p*tum iux® Dunf -
Dimidi paflagij {Fe wargarite Regine - Tota Kirealdi - Seyram de Nithb -
i de Gatemile - de foderof - de forduuin - de Drumiinae - de Ben-
dachtin - de Cupmaculti - de Incheturphin « de Kethee - 7 de olin Prat’
de Edent - de Hadigtuii - de Roketburg - de Bwich - de Sttuelin 7 de
Pth - wanfionet’ ci omiih; appendiciif earnmdé » Cellam de Vrehard 7
corauia ci ceed - tris 7 aliif ptinenciis fuis - O&aua pte de omibs placitif
7 lucris Regif in fit 7 fothif . Decima f*menti 7 aene Reg de King - de
Kellin - 7 de Karel - Annuit redditum - xx - folidoy de firma Reg de
fithkil - Decima bras 7 auefi Re& de Ciachi- Et tota medic’
luc + Git redditutt Rew de Ergaithel 7 de Kentir - Decima dit uenagonit

tat® decime

q eapiuntur int?’ Lambmor 7 Thei + wedietaté dit corioy - ac fepoy zy
fagifiis Sit aialii q occidunt® in feftiuitatih; regif tenendis in ft'uelin 7
int forth 7 Thai - Ex pte Seo® ult LamBmor 7 tota regia poteftate fnglis
fabbis vnii corit - 7 vnoquogq, - vi? - fabbo duo coria - 7 duaf ptes fepi -

fexta ptt pellium arieti 7 agnoy - Omit cete G capta fine fine applichint
ex pte Scoé / toti -capud pr lig'm - 7 dimiditi toci? fagifiis eoy dit |
qilibet capiunt® in? forth 7 thei / Tota decima Siti dnioy Reg 7 reddit?
burgi de Stuel - + toci? Can Reg 7 eadem puincia - Burgi 7 porta de

coutkilb + et bibs lBtatihs fuis - Innirefe maior? 7 minoré - De Wymet -



--- Dunfermline_page228.png ---
176 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xu.

de Crebaré- de Smithetuii de Hal. 7 de Kingorii occidentali : villat’-
Annuii redditit . c - folidoy 1 burgo de Edents ob fepultura clare mefi
Re& walcot - Piltariaf q‘s hetis 7 Bwich 77 alii burgif’ Ledmacduuegil -
ia nectia tro monaftio 7 nemoribs Reg p oftruccde domoy 7 igne ¢
vob fient Regi - 7 hdibs trif' fit hdibs Reg - LiBtatef 7 imunitatef a clare
memorie @alcolmo p'mo - Alek - BB - walcoliii fedo 7 Wito - ac Kmo 7
xpo filio firo AleX jlluft! Seot Regib3 - 7 a diocetanis Frit’ q’ fuere p
tempe vob 7 monaftio tro pia deuoddne gceffas- Vt Sia ad ufus trof
pp'os ptinencia q'eta fint de theloneo 7 de omi feculari ofuetudie p toti
regnii Scoé - 7 ofiis hoief tri LiBi ab Bi ope caftelloy 7 poncit 7 ii ad
laicalia negocia ptinentiti - fieut 7 autenticis inde ofeétis dr pleni otinerj -
y + pafeuif’- 7 bofeo 7 plano- i aq'f 7
i vii’ 7 femitif’ 7 1 dibs aliis 1iBtatibs 7 imunitatib; fuis - Sane
noualiii troy que pp'if manih; aut fiptibs colitis de quib3 aliq's hacten?
ud peepit + fiue de froy aialii: nut'mentif’. nits a vob decimas exige vt
extorgre pfumat + Liceat q uob cficof ut laicof TiBof 7 abfolutos e feculo
fugientef ad oUfions recipe - ac cof ablq, o“diccone aliq* retine « phibem?
inf¥ ut nHi frath troy p? fam 7 monat'tio tro pfeflioné fas fit {8 abbis fui
licencia de eodem loco difeede / n* ardoris religionis optentu - Difeedttem
° abiq, cium littay Fray caudone ults audeat retine - Cvm at genale
intdém Pre flit ¢ liceat vob claufis iannis - excOicatif 7 intddis exclufit -
nd pulfatis campanif dim? ci no deditif, intddo ¢ fuppifa uoce dinina
otficia celeb*re - Crifina u’ - olei {tn - ofec*Gbnes altariii feu bafilicard -
ordiuagdef cficoy q' ad fae’s filint ordines pmouendi / a diocefano
fafeipictis efo fiq'lé catholic? flit - 7 gram 7 cdionem aptice fedif nit -
7 ea vob noluit {8 p*uitate alig® exhiBe - phibem? inf¥ ut inf finef pochie
Fre - nHs {8 aflenfu diocefani epi 7 tro - captam feu oratorii de nouo
oftere audeat ? faluis p‘uilegiis pontificii romanoy - Sepult’am q, ipi?
loci TiBam Ge de€nim? - ut coy deuoedi 7 ext'me uoluntati q' fe illic
fepeliri deliBanerint - n' forte exedicati ut intdzi fint aut ¥ publice
ufurarii / nHs obfiftat - falua tii iufticia illaF ec¢ay a quib3 mortuoy corpa
affumunt® - Decimaf’ Brea 7 poflones ad ius ecCa¥ tray tp‘tantef- q a laicis
detinentur redimendi 7 legitime liBandi de manib3 eo, - 7 ad ecéas ad

ei p*tis 2 tris - nemoribs - ufuag

motndinif

w


--- Dunfermline_page229.png ---
PONT. ROM. ] DUNFERMELYN. 177

q's ptinét reuocandi ¢ 1iBa fit vob de jira auc’ facultas - Obeunte u° te
nie ci%dem loci abbe t tuoy q‘libet fuceefloy ¢ nits ibi q“libet fubrepcis
aftucia feu violencia Pponatur - n* q’m f¥es eOmii ofeufia - ut coy maior
pf ofilij fanioris fedm dni 7 bi Biidei Ram puiderit elegendi - Paci q”
7 t*nquillitati tre rna in poftum follicitudie puidere uotntet’ / auc’
aplica phibem? - ut inf* claufuras locoy feu g*ngiara tray nits rapina feu
furtii fae - igné appotie - fang’nd funder - hotem toile cape - t inthe -
{eu uiolencia audeat exereere « Peea ois HiBtates 7 imunitates a pieceflo-
rib; iris Romanis pontificib; ordini tro ycetlaf ? aucto* aplica of'mam? 7
Plentif’ fe'pti_puilegio eSmunim? - De¥nim? g’ ut nti Gino Udini liceat

aufre ut ablatas

Piatt monaftiii temere pturbare - aut ei? potion
retinere - minuere - feu q'b3libt vexacdib3 fatigare -
coy pquoy guBnade ac fuftentadde ocefla St ulibs omimodis pfut*a falua
fedif aplice aue® 7 diocefani Epi candica infticia - ac 7 Pdzis deeimis

Sia integ* obuent?

moderacone concilij generalis « Si y* & - 7é - Cunéif aii» 72 -

Dat pufij p mani wagri Barthot 1ée Romane ecée vicecancellarij + viij -
Td? O&ob - Indict - vij - Buice iearnaGis Anno « w’ - ce? - xxxiiij’ -
Pontificat? y dni Greg pp - ix / Anno - viij? -

Innocencius pp* - iiij? - Qd ad puifionem ut recepéSm alieuj? non

debeamus compelli -

L[nnocencius Epé 2.2. di diltis filiis abbi 7 Cofitui monaftij de Dun -
ordis 2 Biid@i - diot § And Salt. 7 apt. tnd - Paci 7 t*nquillitati fre ac
monattij fri prna volentes i pottum follicitudie puidere / auc vot
Pfentiai idulgem?- ve ad recepéOm ut puifioné alieui? in penfionib; feu
ecéatticis biificiis compelli auc fedis aptice ut legatoy ipius minime
valeatis abfy, fpeciali mandato fedis ei%dem 7 faciente plenam de hac
indulgeneia menédm - NHi g° ojo - ho - 76 - fire gceflionis - Siquis afi - 7é -
Dat - Lugduit - viij - kt aij - Pontif* fri Anno - ij? -


--- Dunfermline_page230.png ---
178 REGISTRUM DE . XUL

Idem - De indulgencia recepGonii ac puifiont -

LInnot Ept. 2. 9. di. vertabli ffi Epo - 7 dil@is filiis Deeait 7 thefaurario
Glas saltm + Ei t aplié biidieGm - Paci 7 t“nquillitati diléoy filioy - abbis

7 Coit? conat fj de Dunf>- ordinis § Biid@ - diot 3 And - ac ci%dem
monattij pat’ na nolentes 1 poftum follicitudie puidere ipis p littas firas
duxim? indulgendd - ut ad recepédm ut puifioné alicui? i penfionib; feu
ecéafticis biificiis compelli - ane* fedis aplice ut Jegatoy ipius minime
valeant abiq, {peciali mandato fedis ei%dem faciente plenam de fra
indulgencia mencioné - Qvoc'ea difereci Fre p ap™ > feripta mafim? -
q'tin? eosdé abbem 7 cont ac jpoy monaftinm nd pmittatif {F hiis o*
gceflionis fire tenoré ab aliquib3 indebite moleitari / oleftatores hui9m'i
p cenfuram ectattied appHone p2poita copelcentes + Qd fi nd offis hiif’
exe + po + intée ¢ tn fF - Epe ei eoy alt’o ea nichoming exeq*ris - Dat
Lugduii - viij - kt aij - Pont ii Anno - ij’ -

dé - De pileis -

Ixnod Epo 2. Q. di. dit. filiis Ab - 7 Cofitui_ monaft> - de Dunf -
ordis § tnd@i - diot § and sat- 7 aplicam tnd - Juftis petentiii defideriis
dignt: € nos facilem pbere pfenfum - 7 vota qa Fonis t"mite ii difeordat
effe&u pfeqnte complere - Cum g" fient ex pte tira fuit ppditi cord not
fitis 7 regione frigidiflima oftituti - nos deuoédis tre peibs henigni
impticntef affenfum ¥ ut uti pileis ordini tro ogruentib; liBe valeatis -
plenam vot oecdimus auc" prefentia facultaté - Ita tn q 1 eleuagde
Eucharittie - ac leeGone euu“nglica 7 aliis 7 diuinis officiif'? debita retlencia
obSuetur « NHi g 7é- Tire conceflionit’
kt waij - Pontif? fri anno - ij -

quis aii» 7é- Dat Lugduii - viij -


--- Dunfermline_page231.png ---
PONT. ROM. ] DUNFERMELYN. 179

Idem - De priuilegio excdicadgis -

~ om & 9 - ase an:
Tnnod ef 8-3 - di dildit fil

ij phi 7 Cofitui de Dunf 7é@ - Cv fient
ex pte tra firis @ aurihs Itimatii nd ni iudices ccéaftiel ci aliq’s st
dicacdis afUngiit - in pticipantet’ exedicatis hi
Rias fulminare ?

obedire nolentes vinélo ex

ar p F Pr vA
no folii i emine s3 Falio modo excdieacdis Plumant
Page Fi Oc Rate paar on deeae Row
nof deuoédis tre Peibs inclinati - auc vot pfentiai Tdulgem? ut fi qfi vot
h9i excSicatis cdicare otigit - ppt hoe maioris excdicacdis
laqueo neq"q"m ligari poffitis ¢ dumm’ nd c@icetis 7 c'mie e*minofi
NHi 9° 7é- fire ocett! . Siq'f A 7é- Dat Lugd - v- kt maij - Pontif® iiri
7 i 7 is \)
Anno - ij’ -

vt familie

Idem - Vt null? delegat? - fubdeleg - eXeutor t osuator fentenciet 7 nos
{8 mencione fpeciali fta de ifta littera -

Jnnod Epé 72 nt ai. Aplice fedis benignitas finve obfeqntii uota fidelia
fauore beniuolo pieq' pfueuit - 7 deuotoy p* q*s i fua deuocdne pmptas
iuenit 7 fuentes quibsdam titnlis decenti? decorare - Vt g' ex {peciali
denoddne q'm ad nof' 7 Romana ectam fre nofciini fentiatis vob fauoré
aplicd nd modicd accreuifle / ane" vots Plentit indulgem? ut nits delegat? -
ut fubdelegat? - executor aut t oSuator ane fedis aplice ut legatoy ipi?
7 vos feu monaftium uFm + cxcdieaGonis + fnfpenfionis vt intdéi fitias
pmulgare aut intdicere uobs ingreflum ecée valeat abfq, mandato fedis

aplice fpeciali faciente plenam de hac idulgencia mencom . Nii g° 7
kt coaij - Pontil® firi anno - if? -

ocet - Siquis ait 7é - Dat - Lugd -

9 .
+7 osuatoref’-

Idé - Indulgencia 0° delegatot’ - fubdelegatof - executores
fup litta px° Peedente -

9 ¢

27x, [xnocent ept 8. & - di - venabli fii Epo - 7 dil@if fillis Deeait 7


--- Dunfermline_page232.png ---
279.

180 REGISTRUM DE {SEc. xt

thefaurario Glafg salt 7 a aplie’ tnd - Aplice fedis benignitas fin - ob -

fi-fa-be-p-o+7 de-p™-qf-7-fu-de- p+ -7- f+ qbsdi - a
ded - decorare - Vt g' ex fpeciali denoGne q*m diléi filij abbs 7 Conuent?®
moftii de Dunf: ordis § bndéi. § And dio® ad nos 7 Rona ecéam hre
noteunt? s' fentiant fauoré apli nd modié acereniffe cis duX9 indulgendi -
vt nis deleg

t?. fubd&t? - executor aut € Suator auc fedis aplice vt
legatoy ipi? 7 cosdem abbem 7 Cont - feu ipoy monattid + excdicagis -
futpenfionis t intddi fiias lees aut cis interdicere ing’f'i ecte valeat
abfq, man" fedis ap® tpeciali faciente plena de ipa indulgencia ficioné -

Ideog, diferecoi Fre p ap + fe'p + mai

n?- q*tinus Pdéot’ abbem 7 Coit:
non pmittatis fup hiis o" oceflionis fire tenorem ab aliquib; indebite
moleftari - moleftatores HY p cenfuram ectaftic& apptone p?pdita copet-
cendo » €¢d fi nd bs hiis ex" potititis inte # tu fF Efe ci coy alto ea
nichilomin? exeqris » Dat Lugd - ij « kt aa

+ Pontif* iri anno - ij? -

Idem - De qitra - 7 anulo 7 cetis Epalibs -

Tnnot Ep 3-8. ai diléis filiis abbi 7 Cofitui de Dunf . Vt puleh* 7
decora filia Jertm fideliby 7 Pribit infidelibs appareat ut caftroy acies
ordinata + eeéa variis infignitur titulis dignitatt - p q"s tang* ornata
monilibs 7 c'chamidta varietate illufttum u'tuti exhibet venuttaté - 7 qd
tandé 7 re hebit - i {pe gerere fe oftendent  titat® indicat p figura «
Qvare fedes afilica fir cetay Sill 7 wagra - ecéas alias tang” adolefeentulas
fuas honoy infignihs liben?? adornat p Mitis lingtay - fperans ut ornate
tanto fe Tmaélatas fludeant diligenti? osuare q*nto ppentius tenent*
dilige deeus pp'um 7 decorem - Cvm g* abbia tra regalis exiftat optétu
kmi in xpo filij Re& Scocie illuttris tris fupplicagdihs inclinati ? t* fili
abbs 7 fueceflorib; tuis i ppetuti utendi witra 7 anulo « iis Tdufitis
pontiticalibs « 7 dandi wonachis 7 clicis tuis duos minores ordinef -
oftiariatt vidett 7 leétoratii - ae Bndicendi pallas altaris 7 alia fa¥dotalia
induihta plend ocedim? auc® Pfenti facultat® - NHi g° 7@ - fire gceflionis
Siquif aii 7@- Dat Lugduii - v - Noii - waij - pontif* firi anno - ij’ -



--- Dunfermline_page233.png ---
280.

281.

PONT. ROM. } DUNFERMELYN. 181

~ hs <x ae er
Idem - Qd nd debeam? t*hi 7 Zam ult mare Scoticana p littaf ap™ de
p i

bonif @ hem? in Seoeia +

Lsnocent ep: 9.9 di. verlabli fi Epo - 7 diléif filiif Decait - 7 thefaut
Glasg sat zap-bnd- Paci 7 t‘nquillitati dilectoy filioy abbis 7 Coit?
conattij de Dunf - ordinis 5 Bide. Sti Andy diot frna uolentes
follicitudine puidere ¢ eis duximuf indnlgendum - ut nit® mare feotici
fap bonif’ que tut 7 Scocia 7 Zam trahi p littas ap™ minime valeant ?
litte ipe plenam fetint de ipa indulgencia mengm + Quoctea difereddi
tre p ap + fe'p - maiim? . q*tin? fup"déos abbem 7 Cont fup hiis no
pmittatis ab aliquib; 0° oceflionif’ fire tenorem indebite moleftari -
coleftatoref - hi p Coma ectattiea appHone p®pdita compefeendo -

4 fi non offis hiis exe * pottitif intée 2 tu fr Eje ci eoy alto ex
nichominus exequaris - Dat Lugd iij - Nott maii . Pontif firi anno
- i’:

Idem de uita - Mitif- 7 miraculis {Ge Wargarite Regine -

Lyno ept g- 2. di- venablibs, frib3 - sti Andy - Dunkeld - 7 Dunblati
Epif salfm - 7 apli¢ tnd - Ex pte Kiii in x° filii iri Regis feo iluftris
fuit nob bumilit fupplicati - ut ci corp? clare memorie wargarite Regine
Scoé chorufeet miratlif infinitis / ipam aggregari {Soy chatalago falem? «
Qvia u° nots non conftitit - de Pmiflis - fratnitati tre pap®- fe'p- maiimus -
q‘tinus de ipi? vita - 7 Mlitif’- ac miraculis inquiratis diligentius bitate -
q inueneritis fideli? redaéta in fe'ptis - ftudeatis not fib figillis tris p
fidelem nuuciii intimare ¢ ut exinde qd a oar ipir Reg expedire
uiderimut’ difponam? - Qd fi nd Gs hiif exe™ . potititis inteo ? duo vim
va nichomin? exeq‘nt® - Dat Lugd - vj - kt Aug? - Pont 1 - a - ij -


--- Dunfermline_page234.png ---
283,

QR.

182 REGISTRUM DE [sec. xin.

Idem - €¢d abbs p' difpentare ¢ vno monach defectum nataliii paciente -

8

de Dunf? - ordinis § Biidai -
A som Galt — QO Aa Ao
sti Andy dioé Sali 7 ap - tnd - Denodis tue peibs benigni impeiens

Txnoé Ept 8+ di- dildo filio abbi monaf
wonaftij tui defect natalia
paciente - dum m° non fit de adultio ul inceftuo coitu pereatus - qd idem
i abbem tui ordinif hi nd obftante defeéu affami valeat - plenam t'
concedimns auctori® pfentiii facultaté - + Lugd « vj. Id? Aug? -
Pontif® - i - anno - ij? -

affenfim - difpenfandi efi uno ex wonachis

Idem - Epo {Gi Andy de liBtatihs + Puilegiif’ 7 indulgenciif - obSuandis -

Ixnot epe § -ventabli ffi Epo ti And sat - 7 ap? bad. Crm
dilém filiti, abbem monatt ij de Dunf ordinis f%i Biid@i - tue diot
progatina fauoris 7 gfe pfeq"mur? ac ipe 7 ei? Coniint? 7 wonattiam
nd obit 1Btatum puilegiis 7 indulgenciis fit muniti - nofy, ipis plura

duXimus indulgenda : frnitati tue per aplica fe'pta mandamus - q“tin?
ipos 7 coy monattium 7 fais WBtatibs 7 Imunitatib; iux* tenor’ indul-
genciarnm 7 p'uilegioy fuoy ptegens - 7 jura coy eif integ™ 7 illibata
osuans ¢ ipos cont‘ tenoré cori p aplice fedis 7 ira reQencia nHatenus
moleftare Ptimas - Sciturus qd ei%dem abbis iniurias non poffemus ficuti
n deBemus equanimit’ tolerare - Dat Lugd - viij - Id? Septéts - Pont firi
anno +

Idem -

DQ . . se 5 ae 2 5
po Dunkeld - De libtatibs - p'uilegiis - 7 indulgenciis obSuandis -

Ixnoé Epo 8 8. di venabli ffi Epo Dunkeld salé 7 ap. bud - Cvm dilém

Os. Pa A ERYAG —_

fii abbem monattij pe Dunt> - ordinis § BiidGi - sti Andy dioé preroga-
. f°, . ~. na a . ~ Man = .
tina fanoris 7 gfe pfeq*mur - ac ipe 7 ei? otintus 7 monaftium - nontis

libtatii p'uile, 7 indulgenciis fit munitii nosq, ipif plura duxim?



--- Dunfermline_page235.png ---
Qs.

PONT. ROM. ] DUNFERMELYN. 183

indulgenda - @ in Dunkeldeng diot ndnta bona monattij Paci confiftant :
tfnitati tue p ap". fe'p- maiim?- 72. fit 7 fepto Peedente « Dat - Lugduit
- viij - Id? Septemhy - Pontif* firi anno - ij. -

Idem - De vita - itis 7 miracut Ste margarite Regine ing'rendis -

» Lxnod Ep. 8.8. di. vebatlibs ftihs St Andy 7 Glasé Epif Sat. 7 ap -

nd» Cv ad inflancia Kitti in xpo filii iri Re& Seod Hlutt’s t* frat Epe
§ Andy 7 venablibs {tbs frit. Dunkeld - 7 Dunblaii cpis frit dederimus
littis 7 mandatis - ut de vita - Mitis 7 miratlis § margaé Regine Scot
inq'reretis diligenti? Ditat® . nob git inuetlitis fF hiis fidelit rete'pt*i -
licet refe'pSitif nob ves ing‘finifle pleni? fup hiis . quia ec n° d&a neq.
noia teftium receptoy nob fuere t‘nfmifla / voto ei9dem Reg cit no fit
erendum in talibus annuere nequinim? in he pte - Q’e'ea finitati tre p
ap. fel + maiim? - q“tin? inquirentes fup Pmiffis iux" p'oy littay
otinencia q*nto pleni? potitis Qitatd / omia 7 fingla 4 innenitis fidetr
redaéta in fe'ptis - not fub figitt tris p tidelem nicii t*nfmittas - Vt
exinde qt expedire viderimus / difponamus - Dat Lugd Id? . Aug? -
Pontif* iri anno - iiij’ -

. . . wom xe OD ~
Idem - Vt nich exigatur in dedicacdne ectari Pe peuragom -

Lxnot Ep2 2-2. di dildis filiis Abbi 7 Cofitui monaftij de Dun? 96 -
Jvitis petentiti defidiis digni € nos facilem Phere ofentaum - 7 uota | a
Fonis t‘mite nd discordant effeau pfeqnte complere - Cvm ¢* fac™menta
ectaftica fint lie ofenda nos tris fupplicacdibs inelinati : auc plentia
diftridius inhibemus - ne us archiepé t epd ab cee if { in dioeefibs
ipoy confiftiit - Fone dedicaddif feu ofee"Gdis Pt pe2addm aliq'd exige t
extorquere pfumat - Tie hoi 7 alia facraiita eetattica eis ut tenétur
impendant cum a uob fuint requifiti / NHi g®- 7é - fire inhibiGonis - Siq's
ali. 7@- Dat Lugduii - xvij . kt Septemby - Pontif* fri anno - vij -



--- Dunfermline_page236.png ---
288.

289.

184 REGISTRUM DE (sec. x11.

Idem - ConSuatoria ut in dedicaédibs nich exigatur -

Innog - Ep? 8. 9. ai vertablibs fib; Sti Andy 7 Glag Epit’- 7 dildo filio
Decaii Glasg - salt 7 aplit Biidict -Cvm fac*menta ec@attica fint 1iBe
confenda - nof diléoy filioy abbis 7 Cofit? coonattij de Dunf- - ordinis
Sci Bidéi - § Andy dioé supplicadib; inclinati p iras litRas duximge
diftai? inhibendum - ne utts archiept vt epé ab ecéiis fuis q in diocetib;
ipoy confiftit - Fone dedicacdis feu pfec*Gnis pe pe’adom aliq’d exige
ut extorqre Pfumat - S35 Be hi 7 alia facraiiita ecéattica eif ut tenentur
impendant - cit ab ipis abbe 7 Con™ fitint req'fiti - Qvoctea diferedvi Fre
pap®- fe'p - maiim? - q"tin? d&os abbem 7 Coiiti fup hiis nd pmittatis
cont® fire inhibiédis tenorem ab aliquib3 idebite moleftari - molefiatores
hi auc’ fira appHone p%pdita compeicendo - Qd fi nd ofis hii:
po™ + intée ¢ duo vim ea nichomi? exeq‘ntur - Dat Lugd - xvij
Septéb - Pont firi anno - vij’ -

Idem - Vt Eeta denuo non confeeretur -

Lnnot Ef - Q. 8. di diledtis filiis abbi 7 Coftui de Dunf 7» Licet ecta
Fra poft cofec*m ipi? p noblioris ftruéure fabricam fdit angmentata -
quia tn pponitis qd antiqui parietes ei? p maiori pte in priftino ftatu
pdurent - Vob auc’ pfentii: indulgemus - ut eisdem parietibs in priftino
ftatu pdurantib; - nHs vos compHe valeat ad eandem Ectam ppe hoe
denuo confec*ndam - NHi g® 7@- tire conceffionis - Siquis aut hoe attemp-
tare 7@- Dat Lugdui - xv - kt Septemby - Pontif firi anno - vij’? -

Idem - Cont* feudotarios -

Lxnoz Epé 2.8 di. diltis fit - abbi 7 Coftui monaftij de Dunf? - 7é -
Ex pte fra fuit ppditum coram nob qd néntti clici 7 laicj tras domos -


--- Dunfermline_page237.png ---
290,

201,

Pont. ROM. ] DUNFERMELYN. 185

aor Oem . = 7
p'ta poftlones - 7 alia ¥ a vob 7 monaftio Fro tenent in feudi- ut fub
annuo cenfi feu redditu {i tro aflenfi vendere + dare - pfonis Keéatticis

zaliis ac alias alienare : quib3dam ex eifiem potlionib; nouos eenfus 7
Bi 9 monat’

ate pp'a non uerentur 7 vim 7

itutes alias impoile tent

Pindiciii 7 grauamen - Quare nob hiitr fupplicattis ut Peanere fup hoe

indlempnitati fre 7 ci?dem monattij Prna follicitudie curaremus - ris
gs fupplicacoibs inclinati / auc’ pfentid diftri&ti? inhibemus ne ab aliquibs

ane quicquid 17 legitimo

‘le ceto talia attéptent® - Detnentes irriti 7 i
aflenfir tro cont” hi phibignis fire tenoré fitit in vim piudicit attemp-
tatii / cont*ria confuctudine nd obftante - NHi g° 7@ - fire inhibiédis 7
- Siquis aut hoe - 7 - Dat Lugduii kt Septemby + Ponti

conttitucdi
amno + vi

Idem - Abbi de Dunf> p fa wargarita -

Isnod ope Suu9. 2. ai - dilto filio- Abbi monaftij de Dun? 7 Scot
CapHo firo Salé - 7 aplit tnd. Exigentibus tue deuoddis Mitis votis tuis
liben? annuim? - 7 peti@dnes tual’ q*ntum eit deo poflum? fauoratilit
exaudimus + Cvm g' dilés filius tir. ID. f- {te Sabine ptr cardinat eni
examinaédm inquifi@dis habite {up vita 7 miraculis be memorie wargarite
t venabli fri Bro

Regine Seoé cdmifim? Gdam fup codem negoéd teh
Epo {ti Andy - nof tuis fupplicaédibs inclinati s ne fnp hiis que idem
cardinalis fe'bit poflit ab aliquibs dubitarj - qd ea de voluntate - 7
tt duximut if teftimditi concedendas -
+ kt O&oby

bijplacito fire peedunt ¢ has litte
NHi g° 7é- fire conceflionis - Siquis ati 7% - Dat Lugd -

Pont

iri anno - vij’-

Idem + De indulgencia - x] - dierum -

Ixnot opt 2. 9. di. vnilifis xpi fidelibs p regnit Scot conttitutis
ap“ - tnd - Licet if de cui? mune venit ut s* a fidelibs f
2



--- Dunfermline_page238.png ---
292.

293.

186 REGISTRUM DE

landabliter Suiatur de habundancia pietatis fue q Mita fupplict: exeedit 7
uota hii Suientib; multo maiora ret*buat q‘m valent pileri ? niehomin?
tn defiderantes dno reddere poptm acceptabilé fideles x‘ ad complacendii
ci q“i quibsdam illeétiuis piniis - indulgenciis feitt 7 remiffionib; initamns -
ut exinde reddant’ diuine g¥e apédres + Cvm g* dignit exiftat ut maior
Eeéa ionaftij de Dunf ordinis § biid@i diot 3 And og*is honoribs
frejjntetur ¢ omib3; uere penitentibs 7 gfeflis q' ectam ipam 7 fefto $
carga® verlablit vifitatunt annuati ? de Oipotétis di Mia - 7 boy pet? 7
pauli aloy ei? auc" ofifi x1 - dies de Tiunéta s* pitia annis finglis niddit
relaxamus - Dat - Lugduii . xj? - kt Octoby - Ponti iiri anno - vij? -

Idem - €¢d ad folugom debitoy n6 ppellam* : n° pbatii fuit q illa debita
7 utilitat® dom? fire flint contfa -

Iyné Epo 8.8. di. dildis filiis Abbi 7 Coftui monaftij de Dun? - 32 -
Indempnitati conattii Fri diligentia q* poffum? Peauere uolentes anc
voty pfentia: indulgemns vt ad folucom aliquoy debitoy eompelli anc sedis
aplice ut altius cuieciiq, nHaten? valeatis ¢ n‘ ea 7 utilitaté déi monatt ij
fuiffe contifa legitime pbati fuit 7 oftentfum - NHi g’- 7@- fire cdceffionis -
Siquis aii 7% - Dat Pufij - Pontif® firi anno - ix’ -

Idem - Vt alienata reuocentur -

Tnnot Eps 8.8 - di. diléis filiis abbi de thero nemore Glasgueii diot - 7
Sactlie Glasgueii Salt 7 aplig Dud - Dili filii abbs 7 Cofit? wonatt ij de
Dun? - ordinis sti Bid? - £1 Andy dio® nob expone curallunt - q ta ipi
q'm pdceeffores cori q*sdam tras - poffeffiones - muna + pentiones -
redditus » 7 quedam alia bona ei%dé monattij + datis fup hoe littis - 7

preftitis iuramentis - nce non penis adi‘tis in g*uem lefioné ipi? né nallis
clicis 7 laicis - aliquib3 cori ad uitam - quibsdam uw? ad nd modici temp? -

z aliis ppetno ad firma uf fub annno cenfu concefferit - quoy aliq' fup


--- Dunfermline_page239.png ---
aud

VONT. ROM. ] DUNFERMELYN. 187

hiis littas pfirmacdis i c6muni forma a sede aplica impet*runt - Nos itaq,
déoy abbis 7 Coit? fupplieagdibs inclinati : difere@oi tre p ap sc'p -
mafim?- q'tinus ca de honis ci%dem monattij p concefliones NY alienata
inuehitis ut dift"éa - nd obftantibs cif iuraiitis - 7 penif’ ac littis - fen
confirmacdihs - aut fi aliquibs de ptibs if q intdici - fufpendi « ut ex@dicari
nd poflint p littas aplicas ab aplica sede indulti exiftit ? ad jus 7
pp'etatem ipi? monattij legitime reuocetis - Contradictores p centiram

ceéattieam - appHone p%pdita competeendo - Teftes ad q' flint noiati fi
se gia + odio ut timore fubtr
ceflante cogatis uitati teftimdid pl Be. Dat - Putij Td? Junij - Ponti’
firi anno -

print? p centuram adem appHone

Alexander + confirmat taxationes .

Alexander Ep 2. 8. dei dildis filif. - abbi 7 Comnentuj conaftij de
Dunf> - ordinif’ sti Bitd And diog - Salt - 72 - Juftif petentit: defidiis
dignit eft nof’ facilem BBe confenfium 7 vota que a
cordant 7 effGu pfeqnte complere - Cun ¢* fieut ex pte +
coram nobif’: in ecéliif conceflif uob in pp'of ufuf taxate sint autor" sedif’
aplice viearie nof ti nCones hemodi ratas
g*tas hntef’- ip
se'pti procinio omunim? - NHi g’ Sino hGnii liceat h*ne paginam fire

nis t“mite non dif-

ra fuit ppditum

is supplicaGOnibs inclinati + ta
put pnide fée sunt auétor’ aplica oftmam? . 7 plentit

conf maddif inf nge - ut ei auf tenlario cont ire «
plipsit ¢ indignagom opis di - 7 toy Pet'+7 Pauli aploy ci? se nottit
ineurfurum - Dat - Anagii - v° - Iduf Jud. Pontif: fri anno sédo -

iq's ait hoe attéptare

Puilegium ci ferico + ne t*hain® vit" mare -

eo) oe Face mie Ses
AleX « Epa. 8 - 3. dei- ze + ut sup" - Exigentibs tire deuocdis niitis
uotis dris libir annuim?- 7 peticdes firas q“ntun: ci do pum? fauorabitr
exaudim? « ris itaq, fapplieaédib3 benign impeientef alent . ut p tras


--- Dunfermline_page240.png ---
296.

207,

188 REGISTRUM DE (see. xin.

aplieaf ut legatoy aplice sedis cit* mare Scocie - fup bonis que habetis in
Seocia oueniri minime valeatif audo' uob Ptent indulgem? - n‘ eedem tre
aplice de indulto huimodi plenam 7 expflam fevint mend + Nulli g
dino hoim liceat h*ne paginam fire conceflionif - 7é- Si q's autem + 7é- ut
fup* - Dat Anagii - v - [duf’- Jut - Pontificat? - fi - anno + ij? -

Contra obligationes -

AleX. Epé- 7@- Quia p obligagbnes tam fup mutuis qm fup fideiuflionibs
confucuertt ectiay diminui facultates ¢ vniufitati tre p aplica se"pta in

w'tute obediencie tub pena expteagbis fit’ inhibem? ne ad inftanciam

ut mandatum alijoy Epoy feu Regu - aut agnatum ut alioy quoylibet
uof seu @onaftid uim alig*ten® obligetis » Dat - Anagnie « v - kt -
DecembF - Poutifieat? i - anno Q'nto -

Gregorius papa - De folutione debitorum -

Gregoriuf epé R. 2. dei. Dilestis filijs abbi 7 conuentui coonattij de
Dunfermelin ordinif’ {ti Benedicti fan&i Andree diot Salt 7 af

en ON eae ede ro A ; ae
hiidictonem - wonaftiii vim sicut intimantibs vob accepim? g*uatii eft

nt

one debitoy fup quoy aliquibs ereditoref ipoy cout* vos a fede afilica 7
eius legatif’ ad ditifos indices litteras impet*ntes : vos cay auctoritate
coram ips iudicib; moleftart dineius 7 7 adhne ut afferitis multiplicit
inquietaut - Not’ itaq, uolentes fup hoc indempnitati einfdem cwonaltij
patna follicitudine Peatre vob andoritate pfent idulgem? vt ad folugom
hui?’modi debitoy minime teneamini # nifi e*ditores coy legitime pbauerint
on obflantibus

eadem cout: fuiffe in vtilitatem coonat tij mewmorati -
renuneiatidihs confeflionibs edpdibs obli
mentif inftrumentif 7 litteris quibsjeumq, cont*&uum tempe intiedis -
NHi g’? omnino bdini liceat hane paginam ire conceflionis infringe ut

ei auf teniario o'ire - Siquis autem hoe attemptare plumferit indignagone

ib3 penay adieétione iura-



--- Dunfermline_page241.png ---
24s.

PONT, ROM. J DUNFERMELY Ise

omipotentif dei 7 beatoy Petri 7 Pauli aploy eiuf fe notit ineurfirum

Dat Lugdut - xv - kt Julij - Pontitieat? fri Anno Tertio -

Idem - De folutione debitorum -

Gregorius ene g- 2. dei. Diz filijs Abbi 7 Conuentui conatt ij de
Dunfmelin ordinif fi Biid@i Sti Andree diot Salé 7a
qonaf tii vim ficut vob intimantih; accepimus granati eft one debitoy
fup q°y aliquibs ereditoref ipoy edtra vos a fede aplica 7 eiuf’ legatif’ ad
ditifos iudicet litvas impet“ntes : vof cay auc’ corain ipif iudicibs; moletta-
rit diueciuf 7 adhue ut afferitif moleftare pponunt -
hoe indempnitati eiufdem conatt ij paterna sollic
ad foluoné debitoy hui%modi minime teneamini nee compelli_ poffitif
nifi ereditoref coy legitime pbaint cadem conta fuiffe in utilitatem
wonatt ij memorati / nec ad foluendum quicq*m eifdem ereditorib; ultra
fortem ane‘ prentiit indulgem? - Non obftantib; quibufetiq, obligaédibs
reniiciaédibs fou iurametif PRitif s Aut penif appofitif in cdtraaibs tup
debitif fup"d@is ¢ Aut cdpoficionibs in frandem - ufuray poftmodi tubfe-
eutif / Aut confeffionib; cont*&uum tempe interietif ¢ feu quibslibet
littif’ veritati 7 iufticie Pindicantibs a fede aplica impetratif de quibs
q"yq tenore oporteat plenam 7 expilam mentionem fieri 7 p qs effedtul’
Bfentia impediri valeat ut diferri / Aut etiam impet*ndi’ que de pfentibs
plenam 7 expflam non feeerint mentionem - Nos enim omnet’ exedieaddit
fulpenfionif 7 interdicti fiias quas oecafione hui%modi in vot 7 dem
wonaftit vim cont” tenorem indulti hui%modi pmulgari 7 peeflus fi quos
haberi contigit decernim? irritof 7 inanef + Nulli ergo omino hominii
liceat hance paginam fire conceflionif 7 eonftituédis infringe uf ci autu
teilario cont‘ire + Siquif autem hoe attemptare pfumpferit indignadsem
Sipotentif dei 7 beatoy Pet' 7 Pauli aploy ei? se nouit incurfaram - Dai -
Lugduit - v - Kt - Julij - Pontiticat? firi - Anno Tereio -

‘licam Biidém -

Nos itaq, volentef fup

. ¢
itndine Peatle ? vob ut



--- Dunfermline_page242.png ---
200,

300,

190 REGISTRUM DE (see. xu.

Carta G - de Qailvyn de Ecelefia de Mailvyn +

Galfridus de wailuy omib; Amicis fuis 7 hominib; ta futuris q* pntibs
faluté in dno. Nota fit uot me dedifie et céceftifle am hae carta mea
cdfirmafle eete xpi de Difermlyn 7 monachis ibidé deo Suientibs ectam
de cailuy T ppetuam elemofina ei dibs ptingeiis fuis 7 maxime ci Pra
illa q* aflignaui eid ecée in dedicacone v3 Fras totas de Potwett ci pratis
cid ppe ectam di&a jactt 7 prati de orchard medow nnd orchardbank
ex pte occidétali vie Regie Welt medow ci Welt flat fub motibs 7 de
cliui mite eorid de thorlothane 7 fup motes eiuftt vni acra ci dio de
Pris que yoeat® cob'netCeroflt eit tofite z croffte et hitagone ibid et in
Wadyngflat tres acras jacétes - 7 in parkley duas acras 7 in valle q
vocatur Kyrkhaleh iuxta molédini tres aeras cit dio 7 infra aulas de
wailuy ex pte oriétali eiufd duas acras 7 vnii acra fap erux 7 tres aeras
in logtofi quart vna jac3 ex pte oceidétali de lonyng ei#d 7 due jacét
fup croft flat ct HiBo intitu 7 exitu ci Libis filturis ad dam ectam
ptinétib; nnd eid ecte in cdi paftura 7 villa de mailuy ad fima duodect
vacearti fue. 6 6 eee

Carta de Halis -

Vnilifis Ste cat's Ecte tiliis- A+ dei gia abbs Ecte xpi de Dunfermely
+ totuf ei2dem loci puentus salute - Noitit des tam potti q'm pfentes qd
Archabat tilins - Wo. de Duglas bona uoluntate ct céfilio 7 affentir
amicoy suoy 7 p peeunia q'm Thi filius Eduuardi de Leftalrie 7 amici
fui cide Arehabaldo dederiit in pleno caplo iiro p se 7 heredib3 suis
qretam clamauit Pram de Halif q'm de nob t tenuit 7 cartas q's inde
habuit in manu fra cum omni iure qd in fra ila habnit vel habere
potuit - reddidit - Notint % tam Plentes qm fut?i nos poft q'etam
clamacidem iftam dediffe 7 cScefliffe 7 hae carta jira e6ftmatfe - Thome

filio Eduuardt de Laftalric pdictam tram de Tlalis p rectas dinifas fuas 7


--- Dunfermline_page243.png ---
SOL.

sec. Xn] DUNFERMELYN. 191

ci omil

ptinge juftis tentdam 7 habendam s' 7 heredibs suit’ de

nob 7 domo fira in fondo 7 hereditate 7 tris 7 aquis in flagnis 7 oolendinis
7 dibs aliif'ad Pdidam Pram iufte ptinetibs libere 7 qtete ab di Suicio =

exaétione 7 confuetudine reddendo inde nob 7 domui fire sig

annis -

vi - @areas argenti-s- iii - mareas ad feftum sti @artini 7 tres @* ad
. = Doe ee 9 . . ~ wns
pent® 7 faciendo forifeci Snicii qd ad tram illam ptinet - Ipe vero f¥ 7

redditus fir eft accept’us sepulturam apud Difermely [Ipe vero frater
nofter redditus eft et aecepturus eft fepulturam cte - 7] poft deceflum sni
ci illa pte peeunie 7 subftancie que illi continget - Tefte eaplo - Teftihs -

De Ponte!

A. dei gta Abbas Kcte ste Mnitatis de Difermel¥ ct omni eduentu
ciuflem omnib; hominib; siue clericis fiue laicis ad Pfatam Eetam
ptinentib;
edg*gacidis Wito filio Ingeram filii Edmiidi filii forn 7 suis heredibs in
fendo 7 hereditate Pram que Pontekin nominat* eit illis diuifis quib;
melius Pdi&am Pram Edmidus aunt eius Viudte reve Dauid optinuit :
libere 7 q'ete ab omni Suitute 7 querela que ad Pram ptinét pe ea que
ad regiam coronam fit ptinétia - Infup 7 ad augmétum tue poflefficis
cdcedimus ei 7 heredib3 suis « x - ina q° int pnominata Pr
de TSuernéth iux© Walford iacét dando nots singulis annis -
dimid ad pétecoft> 7 dimid ad feftii sti wartini - Et si homo ei? sup tram
de Inuirhefeh foriffecerit habebit inde foriffactura 7 si homo fir sup tram
ci? foriffecerit inde foriffaé‘am habebim? . Herba auté tocius ian

seilicet Inthet® cSmunis erit in? firos 7 suos homi:

salutem » Vobis notifieet? nos concefliffe cOmuni affenti fire

m 7 diuifam
xxx - solid

s+ Coneedim? % ci +

remanédi ab exeeitib; dni Regif n' ita eSmunis sit

heredibs suis liberta
extcitus qd homines de Inthefe 7 de waketun domi no polit remanere
z tie vnii foliim’ hominé innenict - In molendinis autem firis s' 7 heredihs
snis illam liBtate que anglice runtfre appellat® ocedim? - Huiuf’ rei teftes
7 aflertores fit \ + abbas 7 omnis cduentus de Dunfermel¥ sicut pens
carta teflatur +


--- Dunfermline_page244.png ---
BOQ,

192 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xr.

De hoibs de Twedal -

Vnitiis f%e aatris ecée filiis- A dei gia abbas ecte xpi de Dunfmel¥ 7
ei2dé loci cdustus salt . Seiant tam Pfentes q® futuri q @arcormi - 7
ediniidus - 7 @ichael filius 7 hes ifti? edmitdi / 7 fFes 7 forores iti?
wichaet 7 meruyi - 7 Gylemyeael - 7 coalmuren td Gyllecritte “7
Gflmahagu 7 oim e0y pgenies ft 1iBi iri hoies 71 pace fira 7 ecte fire
ft - 7 ci tira ‘Tiegeia manét vbiciq, flint - ita 1iBe 7 q'ete ficut Bdeceflores
eoy fuerit ci omni pre: itate fua quof Rex BP dedit ecée fire cit
crebarryii T ppetuam clemofina dando nob finglis annis vnii boué duoy
annoy ut - iiij - sot - Hiif teftib, - Wito filio archebald monacho de
Neubot(t - PH satdote de Whmeth - Edwardo satdote de Laftalrich -
RoBto de Prefton" «A - filio edilfi . Pat'vio filio pet’ de ftel¥ -


--- Dunfermline_page245.png ---
303,

505.

SEC. Xt] DUNFERMELYN. 193

Carta Wit de Smythetun -

suis 7 vieinif pfentibs 7 futuris hane

GilBuus de Smithti omnib; am
cartam vifa® vel audit‘is Saluté - Seiatis me dediffe 7 eonceflitle 7 hae
Pfenti carta mea edf'mafle Wio fii meo 7 hedibs suis totam Pram
Witker cii fuis reétis diuifis sit Rot pat meus e& tennit tenéd a me 7
fendo 7 hereditate lie 7 qtete bene 7 in pace plenarie 7

hredib3 meis
honoritice - Ita tamé q ille 7 bredes sui reddét de ptata fra annuatt ut
hredibs meis dimid - o* - argéti. xl - dad penté 7+ xl. d- ad fettit sdi
coartini p di Suicio sélari exaeeide faluo forifeeo dui Reg - Teftibs -

De tra de Perth -

Omnibus f%e mat's cetic fi Plentibs 7 futtis - P+ dei gta abbas de
Dunfmelyii 7 einfd loci Couentus salém in dno + Noflit vnitifitas tra nos
deditfe 7 eoneefliffe 7 hac Tira carta eonftmatle Johanni Maylbotyl Burgenfi
ville de Perth tram firam que iacet ex pte oceidentali eetie de Perth
7 a ‘ oe om 1 Pedi En ;

iuxta domos firas - Vf? aquiloné - Tenend s' 7 hedibus fuis lide quiete 7
honorifice de nobis 7 tueeefloribs iiris - pdés v° Johes 7 hedes fii reddent
nobis 7 fueeefloribs iris singulis annis duos folid {tlingoy ad f* wartini 7

ad Pentecott> pporeionalit - Tefte Caplo -

De tofto de Pth -

Oumnibs ste mat's Wete filiis piontibs 7 futtis - P - dei gra abbs de
Dunfermet 7 ci? loci conucnt? satm in dno + Nottit vuilifitas ta nof
dediffe 7 eoné 7 hae jira carta confirma’ Wito tilio WiHi aurifab de
Perth Toft nfm qd hem? in villa de perth - in vieo +s -auft*li- Tend
set hedibs fais libere 7 q@ete 7 honorif? de nob in burgagio - Pats fo
/W-- 7 heredes fui reddét nob singt annis p pdto tofto - iiii - sot argent .

QB



--- Dunfermline_page246.png ---
19+ R

xISTRUM DE [sre. xn.

an he oe
tea hodibs tris 7

puof- s+ ad feftii sti wartini - 7 - ii- ad pentecolt> - 7
eq's firis inndict hofpitin  Tefte Capo -

De Inniramund - 7 Heruicroe 7 de ecéa de molin -

Galfridus pmiffione diuina ecée Dunkeldenfis unr humilis - Omnib;,
has tras vifuF vel auditu® satm in dno - Notit vnilifitas tra q cum mota
Bet cStrottfia int abbem 7 cduentum de Dunfmelyn ex vna pte 7 abbem

7 eduentuin de Scona ex alta sup decimis de Inuiramund 7 Hernicroc ad
pacem ind? ipos yeformandam tam fup hiis quam sup aliis de quib3 ind eos
in poftum matia litigandi poffet oriri - vt"q, ps ordinaé®i tire fponte fide
media se sbiecit - Tandem ad ordina@dem firam abbs 7 convent? de Scona
peis 7 suecefforibs suis pdtay Pray decimas offs 7 omnimodas abbi 7
ibs coy q'etas in ppetnii clamaueriit
reniiciantes oii iuri qd in illis habuertt vel haBe potueriit - Saluis domui
de Scona omimodis decimis infile de Seona - Ad eandem uw? ordinagéem
firam abbs 7 cduent? de Dunfmeljn pnoiatis abbi 7 cSuentui de Scona
ecéam suam de @olin in Atholia in ef

eduentui de Dunfmelyn 7 succeffo

atu firo fitam cum omib3 ptinenciis
fuis-salna sibi tra q’m dauid de Ifaftighis in eadem pochia de eis tenet -
auctoritate fira 7 confentu intnenientibs ad firmam dederiit ppetua p
viginti q‘tuor marcii’ annuatim soluend - domni de Duntmet medietaté
feilieet ad Pentecoften 7 alia medictaté ad fefti

wartini in hyeme -
Tidem u° canonici dia ona Plam cetam cdtingentia fuftinebiit excepto q
fia dno pp" aliqd on? eidé ecte fuerit ipditum tiie abbs 7 cOuent? de
Diifmet p pordcde q"m in eadé ecéa peipitit refpondebit 7 abbs 7 7 cduent?
de Scona fatiffacitt p refidno- Et ne aliq* ind déa monatia de cero
oriat® cdtené ¢ vt"q, ps ad ordinagdem iiram fpdte 7 7 fidelit’ pmifit 7 fide
media firmauit q ta sup decimis de Inuiramund 7 de Heruicroe q*m sup
ecéa de wolin n‘non 7 aliis reby Sib; tempe cofecéois hui? inftruméti ab
altut® ptitt habitis 7 poles filam in ppetna in? se monebiit queftioné -
Vt auté hee totalis ordinacio fira ppetue firmitatis robur optineat - vt"q,
ps renicia

s di acGdi + appHCdi - exeepedi fori 7 cuilibet alij exeepedi -


--- Dunfermline_page247.png ---
307.

sec. Xu. ] DUNFERMELYN. 195

Puilegio - omi auxilio « bificio inris candiei 7 ciuilis - p'uati 7 cOmunis
invifdicedi fire 7 succefloy firoy p tépe exiftentiai fponte 7 liberali?
se fubmifit - vt fi aliqii alta ptium cont™ hane ordinaédem uel alig’n
pterit - pté refilient® p%im? cdpellere

artiélum in ea contentii uenire pi
7 e6pellem? ad hane ordinacdem 7 que in ea cdtinent® obferuand p
cenfira cetaftieam 7 p penam cent mareay fabrice ecte Dunkeld a pte
nolente refilire foluenday n‘non p reeep@em ium bonoy Pdtoy mona-
choy 7 canonicoy in epatu fire exiftentiid quoufq, ps refilies ad obfer-

uagdem hui? fre ordinacdis redierit 7 pti non refilienti fi in aliq’ lefa
fucrit de dampnis 7 iniuriis plene fatiffceerit - Ad maior? g* hui? rei
feeuritatem cOficit® inde fe’pt’a in modum cirogphi cui? ur
fire 7 sigillo capituli de Scona roborata penes monaftium de Dunfmet -
alta u° timilit sigillo iro 7 sigillo eapli de Dunfmelyn penes fepefatos
abbatem 7 cduentii de Scona retidebit roborata - Aétum anno gfe -
wit. Ducent’ - t'cefimo feptimo - Sexto decimo kalendas ma

au ps sigillo

j in ecéa fira

eathedrali de Dunkeldeii -

Carta de Pra de Kyndun -

Omnibus has littas vifu® vt auditu¥. R - dei gia abbas de Daf: 7 eid
loci conent? falim - Nollitis vninfi vot’ q nos ct cofenfn 7 affenfu Capitli
firi dedim? cdceflim? 7 hac ptenti carta fira confirmauim? - R - de woratt
fit m@daej filij AleX de @orauia 7 hedibus fuis vt suis affignat’ - tota
‘am firam de Kyndun - iuxta dyngual in Roffia p offis reétas metas cit
iuftis ptinené snis - fine aliquo retinefiito - tenet 7 tnd pdéo R-
is in ppetui - adeo

ter

omibus
7 hedibs suis vt suis affignatis de nobis 7 s‘ceflorib3, fi
TiBe qete plena¥ pacifié 7 bono - st nos déam terram aliquo tempe
HBi9 . plenari? - q'eci9 «7 honorificenei? - tenuim?- aut pofledim?. reddend
if nobis 7 sucé firis singlis annis vni par - +--+ - apd feftti natiuitatis
heati Johis baptifte in cella fira de vreh*rd snpp'ori eiufd celle p tempe
exiftenti vice 7 loco coonaltii fri pro omibus exacé - confuetudinibus 7
demand que p nos vt fueceffores firos a déo Rit hedib; fuis 7 suis



--- Dunfermline_page248.png ---
308.

196 REGISTRUM DE [src. xin.

gi potunt - Et faciendo nobis homagium -
et fernicii qe eee seer ide debitum + Et diéus Ricardus 7
heredes fui et fui affignati yall omfiia ahiciamenta et efcaetas in da
terra cotingentia pe ila aieiamenta et efeactas - que de iure ptinét ad
corronam + Que quid diéa auiciaiita et efeactas nobis iure firo regali
peipienda referuamus - Nos vero et fueceflores firi d@o Rit - de worait 7
filiis fuis 7 fuis affignatis - Bd@am terram vt pmittit® contra omes homines
= feminas warantizabimns - aequietabimus 7 inppetuii defendemus - In
cui? rei teftimonia pfenti fe'pto figillum Capitli firi eft appenfum - Tefte
Capitulo iiro pdGo de Dunfermelyn «+ + +

affig*tis racione diée terre ¢:

Mandatum citationis pro domo de Torphehyn -

Abbas wo"ftii de Dun? - vnus Comiffarioy feu subdelegatoy ci claufut
ad hoe optunis a Retiend in xpo fire ac duo sno - dno. W - dei gta Epo
sti Andy judice vnico agro 7 {tribus sti Johis Jerofolomitani inf*
tis viris decanis x'anitatis séi
And¥ Abirdonen’ 7 Glatguen$ diocetum ad q’s Pfent> tre puenint Slim
in eo q' é oim vera salus ¢ Cum in puinciali Scoticanési concilio s' puida
deliBacide ftatutum - q Layei detinentes inuadentes mundantest ? 7 anfe-
rentes poffefliones seu alia queciiq, iura ecctiaftiea aut liBtates sint ipo
fto [aucoritate] ocilii Pdi excdieati 7 p exedicat? debeant publice
deniciari ? Et nobit vir ac religiof® f*ter AleX de Setton* ex ordiacione

7 cdceflione casri fupioF Pt ordinis in Infula de Rodys exiftentis wage
Doin? de Torph in Seocia efficaci? effectus nob tute cdmiffionis retlendi
pris padi nots dir'te sua g"ui q'rimonia mdft*uit q diis - W - wore ciles fit -

Regnii Seod a fede apliea deputate ¢ dife®

7 hes q’nd Reg& - wore 7 dés Reginald? annis vitis q'b? vix' in huais Pras
poffeffiones ectias 7 - jura sp*tantes 7 sp‘tantia ad Pildos wagim 7 fies f2i
Johi Jerofolomitani z ad déam domi de Torph detinuit 7 detinuerit
win? iufte p otto anof 7 ampli? otinnos vig, ad aduétir ipi? fis AleX" ad
ordiné pag in d&o regno nulla solucide f&a Pddis magro 7 7 ftribs ne
alieui alti noie coydm de redditih; fcibus 7 exitibus Pray ectiay 7



--- Dunfermline_page249.png ---
SEC, Nut.) DUNFERMELYN. 197

polleflion’d: suay pdeay q' qd fetus puentus Redditus 7 obnéciones bonoy
pdtoy valucrunt 7 valere potuerm
tanto tépe si in polleflione Pdzoy magri 7 ffm pacifice extitiffent q'libet
inti vna lh? ct
ftlingoy Q‘re noti supplicant dés frat’ AleX ta noice pdtoy wagri 7

edibus annis vt uale¥ debucrat de

ox dena

ano - iif" - centi libF 7 vi exdecim solid 7 s

fim
ordis sti Johis Jerofolomitani q® noie dom? sue pdée de Torph + ut sibi
de cdpetéti remedio puidemus de 7 sup f'étibus Redditihs exitibus
puétibus 7 obudeidibus pdgis Fenpand - Et petiit quo sup" noie déus
: AFR an ne ee ed) any

ter AleX dém milit® ad pdéam sia p‘eunie sinGlarit de q’libet ano
Qa~ ree te
pdéoy anoy fetécialit
cddépnari 7 cOdzpnatii ad Plea cSpelli ex cautis Padis saluo s* juF biificio

soluend p nos quo sup* noie st fi Alek’
addendi cutandi diminuendi declaradi 7 aa in Pildis vf, ad fine
litis ci pteftacide de expenS suis ftis 7 faciend in hae lite 7 oceatione
ipi? lit’ a dt wilite loco 7 tepe Reeupand - Et q a se afing’ deus frat
AleX q? sup" noje ad o
id que vel quod pha¥ potit de Pais st valeant 7 sint salua five valeat 7
sit salut Jus % nfin offm implorando in pdéis 7 in aliis 7 q'h3 exped* - nos
fue supplicagdi Gnuere volentes inh’ eafu ut tenem® vob 7 vim cuilibet
q iti auctoritate qua sup“ in v'tute ste
obediencie tub pena exedicacdis qua [in] yos 7 Fm quélibet req'fituin
fermi in hiis fe'ptis si in coda’ i
tes fititis vel remiflt ¢ mit Peipitdo wAdam? q*ti? Pdtm aiim +» W + wore
e inf® vni? men’ fj

ia 7 singula sup*d@a phanda s3 pteftat® q ea vel

— By rata
sup pdéis exequéd fuitis 1

s immo Vins aplicis exequédis n‘li

cilité auctoritate paéa canonice moneatis ut i
tépe @onicionis fre s' faciend pfato ffi AleX? q? sup" noie fine q'bs sup™
noib; de pdéis frudib; Redditibs exitih; - puétibs 7 obvenddibs » p ipm
dim . W- ore 7 prem sui Re;

nald «ore s* peeptis detentis 7 occupatis
p tépa pdéa neftitueioné integ"m faciat 7% plenariam soluébem + Alioq'n

ipm qué ex nije ut ex tite 7 ex tie put ex nite 7 z ppt hoe in hiis se*ptis

i

auétdte qua sup* exedicamus ex
Seoti
feriatis 7 nd feriatis dicbus 7 horis
mada? ecia nob ancto“te q* sup* "ti? q

atti a nob ‘andtite qua sup” 7 di

ni cdcilii auétSte publice nicictis finglis dichz duicis 7 feftinis
quib3 vos diuina cdtigerit eelehi

A = rie Oa.
aliay ectiay decanatuti froy pdés wiles.


--- Dunfermline_page250.png ---
309.

198 REGISTRUM DE (Sec. xur.

pdéoy noie ei%tm lit? woram tecerit ¢ ceffetis 7 ceffari faciatis penit?
a diuinis mn eam infti 7 rdabilé allegat volitit q‘re ad he wie teneat*
qua si allegare volitit citetis eii péptorie cord nob feu alto de collegis
Nris ap" Edynburg ¢ ad did Meurii pkm p? f™- sti wich - archagti tee
+++ feriata 7 ceta hora p'ma déam efim allegaturi 7. ulti? peeffurt
cora nob fen alto de collegis firis cf Pd&o fe - A - q° sup* noie fup pais
put de iui flit faeied - Et in figni) hui?modi madati jiri p vos pleni?
executi reddite pfent> tras latori eaydm

git Tris figillatas 7 in cauda
sectida monidde pdéa p vot f&a - In Peia v° cauda Pp citagde 7 in q*rta
cauda p+ + cdicacide - Dat’ ap* Dun? sub sigillo firo die Lune px* aii
t.pdém Anno Bani se 2 ee ee

Copia carte Alexandri Hunvyeth de tra de Lufereuyoth -

Sciant Ptentes et futuri hane conuéGem fstam fuifle [ete. ut supra, N.
201, ujyue ad) Regia Ptate impetrat’ 7 7 impetrand et om

q aliquo titulo

mic conuenédi ipediméto ée pot unt - Ad maioré vero hui couendis fecu-

ritaté fideliter obferuande fubiecerit fe huic inde partes poteftati Regie
vt fi aliqua aliq*ndo ptiti cont hane eGuenédem in aliquo venire volitit
ad pleriam illius obfuanciam p ptatem Regiam fine cont*dicée aliqua
copHatur - Infup fetm eft hoe fe'ptum [in] modi efrographi cui? vna_ ps
penes 4 Abbem 7 ouentum de Dunf- figillo AleX’ Vnyeth roborata remanet -
Alta vero ps figillo cdi de Dun? fig"ta penes fepedi&ii Alex™ refuatur -
Hiis teftib; Bno Abel Epo f@i and¥ ? Bno Wito Epo glafguei / Bno
Ilen¥ ADbe de f@a cruce ? Buo maleolmo Comite de fyff / Bno calif
Com de Strahéen ¢ Bno We. Cofi de Max / Alex® fenefeatt feocie ¢
cagro Gamellii ¢ Thofi de Normannift / Thofii filio Ranulph : magro
Roberto de Stuteuit / Saero de Setuii et alijs - A€t- Anno gfe @° - cc’ -
quiq*gefio q‘rto - Mente O&oby -


--- Dunfermline_page251.png ---
slo.

sil.

SEC. XU] DUNFERMELYN. 199

Jontirmaéd eeée de ftrathardolf -

Onmmnib; x" fidelibs Piens septi vifuF vt auditu® - Ricard pmiffione dinina
dunkeld efis salut in dno + Ibi fauor conucniend aceendit® « 7 gia copiofa
merito exibet? / Vbi religio inmaculata euftoditur - 7 religion’ hofpitalitas
indeficiens comitat® - Cum igit® viri religiofi @onachi de dunfmelin dinine
officio - 7 regularib; difeiplinis iugit infiftétes suftentagdi paupii - 7
gent intendant 7 adeo ut Sipis pleraq,
vidtualia subt*hant ut cis habundaneius largiat® ¢ nos eo intuitu - 7
pfertim ut coy oFonih; specialins inferam? / eis fauore - 7 graciamn

peg'noy + ae hofpiti feepcoi dil

fpetalé exibere volentes - pdecefforis firi bone memorie Gilberti qui
eis eectiam de ftrathardolf 7 vfus pp'os contulit veftigiis inherentes -
vt si q'd p cum mims a@ii fuerit ra@ne Puia supleam? ? cis digtam
eeetiam de flrathardolf libere - plene - 7 integre ei omib; ptinenciis
suis damus + concedim? - 7 pfenti se'pto ofirmam? i vfus pp'os coydem
inppetuti conttendam - q' nobi

p Bete Op
idoneii vicaritii pfen

7 sueceflorih;

bunt + qui nots - 7 suecefloribs firis de cura animay refpondeat - Cui?
ecctia  Bdicta ppetuis tempibs viginti marcas argenti fore
dif@nim? ? qui omnia ona ordinaria fuftinebit - ext® ordinariis P quarta
pte ab eodem vicario s*tinédis - retis omib3 puentib; ecdie I vfus di&oy

porédné

8), . 7 . ae g rs mee
monaechoy ppetuo conutendis - Si quid auté iuris nos ant pdeceflores firi 7
di&a eetia aliquo tempe habuim? - uel dicebam* aut uidebam? hahere :

illud eisd@ remittim? 7 quiet elamam? - volentes - ut si aliquod inftru-
méetii pt*ritt inueniatur - vel eafu aliq’ confingat® - fit irriti 7 inane 7 nullo
efalibs - In cui? rei teftimonii fens sc'pti sigilli
Fri counimine roboram? « Dat - 7é

tépe valit°um + salu

a

Confirmatio Capituli -

Omni; xpi fidelibs pfens se'ptii vifuk vel auditné - RoBtus deeanus ~
3 Xf 3 Paes | : ;
capituld de Dunkeldeit etnam i dno satm - Nowit vnibifitas tra nos


--- Dunfermline_page252.png ---
31g.

200 REGISTRUM DE {sec. xin.

chis de Dunfimelyn
¢ forma + Omib3 xpi

rtant vertabilis Pris Riz dei gta epi Bri gq” feeit mon
sup collacione ecctic de ftrathardolf infpexitle 11
fidelibs Pfens septum vifut vel anditué - Ricardus pmiffione diuina
Dunkeld Epis salut in dno - [ete. ut /upra, N. 310, ufque ad] plens se'ptii
sigilli fri munimine roboram? + Dat apud Dunkelden - die jouis pxima
ante fefti sti @arci Euangelitie - Ani gre - wilt - dneentefimo sexag -

to + Nos afid@as collacion® 7 conceflioné in dib3 7 p omnia sicut 7 carta

¢

pnotata plenius otinetur- ratas 7 gratas habentes - eas edtirmam?- In hui?
rei teflimoniii Pfeus sc'ptd sigillo firi capituli roborantes - Dat apd Diikeld
die sti colithe Anno gie - @" - ec’ + sexagetimo + sexto - Tefte eapitulo -

Conftitutiones quedam de procurationum moderamine -
Ex concilio Latranens

Cvm apts. 7+ J*. + Quoc'ea ttatnim®? q archiefi parochias vifitantes p
ars a ae ; - —— _
ditfitate puinciari 7 facultatib; ectay + XL~+ uel +L + euecGonii numa :

epi auté - xx - ul + xxx 7 Cardinales +

vi nufq* excedant + Archid

I

ef canibs venatoriif’ 7 anib3 pficifeant® - 15 ita peedant ¢ ut

uero + v + ut + vij - Decani conttitnti fb ipis ¢ duobs equif contenti

exiftant «on
nod que fua fit: £5 que ihu xpi querere nideant® + nee {iptuotat epulat
y acne recipiant qt honclie ae cdpetent illis fhit

querat + 13 cum
minitt'ti

Imnocené f - iiij -
Ad memoriam 7 ad obfernaGoué ppetua e'ca grauamina que in peuracdibs,
Fone uifitaonit’ debitil’ iferebaut® (ubditif a platif ¢ puideriit falub’t
canonica iftituta clea enecéSnit mui et multitudiem pay eflay imod-
: ftatuendo modeftiam debitam obteruari + vt n° 7

ancia aliatiy, fHlui

exigendo plati nimi cxeedent - n° 7 exhibendo title fubditi g*narent® -

fieretq, uifitagd ad fafm + aiq, leticiam - 7 nd ad afflicGoné 7 tediti
fhditoy - vera qr nd nulle adhue de hm} peuraédib; querimdie audiunté -
Nof uolentef’ paftorali follicitudie puide tali?’ in hae parte q tollat*

omis oecafio g*wandi - 7 ceflet prs? matia mémurandi - ap - aud -



--- Dunfermline_page253.png ---
sec. x.]

ftatuim? - vt * Archiepis
archid -

: epis .
ity, Plati’ p'lit’ vititantihs
ab eesiis 7 locif’ uifitatit’ exhibeant?

peaconel 7 victualibs aliifg, neeif
modate + fIta q hee sedin offiem reri
eftimacdue fingloy locoy ut fipt?
quip hiif fient fimam teu ualencia
+ ii + wareard arg’

oti 7 nulla peura-

alia necesaria estimentur . et qualiscumyue in

entant .

procuracione tran

ee tneendant » {Prouifo tamen q 6
maioré ut mineré eneeconii 7 p"y
mani p maioritate ut minoritate pla
toy 7 gcit lat’ « taxatii ¢ fiant nfg, ad

fiima ipam ut intra ben’ peuracond

DUNFERMELY.

estimacio habeatur , Sic ergo procuracio archiepiseopi .

201

* Sie ordina litteram . Vt
antur moderate ,
aconis

procuraciones exhibe-
episcopis . archidi.
tantibus ab
ter quod
non debetur procuracio : nisi personaliter visitanti .

+ Sic ordina litteram . Ita tamen vt hee . scilicet .
procuraciones uel snmptus qui pro ei jt summant .
seu ualeni rtm argenti in nulla pro-
curacione traneendant . et hoe werum + qitod non
debent excedere . iiij . mareas secundum omnem
rerum estimacionem . id et . qualitereumque eibari
gulis locis in quibus esigitur procuracio vietualinm
iiij . mareas . non exeedit cum hie dieatur in nulla

mr

+ Proniso tamen ete . Sie ordina
tainen prouiso quod secundum maiorem uel minoremt
eueetionumn . id est . equoram et personarum mume-
Tum pro matoritate uel minoritate prelatorum i
concilio Laterancnsi tasatum . quod est ext de cen
as eum apostalus , cuius verba hie inferius seri

ntur : hant usque ad summam ipsam , seilicet . i
marcarum , nel infra emder suple t fiat nine

1)

expense . Hie ergo hahetur et expresse eaprimitur quod secundum maioritatem et mincritaten: uisitantium

prelatorum . et secundum taxationem cuectionum habitam in coneilio generali + vsque
infra debeatur procuricio . Cum ergo in eapitulo . Cum apos

quod arehie
episeopi
solidos non excedit . Quod si
eueetione dentur . xii
Quinguies. x. diuidantur . xi. per Quinquaginta

faciunt tres solidi

+ Marcas non excedit  procuracio episeopi qui ultra . x

« Dentur ergo archiepiscopo . 1. . oboli . id
Dentur etiam eidem . 1. quadrantes . ecce . xii . denari
et tres obolos .et remanent duo denarii et obolus dandi cidem archiepiscopo . §

1. ij. marcas uel
quod est concilii Eateranensis.. sit statutom .
em. XXV. uel, SNS E et procuracio archi-
snecciones hahere non potest.

r. Quatuor marce sunt «1, solidi ct . 1, denarii. Pro qualibet enzo
seopo . adbue remanent

| dlenarii . Cum ergo in Quinquaginta sunt
est xxv. dentay
juneti quadrantibus
niliter

agatur in procuracione episeopi . qui cum ultra. xsx . euectiones habere non possit .dentur cidem pro qualibet

denari

euectione primo gece. S88. 80
xx. ij. denarii et

x. denay

obolus sunt . v, ohol
archiepiscopus qui habet «2 , eueetiones
quadrintes pro qualihet exectione
crescentes , scilicet . pra quolibet
LSS

ij. solides .

habere . vij . enectiones : facile est uidlere qui
expente + 137 locif'in quihs maior ¢ fer-
tilitas uel copia rerum het? - Et vhi
minoref {'t reddit? 7 ecée faeultatef
min

: Sampliorem necioy vbtatem 7

sic episcopus qui habet . x:

et hoc vhimaiores sunt episvapatus et ditiore

= Postea pro quulibet euectione . iij . quadrantes . ecce «
wolus . Cum ergo . ij . denarii et obolus sint adhue diuidendi . et ia... sunt quinguiest

singulum numerun denarium contingit vans obols . Sicut ergo
huhchit . v . abolos superexerescentes: post xij . denarios et . ij .

cetiones hubebit . ifj . obolos superex-

umero denario t yum obolum et sic neque plus: neque minus? quam

ecclesie , Cum aute

wrebidiae onus

am ipsum contingit .

§ Hic habetur quod shi maior est vbertas reram
et pauperiores ecclesie minores ese debeut procura~
ciones . Kcet procuraeio archiepiseopi . 1iij . marcas
non

ts tive procuracio episeopi . xxx. yj
solids .

puitatem puentui in ipif pe‘acdib3 expendant - Si autem ampliufT huiem’j
peacdibs fuerit ipentii : flati caf recipientet’ reftituere in vtilitatem
ge


--- Dunfermline_page254.png ---
202 REGISTRUM DE [{SEc, XII.

veGay a quibs caf recepit - 7 illi q' eaf’ exhibueriit erogare de fuo pp'o
paupibs dupli ci? qd tali? expenfum flit ult® 2 cdpellant® - 7 alia nichilo-
min? pena puniant® - fi vif rit expedire - Ceterif’ nichilomin? que p
talibs peuracdib3 feu uifitagbibs genalit ftatuta nofeunt® manentib3 ¢
femp faluif'. Nulli g° 7é -

Conftitné Oétoboni legati - De peuracdibs que Fone vifitacbnif debent® ¢
nd reeipiendif ab archiepis - ut aliif iferiorihs platis n* et vifitat -

turalif difponif’ ctiectut femen ferenti reddit 7 fru&ii laborif multiplicat
opanti - Abfurdi ucro fimulq, Tiqui nemo dubitat ibi quéqm vbi nd
feminat mete + zy ex hiif collige que né ipgit - Ex hiif facroy eanonii
puifio eq'tate pondata deereuié - vt ecta que uifitaGbné reeipit 1 tépalibs 7
{Pualibs ectay bonit’ ubrit iftituta ¢ peuraconé exhibeat uifitanti- Cum
ex Fone nifita@onit’ pened debeatur z fi quid exigit® ut reeipit® hi Fone
ceflante : iam male aceepti 7 idebiti nofi fubit . Cum g° itellexim? q
pleriq, plati pe’acdnes a fhditit’ exigit lieet vifita@nif’ offic
Ipendant - Nof tam ecéarii dempnitati gq” Platoy faluti confultiuf puiden-
tef': diftetint thibem? - ne quif coy peuragdnem que Fone uifitaconit’
debetur ab ecta quactiq, recipiat / nifi ci eidem officiti uifitaconit’

eif nd

- Ae re) a
constitutione . Innoceneii Tpendat - *Qui u® alit’ recipit / donce
on debetur nisi personaliter

Supra habuistis
quarti . quod procuratio
nti.

reflituerit ab ingreffu ecée fit fuf-

RoR ao Pcie an
rehiepiscopus Penfuf’. Epi v° 7 alii iferioref plati
seopus uel archidiaemus. nisi personaliter vstet. ef yifitant 7 fupflua comittina feu
de ipso ab ingressu eeclesie est suspensus  auctorita ~ ¢ an .
constitucionis . eneenii numo ut aliaf in expentif
+ Suple constitutam . g*uare fhditof non pfumat / ult®

«‘utitatem et nuit

Si ergo procuracionem  recipiat

dctininati TftituGe felicif reeordacdnif Inocent fp -
quarti + ne uideant® in vilita@dibs @ag Inc's peeuniariis Thiare - g* eetay
nelle conferuare ftatii : ut falutem que°re aiay - 44d fi cont” attemptatint :
fubditi cif’ nd peant 7 hae pte - latas t hui?modi oceatione exp'eagonii :
fiutpention’i 7 Tdci fentenciaf : ipo iure difeernim? ée nullaf’- Sect autem
nif tepe fupfiui + honofim multitudiem hédind nd adducant - p
gn ectay veq'ef pturbari fepiuf’ confucuit - ; modaébné fequant? con-
{iitucdnit canonice 7 latraii - 9 -+

uifita



--- Dunfermline_page255.png ---
SEC. XL] DUNFERMELYN. 203

[Taxatio cecletiarum diocefis S - Andree +]

Eecletic Decanatus de Linlitheu -
313. Mega de St'ucliii ?

Fea de Penyeot ¢

Eeéa de Penteland +

Ecta de Leffewad ¢ 7x:
Eeta de Waleuyn + 0"
Ee@a de Wymeth. Lat.
Keca de Dodygtftoii a
Ecéa de Laftalrye ? or
Ecéa bi Egidij de Edenh?@ : o
Eeta 1¢i CuthBti sb eattro : or
eta de Goger: Lo
Ecéa de Halys ? wo
Beta de Rathew ¢ om
Ecéa de Keldeteth ¢ wo:
Ecéa de Neutofi / : o
Ecta de Caledott Clek? . . . . or"
Ecéa de Caledor Coit : “a

Eeta de Bynyii .
Ecéa de Strathbroé ¢
Ecéa de Egl¥fmauehy
Ec@a de Leuy
Ecéa de Bathketh ¢

Ecéa de Dimanyit ?

Eeta de Lyftuii ¢

Ecéa de Caredyii ?

Eeta de Kynet? . . .
Eeta de Lynlythqy +

Eeéa de Varia Caplla +

Ecéa de Slemanaii ?



--- Dunfermline_page256.png ---
204 REGISTRUM DE

Eeéa de Dunypa :
Ecéa de Lethberd ¢ : : .

Ecéa de Kirketuii : : : :
Ec@a de Erth ? : :
Ecéa de Buthkenner ¢

Eeéa de Aldecath

+S". a@-@r- cece: wr + 7+ LXvij + Mare -

-S". qi + ij - d+ dant’ de @aré -

icée Decanat? Laudonie .
Ec@ta de Allamettod : . : .
Ee@a de Inti x
Eeta de Dunba¥ @ eaplla de WX
Ecta pe Tyninghaiii ?

yugehafi :

Ecéa pe [amy
Eceéa pe Aldhafi ¢
Eeéa pe Lyntuit ?
Ecéa pe NorBw yt 7
Ecta pe Hadyngtoti ¢
Caplla Gi martini :
Keéa de Elftanford ¢
Ecéa de Garuald? : :
Eeta de Barwe ¢

Keéa de Worham ¢

Eeéa de Bothanis ¢ : :
Eeta da Bowyltuit :

Ecta de Sawyltuii ¢

Eceéa de Penteatlad ¢

Ecta de Goljn :

Ec@a de Setuii ¢ : :

Eeéa de T’uyrnent ¢ :

xv os

cay

NUL

+ LX + @"-

six’.

“XL:

“ype
“co
- LX:

aK

+o.
or.
:a



--- Dunfermline_page257.png ---
1] DUNFERMELYN.

eta de Wekilburg : .
Eeéa de Cranystuii ¢

Ecta de Creytufi ? . .
Eeta de Kethimdeby ¢ :

Ecéa de Ketmarifealli :
Eeéa de faulawe s
Ec@a de Lochoruyr ?
Eeéa de Kerfngtuii ¢
Ecéa de Coepei? —.
Ecéa de Clerkyntoit +
Beda de Waitt tuit ¢
Ecéa de Heryeth ¢
Ecéa de mote Laudon :
Ec@a de Ormytt> :

+O + Ors CCC. MY xVj+ oO:

a ‘
Ke&e Decanat? nitkys -

Ecéa de Aldecambs : : : :
Ecéa de Coldynghaih & cap + : :
Ecfa de LamBtoii : : : : :

Eeéa de Berwve# .
Ecta de Mordyngtui +
Ecéa de ffuldeit ¢ :
Eeta de Chyrnetde +
Ecéa de Ederhaii :
Ec@a de Duns /

Ecéa de Elluiti +
Ecéa de Craneflawys :
Ecéa Sci Boithani ¢
Ecéa de Langetun ¢

+ qi - iiij -d- dant® de @* - xxxij- or. xv -

205

ay

solid -

+o

+o

«oy

“or

«a

a

om.

we.
aye
o-
yr.

oe.


--- Dunfermline_page258.png ---
206 REGISTRUM DE (Sec. XIII.

Ecéa de ftifwie ¢ or
Ec@a de Hornedeti ¢

Eeéa de Hotoii ? :

Ec@a de Vpfetlingt: ? : .

Ecta de Hyltoii ¢

Ecta de Wytotemi ¢

Ecta de Swyntuii ¢

Eeéa de Simp'ngh ¢ - : : :

Ee@a de Lainale & Erfhitt /

Ecéa de floghon ?

Eee® de Paul}fwrth ? :

Ecc" de Grenlawe ? . : : :

Ece* de Gorduit ?

Ecéa de Haliburtuii ¢

Ece* de Hofii ¢

Ee@a de Stichehitt ¢

Eeéa de Edynhaiii : - : . : :
Eeta de Eel¥3 ct Capllif de B'yeham ¢ Lethati - int'¥et
Ecéa de Smalhaii ? . :

Ecéa de Malearuystot :

Ec de fitui #

Ecce" de Ereylduti

Ecta de Lygardwa ¢

Fee* de Laweder :. :

Caplla de Wederley :

Eee" de Wedal ? :

Ece® de Childenkyrehe + :

-S*-@+m*r- pe- or - xxiij-«@- 7 dimid -

+ qi - iiij . d- dant® de @ré- xl w* - iif 3.x -d-


--- Dunfermline_page259.png ---
SEC. XL] DUNFERMELY

Feta
Eeéa
eta
Keéa
Keéa
Keéa
Eeéa
Nega
Eeéa
eta
Eeta
Eeta
Ecéa
Eeta
Keéa
Eeéa
Eee*
Eee*
Eeta
Feta
Eeéa
Eeta
Eee"

cGa
Eeéta
Beta

eta

Eeée de flothrsf -
de Claemaii ¢
de Wuckard +
de Kernee /
de Torry ¢ : . .
de Dunfmet ¢
de Intikethyit Fs
de pua Kingorii =:
de magna King -
de Kirealdy +
de Dyfard
de

de
de

de Kynros :
de Portmooe ¢
de Vtyrderet € ¢

de Kinglafly :

de Warkinge ¢

de Kilgousii y

de Vtyrmukedy :

de Ardyngrote ¢

de florty? :

de Quylt : :
de Loferefeh G capH..

- nee +a" + jae

ete de eh -
de Karat :
de K¥lrethny =
de Atnett th}? +
de ABerumby :

an

sty 7x.

_XXVj so"
1x

+ Vj. cot


--- Dunfermline_page260.png ---
Ecéa
Ecéa
Keta
Keta
Eeéa
Kec"
Ece*
Eee"
Eee"
Kec"
Kee"
Kee"

Eee*

Eee"

Eee

“de Tai

a+ mare. C. ore» x

REGISTRUM DE

“de Kelli? . .

de Kileoncath & capt ¢

“de Nithbé ? : :

de Largauch ? . . :

“de Seonyiis . .

de Kennaky

“de Syravs ¢

veth ¢

de Kenbat: .

de Dunenauch :

{ti And? ¢

de Lochres & Capi :
de flovgrund :

de Logymurdach :

de de Wilmanvit :

de fHlife  CapH +

de Lundors « vt Ehedy =
de Culefi¥ ¢

de Qouymet :

de Cr
de Dunbulg ¢
de Cupv¥ +

hecum Cajilla :

de Deruef¥ii

(Decanatus de Gouersn -]

de Potfii ef Caplla DaBny
de fierteuveth @ Caplla

tarn de AVE 7 de Nothryf + qi - iiij - d- dant®
+8 dij d-]

o'r Pt Arehid que ds poni alibi

“XL + G

XL

ir)

)

cun

de w@area + [xxx li +

HXXX +O":


--- Dunfermline_page261.png ---
FERMELYN. 209

/ XUL] DU

Kee" de wetfen : ett Caplla : + xxiiij - @*
Kee* de Lumfort {ii : : : : : ij. at
de Pth eit Caplla : . : : : c+ a.

Kee“

Eee" de Seoti p te: . . . . . La:
Kee" de Camb3mikel : : : : + Vj +o"

Eee* de Blare ¢ : : : : : + xxiiij - o*

Ee@a de CulaS xv @-
Keéa de Banevyii :- : : . . -O+8-
Keéa de flaulys ¢ : : : : : 1xXV-
eta de fforgrund / : : : : + Lx +

Keéa de Rofficlerauch : : : : : “xxvj- co -
Keéa de Inchetore ¢ : : : : + Lx at.
Ecéa de Kyntpinedy + : : : : Xxx @*-
Ee@a de Rath ¢ : : : : : 1x1".
ca de Krot : : : : : Hip. x. ot.
eca de Kynfamys : +xv-o*

Eeta de Kinule: : . : : +XL+ a":
Keéa de R¢nd ? : : : : : + xij-@*-

pe. o'r Ly) + wr 7 dimid -

+S". qit - iiij -@- dant? de warea # [- xi- tj ij-8-j-d- q*d -J

(Decanatus de Anegus -]
Keéa de Lundy & Cajilla: : : : + xxiiij - ot -
Eeéa de Lyf ¢ : : : : : + viij- ao".
eta de Intigot sis ¢ . : . : + viij ao
Eefa de Loggn Dundes. . . . exij-o*-
Ecéa de Strathechtyii : : : : : +X+@*-
Ecéa de Qureus/ : : : . xXx @*-
Keta de Munyfoth ¢ Capilla : : : : +XL- @*
Ec@a de Barry ¢ : : : : : + XXX +O.
Keta de ABellot 2. : : : . + XXx + @*-

2b


--- Dunfermline_page262.png ---
210 REGISTRUM DE

Ecta de Abby 7 Atyfi ci Caplla :
Ecta de Intikilety# ¢ Caplla /

eta de Influnaii

Eeéa de Dunynat ?

Ee@a de Inchebrfot & duabs capt +
Ecéa de Ketene’ ¢

Eeéa de Neutyt
Ee@éa de Neuyt
Eeéa de E:
Ecéa de Erolyit ?
Ecéa de Luntrethyi :
Ecéa de Kerymur ¢
Ecéa de Glamene:
Ecta de Kynetl
Eee" de Intarethy ii +
Eee* de Wathinlur ¢ :
Ece* de Ruftinot 7 de florfa¥ :
Ece* de Rofcolbyii et Caplla :
Eee" de Edeuyii #
Ec@a de Kynett ¢
Ece* de Tanetheys +
Ece® de ABlemenach :
Sec" de Aldbai /

Ece* de Dui ¢

Eee" de Logyii ¢

Ece* de Dunlopyii +
Eec* de Adel ¢

Ecc* de Dulbrodoé ¢

oF

‘aplla +

- S*- peece -

[- Sint git - i

+ d+ dant? de wre - xv- tj -

vii

[SEc. SII.
-ixx- Hj.
Lew.

+ XXX + *-
sly. a
+ xviij - o*
+xV- 0

xv

aes) a ~
core - xxiiij - co" + pt - x - sot. de Eeéa de Dulbrodoé -

j-d-ob-J


--- Dunfermline_page263.png ---
SEC. X1L] DUNFERMELYN. aul

ese Decanat? de Mernys -

Eee* de Durrys : . : : : : “xX. @-
Kee“ de NV ¢ : : : : : -x-o"
Eee‘ de- ffordui ? : . : : + Lx + or

Ece‘ de ADbuthenot :

Eeta de flotyreffach & Caplla :
Ecéta de Dunott¥ & caplla ¢
Ecta de Kinef ei caplla:

Eeta de Bennumi ¢ wor.
Eeéa de Eglifyvrg 2. 1a

Ee@a de Coneucth ? ro

Eeta de ABluthenot : sot.
Keéa de flettrkerii ? +o"
Eeéa de Neudoté + : : : : + iiij «oo -
Eeéa de Garvoé : : . : : : xv
[Ecéa de Dulmad: : : : : sip. oJ

/S*- cece + cr Lxvj + oarg - Sima de Aneg? 7 de wernys / o + wart -

ce: Or iio exe @ eX S-

-S*- tot + viij + ot - viijs a + ix of. x. 8-

pest viiph tix. t-iij
ij-S-ix-d-Tide-c-

+ Wed + q de-v- deti de mrea eetar
ij-S-iiij-d- It de-xx'- lib
mare : xlj-S- viij- d- If de-c- &j + xij
bexvje 2. vip dt. FR ede sc lif xxxj- lib. v-8-

+ Tt de. xx'- mare.

S-yj-d- Tide. a@- maré- xx-

- Ti+ ed - q ad traf’ {p*tant ¢ *. Li xxvij- 3+ vij-d-

vi 7 trard qii. vd. dant® - de maré-cc- tj-L-li-

+ ot bucdif ee
8. iiij- d-

S* cdtCbucbis cetay . - + + +» dena® dant? dems. +++ - -. lib.
xix dob


--- Dunfermline_page264.png ---
Sid

212 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xan.

- Sin" cot'buédis eetay qit - vj - dena¥ dant® de wr « cc. Lib¥ - iiij - LibF -
iiij-S-x-d-ob-

Sua ectiay Reéto¥ de Dunfmelyn in Epifeopatu f@i AndF exeepta
eeéa de wukilburg qii lenant* sex denarij de marca - x - tj - xv - solid
-j-d.ob-

(Addunt® de ReéoF de outkilburg qii tres denarij dant? de qarea - xiij -
sot - Et sie eft Suifia td - xj - li - viij - solid - x. dof -J

Carta de balbard -

Vnitlis 7. p- 7 - tra noulit vnitifitas » Nos ex edi ofilio 7 affenfu eapli
iiri dedifle oceflifle 7 carta fira oftmafle Ade de Blar fram de balbard
qm Tugo fili? Leuing tenuit - et eif@ dinifis ci q'hy eam dés Hugo
tenuit - 7 infup tfileeim aeras menfuratas dée tre pximiores Vfus orient®
ficuti ficheti in pte auft*li defeendit a peteria ufq, ad fuleos aratri + qui
in e'nfifo ad diuifas faciendas ad alind fieheti Vf
iacet deduennt® - Et vnam domi in fYiori nibren pximd magne vie que

aq'lon@ ubi lapis

vadit Vis fém Andream Vfus oceidentem ci tofto 7 crofto yni? acre 7
et pmuni pattura - Tenend 7 tnda in ferdo 7 in hereditate s' 7 heredibs
fuis de nob 7 fuecefforibs firis - [Reddendo inde} annuati p oiibs uid +
ibs 7 demandis dimidia cared ftlingoy

exal videls - xI® - denarios ad
pentecoften - 7 xI* . defi ad fefti 1@i mar
nici dni regis q‘nti ptinet ad dimidid carncatd tre in febira de
Nibren - Et feid q Bnoiat? Ad 7 Tedes fui erunt q'eti 7 liberi a Pftade
Mlture de tota tra qm pp'is fiptibs 7 arat's excolunt - 6 holes eoy
molent ad molendini: nfm ad vie vas - 7 nullii op? ad repaédem ftagni vt

ini - 7 faciendo forinfeeum

molédini facient - Teft> Caplo -


--- Dunfermline_page265.png ---
S16,

sec. XT] DUNFERMELYN. Qs

De Balbard -

Symon abbas 72 + Sciant oifies hofes tam Pfentes q'm faci d Nos geeffitie
7 ofmatle donacioné illam - q'm dis - A + de Blar miles fecit Duneano
de C*mbeth feilz Pram de balbard - qua Hugo filius Leuing tenuit ei
1 tenuit - 7 infup t'fllecim ae*s méfuratas

- fieut ficheti in pte auftrali defeendit a

eifd dinifis efi q*b3 dés Hugo
d&e Pre pximiores fas orient
peteria vig, ad fileos arat’ q’ in tnftfo ad dinifas faciendas ad aliud
ficheta. 2? aq'loné v lapis inc; deducunt® - 7 vnam domi in fupiori
nibren pxima magne vie que vadit fi? fm Andream fis oceidenté ei
tofto 7 crofto vni? acre 7 ei edi paftura p homagio 7 Suid fuo - Tenendt
in feudo 7 heditate deo Duneano 7 heredib3 fuis le déo Alexandro +
edi; fuis adeo liBe 7 qete fieut dés AleX Bnoiatas 2 tras de nob meli? 7 7

liBius yng" tenuit 7 pofledit - Reddendo jnde nob annuati p omib; Suié -

exacébdib3 7 demandis dimidia: marea fPlingoy + videls - xl" - dena?
Pentecoft- . 7» xi - dei ad feftii {i martini in hyeme - 7 faciendo forin-
feed Suicii dni re q"nti ptinet ad dimid carneata tre in fehira de
nibren faluis d@o dno Alexand® 7 heredib; tis - Warda - 7 releuio et
ceeidint - 7 faluo not homagio dé dni Alexand 7 hedi fioy in ppetui -
Et feid eft q _Bnoiat? Diican? 7 hedes fui erit q'eti 7 libi a prettacoe
filt’e de tota Pra qua pp'is fiptibs 7 arat's excolunt - £5 holes eoy molent
ad molendinai nfm ad vit vas 7 null op? ad repacbem ftagni ut molen-
dini facient - Dis v’ AleX 7 beredes fai d@o Duneano 7 hedibs tuis
Pnoiatas Pras et omihs HBtatibs af
feminas Warandizabiit - acq'etabit 7 defendent in ppetut . In cui?

teflimon 7@ -

amétis 7 ptinéé ot" oMes hoies 7

De Petbauchlyu -

pti vifuY ut andit*if Symon dei gia AbBbs de Duntmelyi 7

Omnis he

: . AyD a DO . Aes eerie ci
ei9dem loci conuétut humit ckuam i dno saluté . Notit vnitiitas tra nol



--- Dunfermline_page266.png ---
. XU.

214 REGISTRUM DE [s

dediffe conceffiffe 7 hc pfenti earta fira cofirmatfe Ricardo coco Quienti
tiro p homagio 7 Suicio suo illam medietaté de Petbauchelyii q*m pr suus
quondam tenuit pté se
suas tas diuifas -Tenendam 7 hndam s' 7 heredib3 suif de nots 7 fue-
ceflorib; firis Ippetuii - libere - q’ete - plenarie - 7 honorifice - Reddendo
inde nob 7 succefforib; ris annuatim vnii par caleariit alboy ad trantla-

ilies aquilonalem que iacet i longi sup Pothyt
‘ q gu sup M

cidm beate margarite Regine - Et faciédo forinfeei q*nti ptinet ad tantam
tram - Infup dedimns eidé Ricardo illam ptienlam fre sub villa iferiori
que vocatur pti que iacet 7 longi sup riuulii qui venit de Garnoe 7
currit sub villa inferior’ de Difmelyn q*m q'dem pticulam Pre Symon
cocus pio tenuit 7 poftea Alanus qui fuit fenefeallus - Tenend 7 bnd s'
7 hedibs suif de not 7 succefloribs tris liBe - q'ete plenarie - 7 honorifice -
Reddendo ide nob annuatim wna lib"m cimini ad Pde fefti beate
Margarite Regine - In hui? rei teftimoniti huie fe'pto
duxim? apponendii - Tefte capitulo -

sigillit capli firi

Carta de bendachin -

Omib; hoe feripti: vifu¥ vt andit4if Symé di gia abbs de Difmelyii 7
id loci connétus efnam i dno faluté - Notit vnitlitas tra nos de
cdmnni cdfenfu 7 affenfir tocius capli fri dediffe 7 cdceffiffe dno Thoii
de Betheref militi 7 heredib; fuis legitimif quof de eorpore fuo habuerit
p homagio 7 Suieio fuo toté Tra fram de Bendauchin ci dibs iuttif’
ptinéciis 7 reétif’ diuifis 7 mori’ - marifiis planis 7 pafenis stagnif 7
molédinis 7 et dibs afiamétif’ ad déam tram ptinentibs - IBe - qrete -
plenarie 7 honorifice saluis not hiis que fp*t

at ad corona dni Regif +
que excediit vacea 7 onem - Reddendo inde not 7

foriffZis 7 querel
coonaftio fire singlis annis ad duof Pminof anni Duodeci careas fflingoy
silies sex @areas ad P&tet 7 sex ward ad fefti fi artini in hyeme >
faciendo forifeé fi fieri debeat - Si v’ cdtingat q déa fra de Bendauchin
aliq’ tempe p aliq® pticulam Pre cireniacdt p recognionem ut p deam-
bulaGm angeatur ? Predés Thofi 7 heredes fii Pdéam_ ptiglam Pre ad


--- Dunfermline_page267.png ---
318.

319.

xu] DUNFERMELYN. g1s

firmam hebit scedm q p eftimaéom pboy viroy valere poffit - In hui? rei
teftimonia sigilli eapli fri luic feripto apponi fecim? -

De duodeeim maré peipiend de Bendanchin -

Onmmnibs hoe seripti: vifi¥ ut audit®if’ Thon de Bethert milef filius Alani
de Betherf etna 1 dno faluté - Notlit vnittitas
legittimof quof de corpe meo habuero teneri Abbi 7 conuttui de Dixfme-
lyf ad foluédné Duodect waré sigulis anni’. - -- ppetuo ad duos Pminos

fra me 7 heredes meof

oa He =e aN ee ) . a
anni in monaftio de Difermelyii faciendam de tra de Bendauchin q* de
eifd p fro homagio 7 Suicio tenem? - Seilics

sex cart ad Pentecoft: ~
sex maré ad feftii {Gi wartini in hyeme sié in earta fira q*m de cifdem
habem? pleniuf continet? - Si auté ego ut heredes mei ad aliqué Cmini
Pnotata a folucione dée firme vit" qudena ceffattim? qlib3 septimana
duos solid argenti q*mdiu ceffattim? nomine pene feretro beate Wargarite
Regine de Dunfermelyn pfoluem? subiciédo me 7 heredef meos jurifdiedi
Epi 7 Deeani de Dunkeld q' p tempe fuerit vt ipi not’ p eenfura eeéafti-
cam ad Pdga obferuanda fi neceffy fucrit eSpellant 7 reniiciando p me +
heredib; meif omni exeepni cauillaGoni regie phibiédni 7 omni inrit”
remedio qd m' 7 heredibuf meif’ pdeffe 7 déis abbi 7 eduétui potit obée -
Tn hui? rei teftimonit: huie feripto sigilli: nim vna ei sigillis dni epi de

Diikeld 7 Decani eiufdem loci 7 abbis 7 cSuent? de scona appotui -

Compolitio de Qaiftertun -

Seiant tam Pfentes q*m fut®i-q ct cétencio mota fuiflet int’ domint
syn monem abbem 7 ouenti de Duntmelyn ex pte vna ? 7 Witm de
‘etun filia 7 heat Iugonis de ayfttun ex alta? fup mult’a 7 feqla
molédini_ 7 fab'ce 7 opibs carucay - herciay « plauftroy 7 melloy de tra
de mayfttun petitis - Tandé anno g* - wm. ce’ - feptuag . ftdo - ad pente-
coft - q'b3da mediantibs dife'tis viris in? ptes amicabilit cduenit fib hac



--- Dunfermline_page268.png ---
3o0,

216 REGISTRUM DE (sec. Xin.

for’ ¢ videl3 q dés Wilts 7 hhedes fui faluo eifd tenore carte fue originalis
dabt in ppetui pdzis abhi ¢ 7 ouentui 7 fuceefloribs fuis p filt’a 7 feqla
molendini 7 7 fab'ee 7 opibs fap’ déis finglis annis - xx - solid {Plingoy ad
duos dminos anni foluendos medietaté feils ad Pentecoft? 7 aliam medie-
taté ad feftii {Zi martini in hyeme - Et feid - eft / q dés Witts 7 heredes
fui venient ad molendinii 7 fab'cam doy abbis 7 uct? - Be nd cil
molédinaF 7 fabro doy abbis 7 ouet? tali? gueniant ¢ qe ca aliis
7 fabris c‘eimanétib; potit puenire + Si afi pp eoy pruitate
ci eiftt fieut ci aliis e‘ciimanétiby ouenire nd poviit ¢ liBe 7 fine ealliipnia
reeedant vbi meli? potunt expedire - Et vt h ouétio robur ppetue Mmitatis
optineat pti hui? fe'pti in modi cirog*phi fti ¥ G remanebit penes dém
Wit 7 hedes fuos figilli capli de Dunf @ appoitd - 7 pti 7 refidebit
penes dém abbem 7 puenti de Dun? figilla d@i Witt vna efi figillis dni
Wit tiie tépis abbis de infula sti

molédinari

ti coliibe - 7 dni ricard de Balwery wilit> -
> Diteani de Crambeth eft appenfiin +

Carta de + viij - remis in batello paflagii -

Ojtiibus hoe se'ptii vifuF uel auditn® Rad dei gia a de Dunf et
oinf loci Convent? hiiilis etna in dno Salim - Nottitis nos dediffe 7
coneefliffe Johi armigo Pet? filio Adam Thome fit Bernard - Rié de
Kirkeland ? wagote de Craggy ? Johi floker- Et Ene filie Johis Harloth -
~ hedibus suis o&o wants in hatello paffagii ¢ qd voeatur novi batelli -
Ita q ddus Johes armi’ - 7 hedes fii vel affig*ti : exceptis Religiofis
heat vel heant duos remos eiufat batelli 7 quilib3 alioy heat vni remii -
Pretea eonecdim? Sufanne fponfe ei%tm Johis - q si supuixerit Pdgos
duos remos in tota vita faa heat 7 de cori fma nobis refpondeat annuati -
poft cui? difeeffum dé duo remi ad hedes vel aflig“tos déi Johis relitent? -
Tenend 7 nd fibi 7 hedibs vt suis affig"tis di Johis armigi de duobus
remis ad eundin ptinentibs de nobis 7 s‘cefforibs trig pacifice 7 q'ete -
Reddendo nobis annuati pro quolibs déoy odo remoy oéto dena - s -
«uatuor dena¥ ad f® sti @artini in yeme - 7 q*tuor dena¥ ad Pentecoft> :



--- Dunfermline_page269.png ---
SEC, XIU] DUNFERMELYN. Q17

7 faciendo f'mario iiro de mochat p fmpe exiftenti qd facet cotuehunt +
reddendo f'ma¥ pallagii antiqua {ma - Et ef aliquis illoy in fata difcefler' -
steeflor illi? fimam duplicabit 7 nobis fidelitatem faciendo p nos vel
p ballinos ila
Capli iri apposuime - Data apd Daf: in e“ftino Epiphanie dni - Anno gie
7E- ce? + Ixx? - q'nto + Tefte Capilo -

rlinam remi sui hebit - In cui? 7é Iie Sc'pto Sig

De homagio q@ fecit Alexanad Reins Rex feos Edward Regi Anglie p tris
fuis qs huit in Regno Anglie -

321. (Ted - gq Anii sie - w - ce’ - Lxxviij’ + die aploy - Symonis 7 Jude apud
Weimonatit ium AIX Rex Scod fecit homagiti Bno Ndwar
aA = = we Fe > . ~ a oe
tilio Re& Hen¥ sub hiis vbis - Ego deuenio hoim vim [homo tr] de tris

to Regi anglie

quas de vobis tenco in Regno Angte de quibus homag vobis debeo + Saluo
regno eo Tune dixit Eps Norwycens - 7 saluit sit Regi Angte - si ius
heat ad homag vim de regno + Cui Rex ftati refpondit 7 apte digns ad
homag regni mei scot - nullus ins ht u" solus ds ne itd tenco - n' de solo
do. Tune RoBtus de Brus» Comes de Carryk - fecit fidelitatem p de
dno BR - Seo’ iurando in anima faa sub hiis Vbis Sie ¢
sta + Diis me? Rex feot qui h' eft - er’ vobis fidet de vita 7 @cnb's 7 de

is oe adiuuet 7 fh

Ba) ca asthTs 5 - ya Oh :
treno hono¥ 7 fra cOtilia eclabit «7 tie Rex Scocie adiecit - sedi forma

homag « qd st fecit «s+ de tris quas de voh3 teneo in regno angte - Et
Rex Seog ciceflit - q faceret Suicia Regi Anglie de illis - Saluo regno fire

debita 7 cdfueta de q'hs eid fecit homagium -

De cup'macult -

322. Omnibs hoe se'pti viluk vt anditué Rad di ga abbs de Dunit» 7 eiufit
loci coutt? Hilis etna in dno salé - Nouit vnitlitas tra nos dediffe -
cdcefliffe + hae carta fira cf mall malcolmo filio maleolmi de MWerinderah

rd Yui fuo tota tram iiram de Cupmacultyii - Kethee

QE

p hom



--- Dunfermline_page270.png ---
218 REGISTRUM DE (sec. Nu.

Fordewyii - Dummerneth p fuas veétas dinifas ei dib3 inftis ptineelj
liBtatibs fais in p‘tis - in pafenis . in moris - 7 in marifijs - in ftagnis
colendinis lanitis 7 HBtatibs
ad déam tram sp'tantibs ut de iure sp‘tare debntib; - Tend 7 hnda st 7
heredib3 fuis de nob 7 fuecefforih; iris in feodo 7 Teditate adeo 1iBe

”
7
7

aq's 7 pitearijs 7 7 bracino 7 in dibs alijs

. . : . ne xe . .
qrete « plenarie 7 honorifice sient aliq's de hdibs iiris tram de nob liberius
qecius plenari? 7 honorificenei? tenet 7 poffidet abfq, di Suid cdfuctudine

exacédne 7 demanda - Videlicet ei cifdé juriby 7 polfeffione in q'h Johs
de flerenderach vettit? 7 favfitus fuit die q° pdtas Pras nob p fe 7 heredibs

nibs p fuftii 7 bactm imppctud t“didit 7 refignanit - Red-

suis 7 fuce
7

dendo nob inde finglis annis - v - maré - argent - wediété +s - ad pent 7

medité ad f" sti martini in hyeme - 7 faci” fortteci: q“nti ptinet ad dzam
Pram» D%s vero walcolm? hebit foriffta vacce 7 onis de hdib3 fais ligijs
inf® déam tra manctib; » Nos u® hebim? foriffea vacea 7 oué excedentia -
Dag ap* Dunf? die iouis px* p? f” sti Dunftani archiepi - anno gfe «itl -
tdo + tefte Caplo -

ce’ + octog

Carta de Pethinereff de deno obirwifi -

Onmnibus has tras vt auditn? . Witlis de Obirwitt Diis de Pethyn-
. A Aas era a

creff’ eCnam in dno faluté- Notlitis «oe ex mera gia mea 7 pp'a voluntate

Abbi et Comentui de Dunfmelyn vna earbona-

conecfiiffe Religiotis viri
riam in terra mea de Petynereff ybietiq, voluerint - excepta fra arabli -
ita y fufticieneiam ad vius fuos inde peipiant et aliis vendere nd pfamant -
vyna vero deficiente aliam p voluntate sua facient quociens viderint expedire
sibi - Infup volo 7 concedo eifdem 1iBam poteftatem - fodiendi - capiendi -
z cedendi lapides in déa tra mea ad vias suos p voluntate coy excepta
tra arabili - Concedo etiam [eis] 7 ad eos ptinentibs q liBe vti potlint

oimih; viis et semitis p tras meas de Petynereff’ 7 de Galurig sine aliquo
impedimento - q'bus aliquo tempe vii sit vt vti confueuerit - In cui? Rei
teftidii pfentids
AndF ct sigillo RoBti de mala villa qui sigilla sua ad inftanciam mean

igilli meum appotui vna ci sigillo officiat dni Epi séi



--- Dunfermline_page271.png ---
34,

> NUL] DUNFERMELYN. 219

Plentihs appotuerunt » Dat ap" Dunfinelyn die cartis px’ ante feflum si
Ambrotii Epi 7 Confetloris «Ani gfe - @ithio-Ducentetio -Nonagetio Po -

Carta de Tris q's Abbas Radulph? dedit ad feodotifi wagro Witto de

Cragamund -

Isto snnt tre q's Abbas Radulphus dedit ad feodofivrma - wagift’ Willi
de Cramund « filius [tilio] q’nd Symonis filii Nichi -  heredibus fuis vel
fuis aflignatis - vnit tofti 7 Crofti in villa de Clerbalditton” - ad feodotirma
que Normalli? bel tennit - 4 hem? de dono pet. filii pet. de rupe +p
illud tofti 7 erofti + que iacét in? Pras templi
+ gunta tra hofpitalis se extendit - et yna ptitla

suas rtas dinifas - videli
7 hofpitalis in longitudie
tre in Nortilat’ - que extendit se de Nortry
vig, g‘lans sedm longitudinem ab boriali pte ire hofpitalis vig, botyn + et

in latitudie Vlas oeeident

‘edione patiure nut'end - 7 retinend - anmmatim in ila pattura - quatuor-

deeim bones 7 quatuor viginti oues qat'ees ei agnis fezntibus don‘
b5 aliis afiamentis ad villam de

fepentur a matribus 7 duos equos ef of
Clerbaldynfton™ {p*tantibus -

Insup eid Wikmo de Carmud clico fit. qd monis filii » Nich + hedibs
ras tre ad feodofinna + quas « J - filius

fas nobis dedit - videlies vnii tofti qui

suis vt suis affignatis - las deet al
Thom de Cramud - p snas rtas diu
iacet int) padtm Johem + Nicholai - + [in] eodem tofto 7 erofto vnam acram
zaid- Tt in pofflath duas aeras + vna pticata min? +] iacdt ox aq'lonali pte
rs que iacent sup caplla +--+ ex oecidentali pte de Pra

tre finpli - Ti tre:
ordiicea - Ii duas acras ex orientali pte de HTertlautlat: « Tf duas aer's e'ea

le Raue de Uertlawtlats - efi offtibus ptiii eid - tre ptinétilus vt de jure ptine
debutibus - Té cid Wittmo de Cramud - filio quod, Symonis filii nicholay :
sex acras tre 7 did in tritorio de

7 Nedibus fuis vt suis affignat> - illas
Cramud - ad feodofirmam - quas Wiilffis de kyngorne p suas rectas diuifas
nobis dedit « videlies vnii toftti 7 croft - q iacent in? tram déi- W. de
Cramund - clied - filit qendam fymonis - filii nicholai - q*m tenet de Rege ex
orientali pte » > tram templi ex oecidentali parte et in eodin tofto 7 e°fto


--- Dunfermline_page272.png ---
826.

220 REGISTRUM DE [see. xu.

qing, acras - tre» [é in le pesflat’ vnam acram tre» 7 dimid - que iacent
ex aquilonali pte tre fmpli ei dibs ptiné -

Ifte sunt Pre in quibus vendieat ius coonattium de Dunfmelyn » Et de
dé wonattio tenentur - s+ In Clerbarditon® - vnii Toft continens in fe
ynam acram in fronte - Et iu campo eiufa ville - vvam bouatam Pre
arablis - [£ Laut de Cramund filie q’nd @agifit WiHi de Cramund illegie
- dedit quodd toftii et fra cui? mulieris fili? dém tofti eum tra tens,
nie - f'- de pd@o Lan# - Et si Gent edifieata valerét p anni vnam inaré vt
sexdecim folidos + St in villa de Cramund decem acre. de quibs + pdés
Laur ht in manu {ua t'a tofta 7 tres acras tre + et fepté ac‘s in Calla

+ +++ et Herttlatlaw iaventes - ht - J -

ili? Willi conftabula® in manu
faa Rone quart ollendat Pdés Johs que t'a tolta et ae’s Pndatis valent p
annii - viginti folidos -

Genealogia Edilblac -

{dilblaé genuit - W + de Lathanland » Withms - eonttantini - Conit
tin? Johem qt uiuit - Iti fit hemief de Dunf 7 remanentes - GilBeus
c’pmet manet in Balner in fehira de rerays - Galf‘d de Ditberauch manés
apd Ditherach Criftin? fit Ade mang afd Wefterurchard - Ego fit gilfti
mans in tra achii de K¢nros : Jobes tit kynet? manés apd Walwein -
Oenen? preberii manés afd hichertmakedi : Patrici? frat ei? mands apd
Renkeloueh + waurici? cohns @anens apd Petink

Genealogia @auricii fatherlit -

_—
Wiliis lemig pine afd flemighreeh cortuus ef 7 iacet afd Dun? :
Alwin? cambruii fil ei? mortu? eft afd tolibrench 7 iacet in cimiti de
markynehs ¢ Eugeni? fit ei? @ortu? eft apd Kyi ibid. 7... 5.
Et maui Suthert eft filius eius

al ~ jae



--- Dunfermline_page273.png ---
329.

330.

Xun] DUNFERMELYN.

if

Genealogia Johis teolog -

Pat'ei? Scurfarauch mortu? eft afd Oreck 7 tepttus in cimitio de
Kyngori’ ¢ Alan? gil@wer fili? eiut’ wortuy eft apd Kyngt 7 fepultus
ibid ¥ Johes Scolog fit ci? mortu? eft afd Kyngt 7 feplt? ibid - Nt Johes
Seolod fili? ei? @ortuus & apt Kyngt 7 Sepult? ibid ¢ Johes

sete e cece sees Kyngt «7 fepult? ibid: qui q'd Johes g
filios seiliet Adam - 7 Joh - Bet. g++ +++ +++ + Ada vero @anens ap!
Kyngt - 7 ibid - poft aduentii Ballioli in Seocia intfeeé? in cimitio - «
See eft fepult? - ,

Genealogia Johis filii Ad -

28. Adam fit Johis Scolog senioris mortuu? & apd Kyngt 7 sepultus ibid :

Johes fili9 ei? viuit 7 coan; ibid -

Genealogia wauricii fit Rit 7 cugenii ffis ei? -

Gile'ftin? mantauch ili? gilyrewer BdGi mortu? eft apd Inehdrayn +
sepultus afid Kyngt- Rig fili? ci? mortu? eft apd Inchdrayn 7 sepultus
apd Kyngt - oaurici? [filius] eius vinit 7 mang apd petynkir -

Genealogia fit Johis malethny -

(L)allethny fili9 gilgrewer Pdgi mortuuY é in Gathmilk 7 sepelitur apd
Kyngt - Johes b*ciator fili? ci? mortu? & in petynkyr 7 sepelité afid
Kyngt - mallehny fili? ci? mortuu? eft in Katkybaran 7 sepelit® apd

Kyngt - Willis fit ei? viuit 7 manet in Kafkynbariam -


--- Dunfermline_page274.png ---
331.

222 REGISTRUM DE

Genealogia bridini puddyng -

Sithaut fit Edwald mortun? @ in pethyockyr 7 sepelité afd Kyngt -
Bridin? fit ei? viuit 7 oan3 apd Gathmik -

Dr Herbertoli 7 Inchefturphyti -

a 7 . . (3) to 99 : =
2. Tales fant iurati q' fecunt recognidom int’ tram dni reg de Herbertoli

ex yna pte 7 tram de Inchefturphyi_ que @ abbis 7 eGuent? de Dun? ex
alta - 6 diis Robert? de Haya » Wits de Blar - Johs de Longfortun -
Wis fili? Rogi de Cloni - Gileft fr dt Eugenij - Eug makinkerd -
Warin? de Huétirgauen - Adam de worteley - Wits de petkaran - oaths
mar? de glafelon - fector de Lochnidi - 7 ci ifo furni 7 Bridi - Sector de
Culmedi - 7 ci ipo Kelan 7 gilmetonoe - Seftor de Hure 7 ci ipo Rad >
Rot - feator de Kendelouch 7 ci ipo martin 7 gHmor - macalpin - Seétor
de Hu@irgauen - 7 ci ipo Duncan? puus - 7 Colin mackindoyr « Gilt fit
Seétoris de Inchethythyl 7 ei ifo Rous fit Hug long - 7 Gilt tit Colini -
Seftor de Balinferth 7 ci ipo Hug 7 Rob de ead - Seétor de Capet 7 et
ipo Gilmor 7 cacerolit - Rob de Capeth Se&or de cureheli 7 ci ifo
Wits Kalenterach - 7 Suienf de @ortheli - Seétor de Longforti - Seétor
de Dulmloch - Criftin? wen de ft*thurd 7 ci ipo Colin? wegdubyl - ;
cakbeth wachanhyl - Sector de Rath 7 ci ipo maebeth 7 gilbrit -
dicunt abbem 7 ouentti te Dunfii nullii ius hre i Fone tre de Toeheturin
vit* altencreeh ¢ ¢ defeendendo in aq*m de Tay fitas tram dni Re: ‘gif de
Kynelevin n° in pptetate n° in cSmuni - 7 fic affeendendo ad quemdam
lapidem - iuxta marifid: petay -



--- Dunfermline_page275.png ---
333.

SEC. XL] DUNFERMELYN. 223

we OD ar) -: . ~¢
Diuite int tram de Baluegonene# 7 tram ecéie de Sauclyn - ac e¢ tram
de Kynerny -

Incipizdo in occidéte ad lapidé qui vocat® le Haryftane in oecidentali pte
de Carnebeg - 7 fie V1? orient@ ad cap! in fiimitate de Weftircarne - et fic
all fiimitaté del Eftyrearne - et fic ad loci qui vocat* le Caitilfted « 7 fic
Vis orienté Pp porta de le Caftilfted vfq, le Caftilftank - et fie v Pfs orient®-
vig, ad vallé int Ie ffarnyholme 7 lapides molendini . Et fie Pfas orienté
. lurgylmry - 7 fie ad aqua 7 vadii de lurgyhury 7 Teykyngatk . Cia
es ad haldywye> - 7 fie ad lapidem qui vocat® le
Hafftane de doucly - Et fic p Sicheti qui voeat® yhalwleche - extendens
ad media marifii de Balnedra -

Mete de Welgum -

Enidencia Abbis de Dunfmlyn fup metis et diuif mot de welgum

Ineipitdo apd le Peth eiufd mot - 7 fie defvédendo p via que venit de
fab'ea de Nythbren - et tedit v1? Balmait yfq, ad capt cuied fat 7 7 tic
defeen® . deinde p riuulii ciuft fot. vf ad ponté Regine - et fie vfus

orienté - p quéd"m ietii a pdZo pote ufq, ad lapid® q' iacs in aq'lonali
pte de @elgom - 7 fie de illo lapide nfq, ad lapidé qui voeat® le HaFftane -
qui iacet ad finé mete de Balbard . ~ Ge afeendendo p cand meta fieut

fuleus aratri fe ht in arando -

Wete de Knoklargauch -

5 (ete mont? de Knoklargauch inter comitem de fyf ct Abbatem de

Dunfermlyn incipitit ad duos lapides in auftrali parte mont’ predict
afvendendo ad font® qui voeatur howwell et fic uerf? hoream vig, ad
lapidé qui vocat? Wadeftaii et fie ad loci q' voeat® Knokmadyr et fie


--- Dunfermline_page276.png ---
336.

224 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xm

defeendendo ad femita de melgom q° femita tendés de fabrica de Nithbren
tendit fe et per illam itur apud Balmafi -

De Neubotil -

(mmibs 7% - Notlitis nos dediffe conceffiffe 7 hac carta fira pfirmatle
religio’ vif abbi 7 cOuentui de Neubotill vnii cobellii 7 vnii rete in
pifcaria noft® vbi q’ndam ex pmiffione Pdeceffoy Sroy pifcari solebant ¢
salua nob aq* de Efk vfq ad lit? maris ita q7 illa aqua in q*uti dminiai
nim se extédit ¢ KBtave pifcandi nd optineant . Tenendam 7 habendam
de nob 7 succefiorib; firis sibi 7 succefforibg suis inppetui / liBe # quiete ¢
ab 64 Suid 7 demanda / reddédo nobis inde dnuati duas lib*s pipis ad
tefium Tranflasdis Be wargarite Regine In eui? rei 7é -


--- Dunfermline_page277.png ---
REG. ROB. 1] DUNFERMELY

‘

Lida dauid de @anuel de trade Kyughail -

Anno sie + @"- ccc’ + q*rto die dominica in fefto Pentecoft facta fuit hee
oueeio in? Religiofos viros ADbem 7 Connéti de Dunfmelyn ex pte vna :

+ Dauid de wanuel ex alta : videl3, 4q dG Abdbs 7 oust? céceflerunt 7 ad
f'na dimiferunt pdéo Dauid totam tram fnam de Kynglaff¥n ci decima

mentis ad eamdé tram peinctibs vt de

molendiii + bracina 7 Gibs aliis at
iure ptife valentibs - Tened 7 hnd s! vig, ad finé vite fue adeo Be qrete +
plena¥ ¢ pacifice 7 honorifice + sieut wichael de Arnoth d&am tra de déis
abbe 7 puétu aliq? tépe ad fmam tenuit vt huit / ita ti q id? Danid
camdé tram nulli alii fe Toten alig’ tépe afledabit : seu ad f'mam
dabit Reddendo inde annuati Batis abbi 7 ouétuj fexdecim mareas
bonoy 7 legalit felingoy ad duos ani tios / videls wedietaté ad pentecolt
cartini in lveme de y*b3 fexdecin maré

7 aliam medietaté ad felt 1
allocabit? annuati pddo Dauid tres marce p fuo fideli auxilio 7 plilio déis
abbi 7 puétui 7 eoy wonattio aidéo fuo ppetuo preftand - videts viginti
solid fal Dentecoft 7 7 viginti solid ad feft> 1@i martini in hyeme - Q*ndo
auté otigit Pda Daud in fata decedere : Bata 2 tra ci edificiis in eadé
inudtis do coonaftio de Dun? liBe relltet? 7 corp? eid Danid in
codem monaf'tio put ipe ex pp'a fua deuocione teftat? eft ? fepulte t*det®

- Idem wv’ Dauid faciet forinfeed : q*ntt ad déam Tram ptinet - In cui?
rei teftimoi pti hui? se'pti in modum cirog*fii pfeai ¢ penes déos ABbem
7 pustii remanenti : sigillum pd@ Danid eft appentim : pti v° ci%d se'pti
penes ptm Dauid refidenti sigillum cde eapti de Dafmelyn eft appofitum -

Copia Decreti arbitroy fup deéis hlady ortoy 7 eroftoy de Intkethin «

338. meee q die venis pxio pott fefti aplori: fymdis 7 Jude Anni gfe
ccc! + y"- ppuit waleolm? prior @o*fterij de Dunfermlyn procurator
Pp "Atte + 7 guétu eiuidé loci in ectia pochiali de Dunfinlyn ex pte vna 7

Willis gugy ppetuus vicari? de Intkethin ex alt* - cord magro Waltero
QF


--- Dunfermline_page278.png ---
339.

226 REGISTRUM DE [sEe. XIV.

decano morauieh agro tho" - de a¥tofi - et @agro nicholayo de lochma-
bane quoy decreto et ordinacdi dict? Abbas p fe 7 ouétu fuo 7 di&t?
Willis vieari? de InQkethin amicabili? fe fubmiferat ta fup dedis bladi
in ort ville de Intkethin deerefventibs q* in alijs que in déa amicabli
opotidde pleni? otinat? . pftito fup hoe a di& ptib; facraméto q ftabit
to 7 ordinaddi Pdi&oy magittroy - Cumq, Basi magri in Pda ectia
pochiali de Dunfermlyn diéo die fedentes - audirét peticoem paca viearij
de Inukethin 7 defenddes Pditoy Abbis 7 guet? de Dunfmlyn fap deéis
memorat* le& tn carta ptmi donatoris fGa Abbi 7 ouétui de ‘Dunfuly in
Ippetuii toci? bladi decialis ecdie de Intikethin
ocellionb; 7 ofirmaddib; fup hijs fuoy fuceefloy ofirmacbe Epi Sci andree

de

pura 7 ppetua elemofina

indict delegatoy a fede
aplica fup hijs dleputatoy AEN diéi mari deereueft 7 ordinauert
fup dié- dedis bladi tam in ort’ q in alibi decrefcent> in villa de Inti
thin 7 ext® q vti nie poflidet pdzi Abbas et puttus 7 dict? vieari? pdiaas
esta ita eas optinedt in futurt’ hoe € q Abbas 7 puet? pdiai deciam
toci? bladi i campis 7 in ort~ toci? pochie eetie de Intkethin integ“liter 7
libere peipiat faluis Bdiéto vieario cetis q ad vieariam faa ptine dinofeit? -

7 faluis déis magris pniiciaGoe 7 ordinagde p loco 7 tempe faciend fup
alijs que in ptaéa fubmiffide otinétur - In eui? rei teftioun sigilla Pdioy
magiftroy fit appenta huic méoraud - A@ 7 Dat apud Dafmlyn Anno
die et cielo fup* diét> -

q* pro tépe fu {at nee nd 7 ofirmadde cauta cogn

Carta de Pethbauchly -

Onmnibs hoe se'ptum viluF vel auditué - Hugo puniflione Diuina abbas de
Dunfmeljn 7 cid loci puet? Saltm - Nowit ynitifitas tra nos dedifle
coneeffiffe 7 A carta fira pfmafle cariote filie 7 hhedi Ricardi coci q’nda
begiis de Dun? p homagio 7 7 fideli Quid fuo iam wedietat® de Peth-
bauehly q*m pdés Ricard? | pa fuus q°’nd de nob tenuit ptem scifs
SED q iact in longi fup pothyn p fuas reétas diuifas Tenéd 7 hnd
~ 7 hedibs fuis de not 7 fuecefforibs [noftris] in ppetuii liBe . qete - ple-


--- Dunfermline_page279.png ---
S40.

REG. Ron. 1.) DUNFERMELYN. 227

na¥ - 7 honorifice ¢ Reddendo inde nob 7 tuceefforibs firis annuati vni par
caleariti alhoy ad felt tnfladdis he wargarite regine - Et ipa 7 hedes fiyj
nd ppellét? venire ad molendinii nfm aut fabrieam né quieq*in foluent
Dereth aut Slother 15 ficient feqlam ad ecuria fram 7 forinfee’i Suicit
oa . De ., ra FO gl

q‘ntii ptinet ad teiam ptem vnius Dauethe tre - Ttem dedim? eid

cariote iHam ptidlam tre sub villa infiori que voeat? p'tum in b’gagio
de Dunfmelyn 7 iac’t in longi fup riula que venit de Garwot 7 crit fh
villa infiori de Danfmelyn qua qi ptitlam tre Sims Coe? p'mo temit
+ p°mod Alan? q' fuit feneteall? / Tentd ¢ 7 hud s' 7 hedihs fuis de not +
fuceeflorib3 ii
fuccefloribs firis annuati vna lib‘m Cimini ad pdém fefé be margarete
regine - In cui? rei teftimoii pfenti se'pto sigillii: cde cali iri eft appen-
fum / Tefte Caplo -

Tie - qrete - plena¥ - 7 honorifiee - Reddendo inde not ~

. S aie aA . = i =
De repaéde eccletie de Inikethyn iti? 7 exti? p viearit 7 16 p abhaté ~

oust: de Dif -

A> in ecta prdli ciuitat? St Andy die Jouis pxia p? fefti sti Hillarij
Anno gfe - + ccc? . undecio cora nobis Wittmo Beel eandico Glalguen
vie gerente dni epi sti And? fedm forma omiflionis nobis fee In ta

refeeédis chori ecée de Inuerkethyn 4 vit? 1 viros Religiofos Abbem +
coutti de Dun? A@ores p magim Witm de Eeford peuratoré fii legie
oftituti 7 indicio gparétes ex pte vna 7 dim Wim curat> eetie de
Inukethyn ret nutlo modo openté ex alta : Ci oftaret nobis p ret°acta dém
do™ Wittm ad p*fatos dié 7 loci fuifle citati q cdperet p fe vel peeatoré
no’ tuo 7 ectie fue Pdze legie oftituti ad audiédd ibid fitiam diflinitiam 7
Ga memorat* - Cui ex pte déoy Abbis 7 ouét? editi fuit 7 hie modi Dicit
7 pponit cora vobis dne Judex @aleolm? de Gatemyle pe’ator Abbat- 7
ouet? de Daf no® eorid 7 moti fui cdt* dim Wit curatii ecée de
Inukethyn 7 quélibs ei? pe’atord legtm fen defenforé q ch ipe dicat pub™
affendo ipos tenerj ad refeegdem chori ectie de Intkethyn
Vitate minime teneat® {5 poti? clerici Pfentati 7 iflituti 7 cegia memorat> :
quo deelarato petit p*d@im cnratii feu quaciq, plona p ipo 7 iudicio legie

f

/

i ad hoe i


--- Dunfermline_page280.png ---
Qos REGISTRUM DE (sec. XIV.

Ttucniétem p fiiam tram diffinitiam compefei qa piles fua defiftat ¢
q'm fup hoe fae! eiftt 7 q choy p'dém refieiat quociés flit oportunii / p*miffa
dict 7 pponit noie peuratorio juF benefié 1 omibs fibi faluo : petit et>
expefas e'ea igtlt lit- faétas pteftando de faciend p loco 7 tempe decla-
rand ad libella Vo pdém p dm diim W - eurati lis fuit pteftata 7
hineinde jurati de ealumpnia pdué> q, iftrumét: autetié 7 7 indicio eora
vobis exibit pq d@i Abbs 7 ouét? fundare volebat itencidem fua facifq,
bg ex pte dtoy abbis 7 oust?» q'hs ex pte aditfa refponfii fuit ac
examiagdem dée caufe ppotte

potiti
omibs fidelit) examiat” 7 difeuflis | q ptes e%
nitebant® ¢ qv tad déus peurator ptumaeia pfati enrati miltipliei? aceufanit

- filiam ferrj ct iftitia poftulauit examiato pceflu 7 int ordie 7 omib3
obfuat porcioné garhay decimalit eetic de Intlke' sthyn ‘ad abbem 7 eductil

de Daf ptinste
. a ss soe 0 8) aS Ts 7
Inenim? lneulent  déosq, abbem 7 conuéti ad aliq® ona Epalia vel alia

auctdte apliea libera fore 7 inané ab omi ofle ‘exigedo

ona cecte de Intikethyn rade d@e poreidis ieibentia nd teneri 4 poi?
clericos 7 d&a ecetia de Indkethyn iftituédos - ad puta’né Philippi de
Mowhray 7 Galyene vxo¥ fue ae herd {voy put pubeii jnftfm cord nobis
1 iudicio exibita pleni? maifettat Tdeoq, pfatos Abbem 7 ouétii ad refec-
Mem chori eetlie de Inukethi podée nd teni oftendim? 7 diffinitie fenté-
ciando pniiciam? ae deelaram? 7 eund dim Wittm curati i o&o mart
ftlingoy cord nobis petit? Foe expetiy 7 Ptada Fa fadtay p religiofos
memorat? p nos taxat- 7 p pe‘atoré corid iurat> p tiiam diftinitiam
cddempnam? ifra temp? a juF Pltituta - déis religiofis at eoy peurator
fidelit’ pfoluend - A@* 7 dat> vt fup" & prelibati Et qv figilli nfm
autentict nd eft Pntibs ¢ Sigillir officialitat’ Cur {8i and¥ eft appenfum
ad req‘ficioné firain fpecialem -

Hee eft vera et indubitat- copia cuiutd ad int abbat® et eonué-

tum de Dunfermlyng ab vna 7 vicarii’ de Inuirkething ab alt* p

me Diim andrea pacok notariii pubei faecra ap™ - 7 regali autdb? -

Notarius ci collacionat® 7 cum eod pcordari rept* p alit fidelit
feript? Nil addefi t diminu@do qd ei?d fubim 7 aliquo variare
poflit trantumpfi manuali fubteripeide Signoq, et noie meis folit-
+ oluct: figndi Rogat? 7 requifit? i fidé veritat> premiffoy -
Anpreas Pacok +


--- Dunfermline_page281.png ---
341.

342,

REG, ROB. 1.] DUNFERMELYN. 229

De Eeeletia de Kinros cum capella de Vrwett -

RoBtus dei ga Rex Scottoy - OMib; pbis homih; tocius tre sue tam
§ emt 3

is Sattm + Seiatis nos p falute anin

elerieis q*m Ia fire et p salute aiay
dum antecefloy 7 suceefloy Troy Regi Scot dedifle / concefliffe 7 hae
pfenti carta jira conf'mafle deo 7 ecclie ste Trifitatis de Dunfermelyn / 7
@onaehys ibidem deo feruicntibs 7 in ppetuii uituF / Eeeliam de KXynrog
et Capella de Vrwet vna citi Pris ct cetis ptinenciis fais Tenend 7 habend
déis Religiofis 7 eoy sueceflorib; in ppetuii in liberam puram 7 ppetuam
Elemofinam / adeo liBe et qete / plenarie 7 honorifice ef omib; 1Btatibs
amentis 7 iuftis ptiner fais / Sieut aliqua Eeetia in
pnos aut pdeceilores iiros aliquibs in ppetuad elemofinam

edmoditatibs

Regno Seot
conecffa ? liberius seu q'eciu® tenet® aut poffidet® 7 saluo Jure Reétoris
qui nite eft; don® cedat vi decedat / aut aliquo cafu inhabilé se reddider' p
biiticio iHo optinendo . In eni? rei teftém Pfenti Carte fire sigilli nfm
Peepim? apponi - Teftib; Bernardo Abbte de Abbyrbrothoé eancellat iro
Edwardo de Brus Comite de Carrik 7 dno Galwidie ffe firo / Thoma
Ranulphi comite @orauie nepote tiro : Walto fenefeallo Seoé - Jacobo
de Duglas - Johe de wencteth 7 Rot de Keth marefeallo firo Scot mili-

tibs apd Cambufkyneth xiiij

die Nouemb anii Regii jiri Nono -

Miffio Regis ad Efim -

RoBtus dei gfa Rex Seottoy / Ve
Andi Epo / Satim - ci pil exiftat ae Fonabile lefis Ecetiis fbuenire -
conafteria’ q, ntm de Dunfermelyn fre dioceS turbati sit Hitipliei? ac in
keb3 exinanitum p guerray diutinay ineuitabiles euent? - pauptati 7
rer fpoliaeioni einft / Regio atftu compatientes vt tenem® /. eid
wonat'tio ae monachis ibid deo Quientibs 7 in ppetni SuituF in hofpitali-
tatis angmentii Ecectiam de Kynros ci Capella de Vrwell ppe honorem
sepult?e Regi Pdecefloy roy qui ibidem fepelinnt?® / ac sepult®e fire qua

abili in xpo pat’. Witto ead gia Sti


--- Dunfermline_page282.png ---
343.

SAd.

230 REGISTRUM DE [sgc. xiv.

apd ipos specialit elegim? / dinine conceflim? ituitu earitatis - Vnde ct
in? cea paftorat ofticii  Peipni exiftat fidelii . animos ad opa excitare
caritatis 7 siima sit Fo que p Religione fae‘ Patnitatem fram aff*tuofe
requirim? 7 attéte Rogam? quatin? ea que c'ca Pmifla pro atfe&u Regio
deuote sit inchoata confiderates ¢ velitis supplere 7 pfide in omih; / que
fpttant ad officii vim paftorale d@am Ecctiam 7 capellam vna ett f*tibs
ad eaftt ptinentibs eift ReligioS in pp'os vfus 1iBe edcedendo / ita q Mtore

eiufd eectie qui niie eft cedente vt decedéte pfati religio’ ae succefloF
eoydé vti valeant in ppetud frudib; p vos s° conceffis earitatis intima
7 Pet firay intuentu - Dat apud Dunf . xvj - die men$ NouembF Ani
Regii firi nono -

Jonfirmatio Epifeopi -

Vnitfis ste mat's ecetie filiis ad quos Pfentes tre puenint . Willis
miferaébe dia ecetie Sti and? «inift humit Salt in dno. Nottitis nos
tras Excellentiffimi Principis dni firi Reg Scottoy formam que tequit*
continentes inipexiffe - Robtus dei gia 7 cota vt sup" ad tale signi.
Lfmra, viz. N. 349.) Et In eni? rei teftism pfentibs tris sigillii nim eft
appen$ - Dat ap* Torry - x + die Nouembr - Anno dni. @° - ccc? -
quartodecimo -

De repadbe eedie de Inukethi -

Vnitfis Pntes tras ifp’tu® Willis di@? Gogyn vieaF ectie de Inttkethyn
Stim 1 dno ci ex caufa judieati noie expentay fay i q’da Ga nup mota
ot" me p religiofos viros abbm 7 ouéti de Daf fup refeceide chori ecctie
de Intikethyn 7 o&o maré fPlingoy tenerer obligat? deftuq, folucidis
eiufd peciie p execuddez p'dée fentécie odempnatof p'miflis mdicidibs
pub™ fueri p exedi® deniciat? / dé religiofi fui gta ad iftacia q’rid
amicoy meoy pie" ac gpasside moti flat? mei ipotéciam ofidantes ac



--- Dunfermline_page283.png ---
345.

REG. ROB. 1. ] DUNFERMELYN. 231

recdciliaG@oem mea poci? q* moleftia pie afftantes quatuor waré de déa

= . 6) - A Alea ry 7
peeiia mt liberalit odonariit Ita fn q ad duos tmios fubfe'ptos de aliis
qtuor ward cif fatiffaéem bona tide foluédo viz eift i mo“ftio de Dat

duas maré ad f" peutecoft> Anno gfe +m - ccc’ + xvj° + et alias duas maré
ad f* Sai iitini 7 yeme pxio fequeit Ani eid fie vitiori dila’ne cauillagde
feu excepéde juF vel fai. Ad qua q'dé foluédem ut p'mittit® facieti obligo
me fide media 7 dia bona mea moblia 7 imoblia pntia 7 fut*a ta ectica q*
miidana vbieiq, fuerit iventa capiei 7 aftugéd p volite eoy religiofoy
quoufy, plenarie fuerit eis fatiffact> ti de expentfis fi quas felint ob defém
predée folucionis fais tihis nd face q® de debito p'ncipali - hn cui? rei
teftidm putib; tris figilli: med appofuj 7 ad maioré fec“itaté facie Sigilli
do? oflicialis curie Saati and apponj peuraui - Dat» ap’ Dun? die Jouis in

erattio beati gregorij ppe Anno gfe - @™ - ccc” « decimoquarto +

Hee eft vera et Indubitat? copia cuird obligacidis fact> ind qued
abbaté et conuétum de Dunfermlyng et vicariti de Inuirkethyng
p me dim adrea pacok prefbfm {Gi andy dioé - Notarii pubei
facra ap et Regali autdb? - Notarius p alii fideli? fe"pt> factaq,
diligét> collacide ch origiali 7 ci cod ocorda® rept’ Nil addeft aut
diminuédo q ei? futiam 1 a'quo variare poflit tranflumpt> . Signoq,
noie 7 fubferipeide meis folit 7 ofuet? figndi - Rogat? 7 requifit?
in fide et teft pmifloy -

Awpreas Pacox -

De patlagio Regine -

RoBtus dei gia Rex Seottoy + Omibs pbis hdibs toci? tre fue Salém «
Sciatis nos p falute aie noft® 7 falute animay antecefloy 7 fuccelloy roy
Regii Scot ¢ dediffe ¢ cdcefliffe 7 hac Pfenti carta jira cdf'tmafle ¢ deo 4 7
heate cwarie 7 eectie ste Mnitatis de Dunfmelyn 2 Abbati et @onachis
ibidem deo feruientib; 7 inppetuti Suitu¥ @edietatem paflagij Regine que
fuit q’ndam Rogi de coubray qilitis 7 Capellam ex aq'lonali pte paflagii
eiufd ¢ cf dedis obuécionibs - 7 dibs aliis ptinétiis ad déam Capella de



--- Dunfermline_page284.png ---
346.

232 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xiv.

jure 7 antiq'tate ptinentibs : seu aliq’ iure ptine valentib3 7 fut?ti - ae
etid q'ng, @aré annui Reddit? annuati peipiendas de f'mis burgi Tri de
Inflkethyn 2 ad duos anni fios # wedietaté videlics ad £™ Pentecoft- 7 aliam
miedietaté ad fefti sti wartini 1 yeme p eq‘li peione / Tenéd 7 hnd eit

s 7 coy faeceffo”’ de nots 7 hedibs firis / in pura 7 ppetud clemo-
iBe 4 q'ete : plenaf 7 honorifice ? ei dibs liBtatibs 7 cdmoditatibs ?
ayfiamitis ¢ 7 iuftis ptinenciis fuis - Ita q d@i wdchi 7 coy tneceffores
inueniat dwos Capellanos in déa Capella diuina celeb‘utes inppetuii : 7
ipam Capella reparét 7 cOft'ant sumptib; fuis 7 dam capellam s* ed{t"ttam
inppetuii cdferuét vna ct calice 7 vettimentis / lib's 7 aliis ornamétis
cdpetétib; q° in déa Capella inueniri debeat et fQint req'réda - In e? rei
teftidia Plenti carte fire sigilli, nim pcepim? apponi - Teftibs - W - dei
gia Epo Dunk - Bernardo abbe de Abirb¥ Cancelto firo - T . Rannlphi
Comite cworati 7 Bno Vat Anandie 7 wannie ¢ Walto Sei Scot - Jacobo
Bno de Duglas 7é -

De iure pat*nat? eectie de Inflkethyn 7 Koketa -

RoBtus dei gia Rex $
Sciatis nos p fulute aie fire / antecefloy ct fucceffoy noftroy Regi Scocie :
dedifle ¢ conceffiffe 7 hae Pfenti carta jira cdfmafle deo - Beate carie
virgini / et ecctie {Ce tnitatis ¢ ac ste wars
fermlyn ? et @onachis ibidem deo feruientib; 7 inppetudi feruitu® jus
pat’nat? vicarie eectie de Intlkethyn et ptinend : adeo liBe 7 qete : plene:
pacifice : 7 honorifice : ficut anteceffores q’ndam Rogi de moubray ili
qui cdtra nos foriffecit ¢ dém ius pat°natus liBius 2 quicci? 7 aut honori

cottoy - Omih; phis hiib; toci? tre fue Salim -

rite Regine Scot de Dun-

cenci? in omib3; tenuertt 7 poffederit / nichil inde nob Reddendo ; n*
orationt fuffragia tanta - Pretea dam? 7 covedim? 7 hac pfenti Carta fira
coftmam? Pdéis mdchis tota noua magna cuftuma jiram de dibs Pris fais
infra Regnii nim videlic; ta de Burgis de Dunfermlyn - Kirealdyn coutkil-
hurg 7 de paflagio Regine q* de omib; Pris fuis aliis quibufeumg, ? Ita q
dé wdchi habeant 7 vtant® Koketa fua pp*a / sedm liBtates Regalitatis


--- Dunfermline_page285.png ---
a

REG, ROB. i.) DUNFERMELYN. 233

fue ¢ et Pfentis cdceflionis fire - in dibs Pris fuis Pe Que quidé koketa
cognofcat® 7 admittat® ab omib3 Burgenfibs 7 hoib3 jiris / 7 extraneis
Meatoribs p totii Regnii ném sii inpediméto Camlarioy firoy 7 aut alioy
cinitt’y troy q'yetiq, quip tépe filint 7 fine petigone alicui? altius
thucniédo p hac donaée et cceflione fira

allocagduis 2 ut liberationis

dée cuftume? p nobis 7 fuceefforib3 firis 7 in honore dei - Beate warie

virginis ¢ 7 beate wargarite Pde ¢ in choro coram feretro {uo ? vnii cere
continue / et inppetui accentum folempnit + In cui? Rei teftidid sigillt
nim plenti carte fire fecim? apponi - Hiis teftibs ¢ veniabilibs pribs :
Wito ¢ 7 Witmo / Sti Andree 7 Dunkelden3 Efiis - Bernardo Cancella-
rio firo » Abbate de Abirb¥ - Duncano 7 Thofti Ranulph de fyf 7 de 7e -

Sentencia - seeeee es de Striuelyn -

Pateat vninerfis per hoe prefens inftrnmentum bipertitum q cum coram
++ cognotvente p abbem - 7

nobis officiali curie sci And¥
Couentum de Diifermelyn petita fuiflet in ..--
's eiufdem a dno Alano vieario de ftrinelyn

+++ annna penfio

duodeecim carearum ci arrerag
ad cui? folueionem ---++++ qui pro tempore fuer
Religiofoy petiéde in forma q feq'tur - Dicit 7 edendo ppont coram vyobis
dne officiat curie sti And? - ant edmiffariis ris q'bufetig, - W - de Keford -
peurator d&oy Religiofoy viroy abbis 7 Conuent? de Di? nde petatar
code 7 @onattii sui cont® dim Alani: vicaria - de St'uclyn 7 q°mlibet
eiu? peuratorem legiti - feu defenfore - q ci ---- in quad pofleftione
iuris peipiendi - duodeci waré argent noie annue pentionis a vieariis de
ftuelyn tmpibus ret’acis pfatus Alan? Pdéas duode® ward in pindicia
coydm déis Religiofis p sex anit - ipes fpoliand sbft*xit - Qua¥ petit noie
‘am penfioné p fentencia

nt eifdem Religiofis

eidem vicario dtoy

peuratorio d&os Religiofos in ftati peipiend » pac
¥ram reduci- 7 dém Alaii feu q*metq, pfona legitima p ipo in indicio
intuenient® in arre® dée penfionis - dtis ReligioS p sex anii indebite
sub{t*étis que fe extendiit ad feptuaginta duas waré - except duab3 care

26


--- Dunfermline_page286.png ---
234 REGISTRUM DE XIV.

quas idem alan? semel soluit de d@a fumma - p vos fentencialit s eddep-
nari 7 cdd@pnati ad folug6m compelli - ius 7 officii vim fup hoe implor-
ando 7 iuf bificd in omibus st faluo - Ad pmiffa dia phanda se uon artans
fet qnaten? {Git phata - aut in inf confeflati caten? optineat 7 p eis
fentencia ferat? - Petit % expen$ cirea litis ing‘flum fas - pteftans de
faciend q loco 7 tmpe declarad - Cuma, lis cota sup déa pentione - vq,
ad litis cdteftaGom fuiflet agitata / in cdfiftorio de Edinburg in craftino
{te scolaftice VE - Anni g¥e - @- ccc’ quartidecifi in_cofiftorio ibid -

celebrato » Bde ptes cSparucriit coram nobis - Et ct peret? ex pte déoy
Religiofoy Abbat* 7 cuentus de Daf? - q Pfatus alan? refponderet peticdi
s'porr'te fup d@a penfione - 7 arref ab ipo petitis p coft - ne fucceffores
fui in in€to vagarent? - plane refpondet agnofeens bond fidem - q d&a
penfio cit arre? - déis Religiofis - ab ifo 7 pdceefloribus suis vieat debe-
bat? - Et q pdeceffo® sui vicat déam penfioné eifit Religio
pfoluerit - 7 q ipam solue? voluit p suo impe » Cui?

annuatim

Fion® s° in indigo
ffam + nos feeuti ibid - d&o die p tbunali sedentes pdém viea® déis
ReligioS condempnauim? in petitis- Ac d&am penfioné - duode® mareat
eif@ religios annuatim debitam fore pniciauim? - pdém q Viea¥ p tmpe
suo ac succeflores suos vi

rios ad folugom dée penfionis annuatim faciend
tencri p sententiam diffinitiuam dcluim? infticia exigente - Salua remif-
fione arreragioy p fmpe suo debitoy - G déi Abbas 7 cSuentus st liberalit’
remifeft + Saluaq, moderacide dée penfionis - qua eid vica¥ feceriit p sex
ani Pdti Abbas 7 cduentus de g

sua speciali - videlies - q foluct int
pentecoft + Anni dni occ’ + xv + vnam Ward «7 ad £" sti @artini p'X
seqns aliam @aré p p" mo anno 7 ani seqnti quatnor ware ose coft tminos
p stdo anno - Anno v’ Peio - sex areas ad Pdos eminos Pp Peio - Et q‘to
anno oéto marcas ad pfat® Pminos pro quarto ancl Decem areas ad
Pfatos p q’ ate + neend 7 duodecim j@aré ad Batos 2 Eminog pani sexto a
quo quidm emino sexti anit pmifit - fide data fidelit solve déis Religios
annuatin’ integra penfionem duodeci maré p toto tmpe quo vicarin?
exiftet in codm loco - n‘ inpeditus flit p guer omune - Et tiie ordina-
riora arbit’o faciet qd de iure cdi in catu cdfimili fit faciendii - Qua
quidem sentenciam firam recepta 7 approbatam euulgauerit - Et ne



--- Dunfermline_page287.png ---
REG, ROB. 1.] DUNFERMELYN. 235

Pmifla ullo impe ung‘m in scrupuld reeidina cdtrotifia relabantur « pti dei
inft"méti penes dém vieat remancnti sigit officii fri cit sigillo dtoy
Religiofoy cdi eft appens - Parti v’ penes d@os Religio$ refidenti sigilli
uetabit pat's dni» W- dei gta Epi
cit figillo dGi viea¥ St appofita - A&ii 7 dati die anno et loco fupradéis -

i And¥ ac sigilli déi offieii fri vna

Dr homagio q@t Comes de fyf tenct® fale onaftio de Da? P fra de Clony -

7 Q)et q die iouis px* aii f" bi Luce Ewang - Ani dni - w® - cce® - xvj?-

fea eft inquific apd Kyrealdy p sbfe'ptos magno iuramento juratos -
videlies - diim Hen de g*h*m - r‘to¥ eectie de Difert? . Wittm de p*fton -
Rig de fudy - Symoné de Longeton* - magiftra. maleolmi de Gathmilk- -
Robti de Orock* . Symoné fit sui» Wikm de mala villa. Waltum de
Benaly - Wittm Scotii - ffolanii de Leuenauch - matheti de doler - Wittm
Squier - watheti de ayton* - Dunt de cwayftton*® + Radulphii iuuené
burgens de kraol « Si aliquo fmpe Comites de fif? Bdeceffores dni Duncani
tie Comitis de fift - vt coy aliquis felint vel felt homagiit wonaftio de
Dunfnelyn abbatibus vt abbati alicui ciuftt wonaftii pro Pra de Clony -
vt d@i Comites face¥ teneant® de iure vt de iure hoe face¥ nd teneant® -
Qui iurati in vtute Padi iuramenti + dixerit - q bit seit - 7 quidam coy
vculis videriit - q illo die - quo t*nflata fuit bata wargata Regina apd
Daf . in pfencia dni Alexi Re& feottoy « s - Alexi Pei - Septem Epoy 7
feptem Comitti Scocie - Diis malcolm? tie CoM - de fif fecit homagiii
dpno RoBto de Kaldeleeh fe Abbati de Da? - coram eagno alta¥ aii
magna miflam p tra de Clony - Similit dixeft q bit seiiit 7 quid coy odlis
vidert « q dfis Colban? Com de fif - fit et heres Pd@i dni malcolmi fecit
homagii dSpno Symoni fe abbati de Dif - in Caplo eiuft loci pro Pra de
Clony » Hoe intfigno + q Johies thyan? te catilari? Bazi ddpni abbatis huit
p homag fto vna suptunica pda dni Camlarii bit furrata « Ié dixe#t - q bi
seitit 7 quid coy océlis videFt - q Duné Coit de fyf - fit pdéi Ani Cotbani
phoétauit apd Daf. cum ddpno Radulpho Abbate «7 dés Abbas petiit
ab co homag p déa tra de Clony - 7 ille refpddit q litn? s* facet voluit -



--- Dunfermline_page288.png ---
349.

236 REGISTRUM DE [sre. Siv

qd Paeceffor sui Piecefforihs suis folint 7 ad hoc faciend pdds Abbas
Pfixit s' diem - ante qué dié preds Duné diem claufit ext*mii - vii paei
iurati didt - q de f&o Pdecefloy ani Dieani nite Comes [comitis] - Ie
Dunean? homagiai p déa Tra de Clony face¥ tenetur de iui -

Homagium Comitis de Fyf -

(C)emorand -q nono die menfis Janua¥ - anno gfe - a - ccc’ - fextodecimo
Dis Duncan? Comes de f¥f° filius 7 heres Duncani q’ndam Comitis de
fyf + in conaftio de Da? cord magno altari fecit homagiii 7 fidelitaté
Buo Robto de Karal tie abbi oonaftii p'déi p Tra de Clany 7 fv
predé

+ qua
Comes de padis abbe 7 coonaftio tenet 7 capite in plencia dnoy
Pris . 7 Couét? - eiufd conaftii » nnon 7 dnoy - Dauid de Wemfs -
wich filit ei? cilit - magri WiHi de fetam® archidiaconi Dumblanens -
Witi de Cornal - Henrici de freflay - maleolmi de Ramefay de Baluewarg -
Ade filii ci#d - Henrici de Remefey - Alani de Clappam - familiariit
comit pdt - ac ¥ Walti de Lydefey - Hugonis de Loewor - Danid filli
civ « Walti de Logy
de Oroe » S¥

igelli de Carrich - Duncani de waiftton® - Roti

monis filii ei%d - Sfmonis filit Sfmonis antedéi - libere
tenentia - Infup 7 Johis filit Alani - Henrici Wyth - Alani de Catia «
WiHi de Clacmanayn - Joh cambii - Wit tinétoris - Witti Sq'er « Johis
Cifforis - Burgen3 de Dif - et alioy filtoy Clericoy 7 Laicoy -

Carta pat°nat? Eectie de Neuland -

Units ste mat's Eectie filiis Pfontem Carta vitut vt anditu¥ Johes de
Grahame pa salfm in dno sempitna -Sciatis me p salute aie mee 7 p
falute aiay dium aticefloy meoy dedifle cdcefliffe 7 hac pfenti carta mea
confmatte + deo 7 pecie ste t'nitatis de Dunf 7 wonach ibid deo
Quientibs 7 in ppetui Suitué jus pat’nat? Ecctie de Neulant in Tweddale
dioce? Glafguen3 ad pfentagm mea de jure sptantis vna ci Pris 7 cetis



--- Dunfermline_page289.png ---
REG. ROB. 1. ] DUNFERMELYN. 237

. : tp: J 7 + .
us qd@ in cifd theo vt hre poto p me 7 hedibs meis
florihs in ppetuti +

ptinenciis fuis 7 ome j
in ppetuti Tenéd 7 habend déis Religiofis 7 coy succ
in HiBam ¢ puram : 7 ppetuam clemofinam : adeo liBe ¢ quiete plenarie ~
honorifice ci oiibs liBtatihs ¢ cdmoditatibs ? ayfiamentis ¢ ct inftis
p tios

ptinenciis fuis / sicut ius pat’natus alieui? Ecetie in Regno Seoe
conceffum ? libiu?

veros pat’nos quotetiq, 7 aliquibs in ppetud elemc
seu q'etiu? tenet? 7 poffidet? - In cui? rei teftidii Pfenti Carte sigilli
met appofui - Dat apud Dunfermlyn in fefto feptem fratra- Anno dni
«w # cece + septimodecimo - Tiis teftih; - Bno Thoma Ranulphy Comite
worauie - dnis Dauid de Wemys +» Dauid de Bercley militih; ? Wito de
yeti ponte dno de Boulthoit in Laudonia - Walto de Lyndefay » RoBto

de Lauwed\# Hugone de Loucho¥ ct Miltis aliis -

Ordinaéd Epi ex vt"q, pte -

In dei noie Amen - Crm diis fir Robtus dei gta Rex Seottoy illutt's
Pat’n? Eeetie de Kynro3 Pat'eiti de Louchyldd ad eandem de iure - 7 féo
vacantem » nob Witlo eadé gta Epo sti And# pfentaffet. 7 nos ad d&am
plentagm eiuft dni fri Reg / eundem Pat'cium admififfem? 7 intti-
tuiffem? jn eadem 7 alig“din canonice idem inftitutus poffediffet eandem -
Placuit dno jiro Regi attentis depflionibs coonattii - de Dunfermelyn p
gwerram  déo - P - cedente vt decedente ’ ipi coonattio | in ppos 7
ppetuos vfus quanti ad ipm ptinuit earitatis intuitu. ius pat nat? eectie
conferre sup"dée - Vnde inftantib; abbate 7 wonachis Pda conattij ac
inflan? petentibs vt idem P - Bd&e Ecetie reniiciaret - vt co citius ac
libius fire aecedente confenfa 7 collacione in pp'os vfus eandem eectiam
optinerent - Tandem idem pat'cius confidata hui? tempis malicia / cetisq,
penfatis piculis que eidem - P - ex variis caufis Tminebant Sr refignacoe
dit Ecctie» 7 suftentaéde sua honefta hnda in futu¥ ¢ ordinaédi fire se
“hpofuit 7 Sbiec'- Nos igit® volentes vtilitati déi ona? ij ac indempnitati
dd P. confule ac puidere - ordinauim? in modi qui seq't? q idem
pat'cius déam eectiam in manih3 firis » {ponte » plane / plene 7 Tie



--- Dunfermline_page290.png ---
233 REGISTRUM DE [sEc. xiv.

refignaret / et q iidem Religio3 quociiq, caf contingente / seu quociiq,
modo scto se hiite tam tempe guerre q* pacis dabit sibi annuatim pen-
fionem Centit mareay p suftentadde sua peipiend a d@is Religio’ ad
quatuor anni Pminos - Termino p'me foluédis incipiente ad f™ séi cartini
in ¥eme anni dui o' ’ cect - xvij - termino vw’ stde foluédis ad f™ te
Purifieaddis - n° - v'gis px° fequens anni ciuft Tio v Teie foludvis - ad
f" Penteeoft> ani g j

aan es

-tmino autem quarte foluddis ad

f . affapédis be warie v'gis anni ciuf videlicet ad quélibet tmind fup*
s q 1

Dx communia de Gatemyle et aliis -

2, Qemorandt q ci dudi orta fuiffet matia difeordie -% diu Agitata int

Abbaté t Couentii de Dunfmelyn ex pte yna % bareinarios Baronie de
ythktt ex alta sup reétis marehiis * dinifis int Pras de Gathmylé
Catky bariaii d@oy Religiofoy - t Baronia pnofatam + Tandé predéi Religiofi
breue pambulacdnis - t Jufticiar specialiter p Regem aflignatos - in forma
capelle impet*uerit - Videls dnos Alex™ Seti - W - de Lyndefay - tie Catriay
Seoeie +t Robti de Lawed - tiie jufticia? Laudonie - qui tres uel eoy duo
spalit huerit in Peepto pdtay tray @archias t diuitas iufte t pa aff}fam tre
vette fave pambulare - Qua pambulaéde féa in Plencia Pnojatoy dni. W-
de Lyndefay -t R- de Lawed - p fideles pat'e iuratos dicentes ‘t afferentes
in vitute sae“menti sui filum aque de Leweii fieut currit a tra de Admor
vig, ad tra de Admulth¢ Ge rea carchia *t dinitam int Tras de Gatemyleh
‘t Catkfbariaii t baronia de ffvtkyt Pnoiatas - Pramq, ex auft‘li pte aque
pnoiate de Lens ii a filo einfa int tras de Admor *t de Admulthy Pnojatas
de pr ti folum Religiofoy Pdzoy - Qt; pact Pdi duo Jufticiak ptatis
ioS dedunt déas warchias cuftodiendas «odo pambuladdis - It peipi-

reli
entes dno Danid de Berelay tie vicecomiti de ffyff t balliuis fais pdéas
lias t dinifas s° pambulatas ex pte dni reg obfua¥ t manutenere -
Quibus nd contenti duo pareionar’ baronie de flytkyH - videls - Alanus
Hoitiat  ‘t Johes de Bégyrton® b'ue de diffayfyna cont* Bdzos Religiotix

m.:



--- Dunfermline_page291.png ---
REG, ROB. 1.) DUNFERMELYN. 239

impet*ueriit - dicentes *t afferentes se debe* ere cSmunia in tris de
Gatemyleh +t de Catkybariaii Pnoiatis % inde se effe diflayfitos p pdzos
Religiofos - Ad quod b'ue pfey'nd ¢ conftituerat t fevunt Herneum de
S‘thanery - t Johem de St*thanery elerienm attornatos fnos ediunéim t

diuifim p tram reg de attornato co
aq’ de forth - cori q’ Jutticia® religios ‘t attornatis Pddis « coultis diebs
litigantib; ? Tand ex cdfentu dui - BB - de Weng
tenentis fpeciali? in canta ptaéta Juttici
-W-de diffington® + parcionarioy de fythky
media corpalit ex vt"q, pte p*ftita in sexdecim arbit’s - videl3 - ex pte
doy parcionarioy otto + Scili; - Dnos Dauid de Wemys - Danid de
Berelay - Johim de Inchem*rtyii - Johem Wyflard - Alex de LamBton"
Wilites - magros - R- de Ballinbreth - A - de @orania eficos - Tugoné de
Louchor - Ex pte v? dGoy Religiofoy in alios odo - seil; » nos wichaelé
de We
tiie Archidiacond: Dumblaii - t @alcolmi de Gatemyleh eficos » RoBtii de
Lawed Bnoiati - W - Baily -
Walteri - De q'h3 fex ad minus arbitrari t iudiea¥ deberent judicialit
+ sentécialit’ - vtra brene de diffayfyna deberet in f%o pdto peede vt
admm'ti - Ita q nally modo dée diffavtine ta deBet ad curiam jutticia ifato
Reuoeari seu eliti + set p Pdéos arbit’s - ut coy sex ad minus deberet
fx de diflafifa sedm arbit‘um
arbit's tnd in cn
-a@agr W. de fetham* -

ghiali jufliciaF Scot - ex pte boriali

tiie loch Ani Reg
F-ae ecia ptis vUuly, confenciéte

vno + compmiffam ¢@ fide

ns seniorem t @alifium de Douers «ilites -

pagros « W- yetham™

prem» Thoma de Baleatky - t Johem filit

examinari ‘%t finalit dePminari - Et si ally
coy vt iudicii deberet peedeF vel admitti cora dei:
Jufticia® deberet fie¥ - Q°y arbit’y sex - vide!
Bni Dauid de Wemys- D- de Berclay -t AleX de LamBton® qilites -
a@agr -Q). de Gatmyleh - W - baily - pat + die Jouis in e“ftino {ti Gregor
pp - in ecelefia cduétuali - de Neubot} - Anno dni - w" - eee’ - pecimo
Nono vnanimit’ cuenerit ad detminand finatr arbit'um seu edpmiffum
pdém - plentibs + aftantibus - uo RoBto tiie Abbe de Dafmelyii +
Auguttino t trario ciufd p set Couentn fuo- W- de Daflington* p seipo-
Johame de St*thanry elico attornato p duob3 parciona¥ Pnoiatis « seils -
Alano hoftiat t Johe de Bygyrton® pdéis - Habita ptus fepe cognitione t
difeuffione caufe Paz breuis de diflayfina » int dZos arbit’s in ditifis locis :



--- Dunfermline_page292.png ---
240 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xiv.

Kyrealdi videl3 * ffytkyH ecdiis - diligent antea t*étata t difputata -
pifnentes tand * finali? arbit"ntes btue de diffi ¥fina nd pofle n° deber
peedere n® eciam adm'ti p? ambulacioné ti iufte t debito ftam ut
Pmiffum eft - In cuius Rei Teftimonid Plenti septo memoriali Pde arbitri
sex sigilla sua pofuerunt -

Copolicio Sr decimis de Cambsbaron 7 vetis pey .

. CEA g oftituti in prencia Retlendi pat's dni Witti dei gia Epi sti And?

Abbes de Difmelyii 7 Cambutkyneth die lune i vigilia bi marei ap’ Torry -
Anno Bui + «®- ccc" » xx’ + al@eantes Sr quada opolidone fea ink déos
abbes 7 coy mon‘ftia auctoritate 7 ofenti déi dni epi 7 i
Sr decimis garbalibs ville de Cabutbaron 7 vetiy

fe'ptis redacta

pei de {Vuelyn ¢ tandé
ex ofenfa dé dni epi geordat® i hie modi - vid3 g abbas 7 cduent? de
CAbufke nd foludt p déis det garbalib; d@is abbi 7 cOuentui de Dif: - n°
sedm q d&e det p peatores vt'ulq, ptis potat alfedari q’nfg, d&e det
puenint ad eftiadem centii folidoy s pucipali opofigone p'? fea Sr déis
ded anéoritate dei dni efi ex tie in fue robore duratéa - In cui? rei
teftioim figillii déi dni efi vinfq, pti hui? pfent indétati eft appent’a -
Dat* - die - loco 7 auno sup‘déis +

Inquifitio fea int’ Religio3 uiros de Dunf: 7 hoies fios de Twedale -

Hee & inquificd f%a in Capella de Logyn die wartis - px’ p? f+ bi pet" -
qd@ dr aduin@la - Anno gfe - @ - ccc’ - xx°- mutuo cdfenfu Abbatis 7
Conuent? de Dif 7 hint suoy vallis de Twedale - p fideles hdines
sbfe'ptos « v3» Walt’ de Logyn - Wittm squiere - Kylfolani - Robta de
Dif. Jacobi de aula - Thoii de Logyn - Jotiem Granth - 7 Rié litil
Burg de Daf - {up artitlis KBtata inf® se'ptis pagoy hint vallis de
Twedale + quos pett a pddis Abbate 7 Conventu s* adimpleri - Prim?
artidlus eft -q petit Balliti de pgenie sua dari per Abbem - qui replegiabit


--- Dunfermline_page293.png ---
REG. ROB. I. ] DUNFERMELYN, O41

eos ad curia Abbatis 7 Coucut? de Daf ad qd refpondent Put iurati - q
talis Ballin? debet cis dari. ti tn de feodo - set de modo vfitato ¢ Seds
arti@lus eft q si atqnis de gene suo vergat ad inopiam - Aut senio sit
confragius habeat suftentagoin de @onattio «ad qd retpondét + iurati in
fide p*ftiti sac*menti- q ad hoe ex debito nd tenent® - fet ex alf'Gone - g
haines coy sunt - Terci? artitlus eft - q si aliquis ex gene coy + Léinem
intfetit vel alind flagitiii commiferit - ppter qd tenetur imunitaté eccle
+ si ad monaftid de Dif venit Za Imunitatis hnde « qqim div
ad qd refpondét q hoe fatent

ibi Revit -de honis @onaftii debet peurari
ext"neo + multomagis hdi fue de gene Pdtoy - Q*rtus artitlus eft. q fi
+ fin’ p homicidio {efit « Abbas +

aliquis de gene sno homicidii cSmiter
Couent? Pde tenent® cdt*buct - duodect maré - ad finem faciend - ad
quod refpondét req‘iti-q niig*m tale q'd omibus diebus vite fue audie?t -

De obediéeia nd fitda epo Ditblanefi Fone deciay garbaliti de Coriitun 7
de Atheray in prochia de logy -

Pateat vninfis ad quos Pfent litere puenerit q mota cont*uerfia diutina :
et ditfis eontenédnihs in? venlabiles Pres in x°. dim Nicholaum de Bal-
myle dei g*tia dudi Dunblanenfé Ejim - vitio defanétii - 7 dim cauritit
cad gtia suum tmediate succeflorem einft loci EPm ex pte vna - Et
dim RoBti dei g“tia ABbem de Dunfmelin ¢ 7 eiufit loci Coucntii ex
altera sup Candica obediencia - puis dnis Epis tam vni q® alti suceefline
ut petierat a pdto Abbe facienda - RaGone decimay garbaliii de Corne-
ton® - et de Atherat in pochia de Logy Dunblanens dict + Pdtis decimis

p vt"q, Pdtoy dnoy Efioy hac vecafione vnii videlics poft alii’ temporibs

+7 in vfus pp'os - p voluntate sua conlifis - et eciam

suis : penit? eccupatis
plimis g*uaminihg : et vexaconiby 7 ditfis humanay vitay piélis sepe hine-
is - Q'h; dillenédib; ta d
s sup "deus + p diligenté requifiGoné : et Rogacdné reg’
Miltiplicit: infufas rancoré relaxans sui animi + pura - ac salud oftendés
cdfeiéciam dina intpirate g*tia difpotuerat q viri dife’ti . 7 puidi- 7 waxie

Qu

‘ ee .
° durantib; + venabif pat’ diis wauri-
oaiettatis

inde ill.



--- Dunfermline_page294.png ---
249 REGISTRUM DE [sro. xiv.

juris piti ab ipo / et suo capitlo piblanen8 et pdZo dno Abbe - et suo cSuentu
+ vt'ufg, ptis aflenfu vnanimi? eligent® « Ad q°y arbittum - quo ad caufim
Bdéam ?minand vt"q, ps se obliga debuiffet - Q quidé via pdto dno Abbi
- et fuo Couentui # vtilis videbat® - et huic g*tnito confenfit « et s* Ambe
ptes mutno confentir ? in hos viros honeftos 7 puidos - snos ad hoe arbit’s - et
amicabiles Cdpofitores ex vt"q, pte elects ¢ videli
dim C'tinii dei tia Abbem de infula oiflay ¢ dunblanenfis Kectie Been-
torem - mag?m Jacobum Benne Eectie sti And® Archidyacont - magtm
Adam de morauia dunblanés Ecctic Candiei ? et diim thoma- Dunblanentis
e

5 venabilé rem 7

tie Aychidiacona « edcordit cofentorait - pox arbit*ri ordina@oni  difpo-

fiGoni ? ct compotiGSni sup Pdza obediencia / et sup Pdtay decimarit occu-
paddne pdéa et sup Pd@oy g*uminii - et vexaéSnii Reformacne se sbicien-
tes et ctia f'mit fide hineinde intpofita obligantes et offi juris biifics +
qreumq, uilegio q° alicui ipay ptii aliquo tempe poffent pdeffe quo ad
hoe penit? reniiciantes - Predicti v’ arbitri et amicabiles Compofitores ¢
diva voluétes volumina plurimis hineinde collagnib; int pofitis p bono
ct edcordie in? Puddos venerabiles fires cdfirmando et p
i vt'ufy, ptis ppetue pfeueranda poteftate arbit*ria sibi
tradita ordinariit q paes diis Abbas de Dunfmelyn - et sui succeflores ci%t
loei Abbates ab exhibione eiufd obediencie ragone Pd@ay decimay «a -
pdto- dno Epo : et suis succefforibs Ecetie Dunblanen’ Epis : quieti fint

tranquille pa
vtilitate anima

ppetuo et liberati - et qd exniie de pa s decimis p vtilitate sua ? sient
meli? sibi videbit? expedit ordinét - 7 difponat - Ordinancrat similid + q
oinia ct sina - p Pddos dnos Efios de pdéis decimif’ q‘liteumq, Recepta -
a+ puto dno Abbe : et su ,
Q'b; quidé ordinainibs : vt"q, ps beniuole confenfit - Pte paéi Epi clama-
Goni + oimiq, juri - qd dicebat s' eopete i déa obediencia / ut Pmittit® - a -
se- et suif fnecefloribs ? ci cdfenfu toci? capli sui pdt penit? reniciante -
Parte v’- pd@i dni Abb gla p Pd&os dnos Epos - vel coy nove :
de Pddis decimis ¢ peepta ipis dnis Epis plenarie rem'tente « In quoy oim
- et sigtoy teftimonii - pti pfent> sc'pti 7 modi Cirograffi conf*ti_ penes
Pdtm dim Adbem Remanéti sigilli autenticn Paci dni Epi set sigilld

Capitli DunblanenS vna cit sigillo dni RoBti dei gfa Re Scottoy nnd

necefforib; ipis dnis Epis penit? sint remifla -

Gia et


--- Dunfermline_page295.png ---
=

REG. ROB. 1. J RMELYN. 243

Tet sigih Pdoy arbit’y 7 viroy sunt appenfa Pti v’ pencs Pd&m dian

Epm Refidenti - Sigil’ cOmune Capifli de Dunfmel¥ eft appentum - Et

p Gaiori cuidencia - Sigilla pd@orum arbit’ri ve'q, pti sunt appenta -

Carta de tris in villa Berwyci -

Robertus dei gratia Rex Seottoy + OMib; phis hominih; tocius Pre fue
Clericis 7 Laicis falim - Sciatis nos diuine caritatis intuitu 7 p falute
anime fire: 7 pro falute animay antecefloy et fucceffoy firoy Regi Scocie
dedifle ¢ conceffifle 7 hae ptenti Carta fira conf*mafie deo 7 beate marie
virgini 7 conattio Ste ttnitatis et heate cargarcte Regine de Dunfinl ne?

ac Reli
fuitut omes tras Redditus 7 burgagia que fueriit q’nda Witmi de Orford

ofis_viris ¢ ADBbi 7 @onachis ihidem deo fuientib; 7 inppetud

burgenS burgi jiri Berwyei infra ipm burgii_ nos contingent racione
foriffadiure dé WiHlni - Tenend 7 habend omes Pras ? redditus 7 Iurgagia
fupd@a cif Religiofis 7 coy fuccefloribus de nob 7 hedibs iiris in feodo
= heditate p offices reétas metas 7 diuifas fas # liBe quiete z plenarie ¢
integre 7 honorifice cum oitimodis libtatibs ¢ cdmoditatibs ¢ aifiamentis
7 inftis ptinenciis fuis ? Reddendo nobis 7 hedi
fucceilores finas burgi de pdéis Pris 7 Burgagiis debitas 7 contuctas 7

firis dé Religiofi 7 coy

faciendo fuicia debita 7 confueta de cifdem - In cui? rei teftiom pfenti
carte jire sigillii n#m peepim? apponi Tettihs +z -

Carta de Cullelonch -

Omid; hane Cartam vifut vt auditu® - Thomas Ranulphi Comes qorauie -
Domin? Vat Anandie 7 wannie Salém in dno - Seiatis Nos p falute anime
Kmi auuneuli fri 7 dni- dni RoBti dei gta Re& {eot Mlutt’s 7 p falute aie
fire ? antecefloy 7 suceefloy froy dediffe conecefliffe 7 hac plenti Carta
jira conf*maffe deo Beate marie virgini et ecctie Ste t'nitatis ac Ste
coargarete Regine Scocie de Dunfmelyn 7 onachis ibid deo Suientihs 7


--- Dunfermline_page296.png ---
odd REGISTRUM DE [sEe. Xiv.

in ppetuir QuituF totam Pram fram de Cullelouch ef ptineneiis in baronia
de Abirdouir - Tenend 7 habendam cif Relig 7 coy succefloribs sine
aliquo retinemento - de nots + hedihs firis in feodo 7 heditate ¢ in hot
yz planis moris 7 marifiis petariis 7 t*bariis ¢ ftagnis aquis 7 molendinis :
viis femitis 7 paftur AiBtatids 7 ayfia-
mentis fuis tam nd nofatis q* noiatis sb tra 7 fup™ trai ad piteam tram
ptinentibs vi aliquo titulo sen jure ptinere valentib:

7 7 ci omibus comoditatibs ¢

? ita libere 7 q'ete :
plene 7 honorifice sient nos déam tra p suas r°tas diuifas d&e donaddis
fire in omib3 7 pleni? ¢ aut honorificenci
tenuim? aut tere potuim? - Dam? etiam 7 cdcedim? paeis Religiofis
qnadraginta folid ttlingoy de tra de qonfloo? «+ in tehyra Scone p man?
dni qui pro tempore fuer' annuatim ad fetta Pentecoft> 7 sGi martini in

p omia liberius ¢ quieci?

hyeme pporeionalit’ peipiendos - Inneniendo p hae donacione tira in
ppetua in honore ste marie vginis in capella sua inf* ecctiam Connentu-
alem de Dunfinelyn ynam Waga Cere p tres dies folempnes annuatim
videlic; in Noéte Natat dnici die Purificacdis virginis atidée 7 die
allay jufd folempnit ardentem more confueto - Inueniendo etiam
in déa capella vnii monachi faldotem quolibet die inppetut’ p aia fra
aficefloy 7 succefloy troy miffam celebratur vbi ordinattim? corp? nfm
fepeliri ad qua quid miflam duo cerei folempnes ardeat a p'neipio mifle
viq, ad finem quoy vn? ftet ad capud nim 7 alt ad pedes - Et feiend ett
q folempnitas tota Pnoiata a die conf is plentis carte fiet 7 implebit® in
forma pdéa ta in vita jira q* pot mortem corpore firo ibid fepulto vt nd
fepulto - faciendo Suieidi de déa tra debitum 7 confuetum tautum - Nos
vo. Thomas Ranulphi et hedes firi Batam fram de Cullylauch ci quad
s platis Religiofis 7 eoy succefloribus vt Pmittité
cont” oiies homies 7 feminas warantizabim? acquietabim? et in ppetui
defendem? - In cui? rei teftidin 7é -

ginta folid annuis pd

Carta de Kynedyi -

bs hane cartam vifu¥ vt auditu® - Thomas Ranulph Comes @orauic


--- Dunfermline_page297.png ---
REG. ROB. J.J DUNFERMELYN. S45

salim ctnam in duo - NoWit vnitifitas ¢ra nos p salute aie fire ? aficetloy
z suecefloy iiroy / dediffe 7 cScefliffe 7 hae pfenti carta jira confirmafle
deo 7 eectie ste Cnitatis de Dunt: # abbi 7 wonachis ibid deo nientibs 7
in ppetai Suitur paugmentae dnoy monachoy vit" contuetia numum
recipiendoy 7 7 in déo jonaftio Suiendoy in ppetuii ¢ ae celeb*ndoy p
nob # aiteefloribs 7 succefforib; firis : totas Pras de Kynedy¥ et balendram
ef ptinené / 7 dominia Pre de Drumk}ppy + Tenend #7 nd in puram
1iBam 7 ppetuam elemofinam # vna ci li v
tihs ¢ 7 ci omih
in p"tis 7 pateuis

iis hdibus ad des

s tras ptinen-
plano

aifiament? 7 inftis ptinenciis fuis in hofeo
@oris 7 ariftis ¢ viis 7 femitis 7 ftagnis
«olendinis 7 bracinis 7 7 et omibs aliis libtatih; ad déas ti
vt ptitte valentibs ¢ adeo life ¢ q'ete ¢ plena
elemofina in Regno Seoé ab aliq’ libing ¥ gretius
tenet® 7 poffidet? - faluo forinfeco Suieio dni Re& quanti ad d&as Pras

7

aquis :

s ptinentibus

+ honorifiee : sicut aliqua

? plenari? 7 honorifieéci?

. V me x, 3) = —: . x “D .
ptinet - Nos vero 7 heredes firi d@as tras e& omib3 ptinend 7 liBtatibs
fap “déis 0" ey pacis Abbi 7 wonachis warantizabim? :
aeqetabim? : 7 in ppetui defendem? - Tn cui? Rei teftimonit 7é -

© des hdies 7 femins

Vidimus Capituli Glafguentis -

Uniiiis xpi fidelibs ad quos pfentes tre puenint ¢ Capituli Glaf® sede
vaeante salim in dno fempitna - vninfitati fre noti facim? p pfentes q nox
vItimo die men3 Decemt afid glaf& Carta nobit viri dni Joh de Grame
pat's dni de Neuland pfentata nob p religiofos viros Abbaté 7 Conuentir
wonaftij de Dun nd cacellata nd abolita n° in aliq*
pleni vidim? 7 infpexim? forma que seq't’ otinétem - Vnitifis ste mats

ni pte viciata ad

ecetie filiis 7¢ vt sup" (viz. .V. 350.] - In eni? rei teftidii sigilli comune
Capti firi Pfentibs eft append - Dat in Caplo firo ap? glafe Anno dni -«-

cece + xxi- die 7 loco sup*déis -



--- Dunfermline_page298.png ---
300,

41

26 REGISTRUM DE

Pro cSmuni pafiura habenda in ora de Erbentoly tre tire de Incheturft -

RoBtus dei gia Rex Scottoy - Omnib; probis hdib3 tocius Tre fue clericis
7 Laicis e ire / 7 pro salute animay
antecelloy 7 fuceefloy roy Regi Scocie / dediffe ? conceffiffe et hac

Salfm - Sciatis Nos pro falute

Plenti carta tira confirmaffe 7 deo 7 Eectie Ste ‘Tnitatis de Dunfermlyn :
7 Religiofis viris Abbti et ei ibidem deo uientibs 7 inppetni
Suitut ¢communa 7 cémmmé Pafiura in cémuni ora de Erbentoly ¢

cukyrfy ¢ infra teneméti nim de Kyneleuyn : pro x1 aialiby Bohg 7 vac

= conti onibs ¢ 7 cOmuna in eadem @ora pro sexaginta plaufttis turbay
anmuatim ad op? i ipoy Religioloy 7 hdimmm fuoy tram fa de Incheturft
ct Tio int’itu 7 exitu ad eandé mora 7 ab ead? Tented
~ hnd cift Religiofis 7 eoy fieceflorih; in liber’ ? pura ¢ 7 ppetuam
elemofinam # adeo libere 7 quiete ? pure : plenarie 7 honorifi

inhabitantii.

e 7 sicut
ipi wonachi aliquam clemofinam infra Regnii nim Scocie liberi?
quietius ¢ purius : pleni? / aut honorificentins tenent seu poffident - In
eni? Rei. 7é - Te

ibs 7é -

de Bruges - de Coketa -

Rohbertus de} gia Rex Scottoy Seabinis 7 burgi wagris ac toti editati
ville de Bruges amié fris carifimis Slim 7 continue dilecédis augmétii -
Seiat( q dine earitat’ intuitu Conceffim? Religiofis viris Abbatj 7 ouétui
de Danfinl¥ mo*ehis ris tota magna cuftuma fram de omibs i fuis
infra Regnii ném in libera pura 7 7 ppetua elemofina - Quapp? vnitifitaté
fram allestuofe duxim? dePeandai quats quocienfeiiq, cereatores tri
fand'e fen alij Meatores cuiufeiq, flint nadois ad ptes tras ci: mercandijs
firis accedentes Coketam déoy Religioloy vob debito modo Pfentatiint :
m tang* coketam firam pp'am aeceptare curet¢- In cui? rei teftiom has
= fivas vot) m'tim? patentes - Dat apud Second decio die Juli
Regn

tra

Anno

firi foxto decimo -



--- Dunfermline_page299.png ---
362.

RoB. 1] DUNFERMELYN. 247

Dr mag* cuttia -

Robertus dej gia Rex Seottoy Collectoribs none cutie ville {i Johis de
Pth qui p tépe flint Slim - Sciate q concetlim? Religiofis viris Abbatj et
pustui de Dif 7 eoy fuccetlorihs i ppe" vt heant peipiant et poflideant
magna noua enftuma cotingenté de lana Corijs 7 pellib; lanite oim tray
7 hoim eoridé Religiofoy p toti Regnii nim ta infra burgos q* ext :
deo libere 7 integ® ficut nos dita noua euftuma magna hemus vel here
potim? in futuy 7 Quare vots madamus 7 freipim? gis coket? dé&oy
Religiofoy fup d&a cuftiia vif quociés contigit fimas cdtentas in citdz
allocet€ in for’ Pdéa- Et nos d&as alloca@es in compote tris finglis
anis vob plenius faciemus allecarj - In cui? rei teftidm has tras fras vob
m'tim? patentes Dat* apud fforfar decio die feptemb - Anno Regni iri
fexto decimo -

De q'ng, waré de Intikethyit :

RoBeus dei gia Rex Scotoy ppditis 7 battis burgi de Intkethyn qui pro
tempe fuerint Saltm - Sciatis q conceflim? Religiofis viris ADbi 7 Con-
uentuj de Dunfermlyii q'nq, @areas sterlingoy - annuatim peipiendas de
firmis Burgi de Intkethyn p man? Fras ad Pminos Pentecottes 7 sti

wartini in hyeme ¢ quas eis conceflim? in ppetuam elemofinam vna ett
«edietate paflagij Regine # ad fuftentacion? duoy Capellanoy dinuina
n Capella déi paflagij ex aquilonali pte ciufad - Quare

vob @andam? 7 Peipim? : q'tin? Pdidis Religiofis 7 eo suceefloribs :

ppetuo celeb"ntia

us ppetuo pfolui faciatis ¢ ad tminos ante-
annuis faciem? pleni?
allocari - Inc? rei teftidia Plentes tras penes Pddos Religiofos ppetuv
remanturas ¢ cifd fieri fecim? patentes apud Dunde p'mo die Ap'lis Anno

singlis annis déas_ q'nq, «a

déos ¢ Et nos ipas q'ng, wareas vob in cdpotis +

Regni firi Septimodecimo -


--- Dunfermline_page300.png ---
3o4,

305.

248 REGISTRUM DE

Couené in? Abbatem de Dunfmelyii Ptores sti Andree 7 @aij -

mo mo, xxmo

Anno ab incarnade dni o@™ - ccc - jij? - die sabati pxima poft
feftum stoy cartirum carfi warcellini 7 Pet’ in @onafterio de Dunf fea
eft puted sen amicabit opofiéd ppetuis tempibs duratura int Religiofos
viros Abbem 7 cSuétii de Dif ex pte vna 7 ptorem 7 coutti
: plorem de maye ex altera p peuratores eoydm pfentes ad hoe f{pecialr
deputatos videliey quod pdt Abbas 7 cduent? de Dunfmelyii hito sup
hoe pus dilignti 7 solempni tractatu ynanimit cdeefleriit porihs de may
qui p tempe fucrit integras decimas suas petocy
de duaby bal - alliis cum  pting

Andree

~ de fawfyd de turbree 7
iis G TE sit PAG poris de cayii rade
prorat? sui aid@i sub quoda amnuo céfi sex:

inta solidoy legat «oncte

an

soluendoy paai is Abbati 7 ouétui sing’ ad duos ani tmios Pp eq*les
porédes videlic; ad fefta purificaCis 7 pentecoft> ¢ jta videlic3 quod dé
P ores teneant? ad soluédem d&e penddis in ofii enentu sine colat déas
Pras - sine nd + guerra ecSmuni excepta # Ita cScordati eft int pdas ptes
Quod si otingat quod abfit @onacos de kedynys q’quo m? dm proratii de
@aij reeupera® q extiic ifte tract? viribs; euacuet’ n® ad eos viterius

extendat? - In cui? rei teftimoniii huic se'pto in @odum Cirogr:

{fy pfecto
pti penes Pd@os Abbaté 7 puentum remanéti sigtm cdmune capituli sti
Andree yna eft sigto pnominati p'oris de «:
Pdem ptoré de waij xefident

eft appenfum / Pti u° penes
ygim cSmune capituli de Dunfermelyn eft

appoitum +

De wolyn -

Robertus dei gia Rex Scottoy - Oitiib3 probis hdib; toti? tre fue salfm +
Aceedens in pleno pliamento fro tento apd Scona folempnit i in fefto sti
Jacobi Apli ci c6tinuatione dieri fequétii ? anno dni citto « ccc” - xxiij
RoBtus Abbas de Dunfermelyn noie tuo noieq fui eduent9 quac
couétionalé

a tram
in? Dauid des Haftyngys ex pte vna et Abbem 7 couttii de



--- Dunfermline_page301.png ---
REG. ROB. 1. ] DUNFERMELYN. 249

Dunf pdeceflores snos ex alta + sup Tris de molyn ? Petdufdy + Petmal-
doie€ - Baleone - Petmacdufgytle facta 7 sigillo ipi? Dauid edfignata / no
in aliq" pte sui vitiata cora nobis 7 edfilio fire

cancellaté n6 abolita sn’
exhibuit 7 oftendit : cui? tenor tat eft . Omid; ad quos Pens seripti
pucnit Dauid de Haftyngys salim . Noulitis me recepifle ad feodfirma de
dno Wito Abbte de Dunfermelyn ? 7 eiuft loci cSuentu ¢ fram suam de
Petmaldoe : Baleone : Petmafdufgy! p tas
Z et et omibs; Natiuis ad déam tram

wolyn — silieet Petdutdy
diuitas suas 7 et omibs ptinetii
ptinétihs Tenéd mm 7 hedih; meis de pdéo Abbte 7 custu 7 fuecefforibs
coy : ita libe quiete plena® 7 honoritice sicut déi Abbas 7 cust? eam
is 7 ex cdftmacoe fuecefloy

ex donatione bone memorie caleolmi edi
suoy libiu? + z quicti? tenent aut poflident + Reddendo inde eis 7 fieeet-
forib3 suis annnatim centii solid pacandos in Abbathia in Seona — seilies
dno ptori ¢ ut supp'ori eiuf loci ¢ ut bto niieio Abbtis 7 cone? de
Dunfinelyn inf ytndeci dies Pentceoft: - Si v’ contigit q p guerra ut p
aliq'm alia oceatiGem infra Pd@os qndeci dies Pentecott> a d&c peciic
folucde ceflatio tenor earte Pdéoy Abbis 7 cducnt® penes me refidétis
poit? inf'met? 7 in irritt reuoeet® - Hijs teftibs Galfdo elico de HBacoe «
Witto de Nydyn - @agre Alano de Pert - RoBto Frebern - Wilko de
sens +++ WiHo de .. +--+ + 7 fiiltis alijs- Et quia Danid de Haftyn,
pas atholie tras 7 ptinet cdtra fidelitat® fram veniendo foriffecit 7 p
indicia in parliamento fi fire tento apd Cambutkynet | de confentir toci? cleri
exigente ¢ int alios : qui ad dém pliamenti nim

+ populi editir iuftic
ad fidem jiram nd extiterant ¢ pdidit 7 amifit 2 ac id Danid Pdéas Pras
de molyn : Petdufdy : Petmaldoé ¢ Baleone #7 Petmacdutgyl 7 ci ptinent
niodo quo déus Dauid de haftyngys u'tute seripti pdéi ¢ de dais religiofis
tonuerat ¢ tennit : 7 poffedit anteg” se ut piniteit® foriffecit petiit déus
Abbas ci inftancia ‘ingreffiam déay Pray suay s' concedi # pro co q dite
tre ¢ pro defedtu cduencionii 2 in Pddo seripto contentay n° complete
fuerant né feruate / n° tenenté labuit ¢ qué de jure recognote tenebat? -
Confiderantes g" petiGoem dé Abdbtis 7 eins intentioné pleni? intelligentes
p probos 7 fideles hoies Regni i sup pmiftis ing'fiGoem pus fieri feeim?

diligent® p qua cdpim? q dée tre ci ptinent ppt defect? Bnotatos ad ins
21



--- Dunfermline_page302.png ---
306.

250 REGISTRUM DE [sEc. xiv.

7 pp'etaté déoy abbtis 7 pvt? : 7 eoy « oonaf tii deuolute funt 7 in ppetuil
applicate - Vnde volum? q dtus Abbas 7 itt? ingrefflum déay Pray suay :
inx* peticdem suam habeant : : teneant ¢ 7 poffideant ¢ 7 de eifdem dif-
ponant ¢ put s' 7 wonaftio suo meli? viderint expedire « In quoy dium
teftism Sigilli ntm pfentibs Peepim? apponi ? Dat 7 act afd Scona in
pliamento iiro Bato ? Anno gfe supraferipto -

De @olyn -

Anno dni @itto ccc™ vieefimo Peio apud Scona in pleno pliamento ibid
cora fereuiffimo p'ncipe Bno RoBto dei gra Rege Scottoy iluftri facta
eft h® comudtio in? Religiofos viros Abbté 7 Conuenti de Dunfermelyn
ex pte vna 7 Johem Cambett filiii dni Nigelli Cambett : 7 dne marie de
Brus ex alfa, videlicet q Pfati Religiofi dederit cdcefferunt ¢ 7 pfenti
carta cdfirmaueit cid Jobi Pras fuas de q@olyn in Atholia videlicet
Petdufdy ¢ Petmaldoch / Baleone ? 7 Pee p rtas diuifas fuas :
p suo homagio 7 Snicio 4 1 Tened 7 tnd : s'-7 hedibs suis wafculis tanti:
de corpe fuo Hineali exeuntib3 / ci omnibs fuis iuftis ptinen® 7 ci omibs
natiuis ad déas tras ptinentibs ¢ n‘nd libertatibs ? 7 ayfiamentis in coris
warifiis / aquis ¢ viis ftangnis : molendinis ¢ 7 aliis quibufciig, / ad déas
Pras ptinentib; 7 ut de iure ptinte valentibs ¢ liBe quiete : pacifice : 7
honorifice ¢ Reddendo inde déis Reli 7 fucceflorihs fuis annuatim
decé maré fterlingoy + ad duos anni Pminos ¢ {eilics. medietat? infra
cenfem poft feftii Pentecoft¢ + 7 alia wedietaté infra menfem poft fefti
sti wartini in hyeme in ecctia pochiali de Pt feilicet dno vicario eiufdé
loci ¢ qui p tempe fitit uel eto niicio déoy Religiofoy ad hoe fpecialit
deputato - flaciendo forinfeeii § Suicia : q*ntii ad déas tras ptinent - Si auté
a déa folucone : fais Pminis et modo pmiffis p guerra uel, waliqua aliam
oceafioné in pte : uel in toto ¢ aliquo anno? uel aliquo Pmino cefflati
fuit 2 Idem Johes hedesq, fui s ut Pmiffum eft / a iure 7 poffeflione déay
Pray eadant ¢ 7 Pdte Pre ad Pdéos Religiofos + 7 wonaf tia pndiati :
libere sine aliquo impedimento : retitant? inppetut - Et ad omia pmifla



--- Dunfermline_page303.png ---
REG. ROB. 1.] DUNFERMELYN. 251

fideli? hineinde obferuanda ct Roboranda / lui scripto Cirograffato pti
penes Pdtos Religiofos remanenti Sigil: Padi Johis ¢ vna ei Sigillo déi
ni firi Regis eft appenfum - Parti v’ penes Bdém Johem refidenti sigilli
comune Capitli de Dunfermelyn eft appofitum -

Confirmaéd Epi capelle {¢i Jacobi +

Omiihs hoc feripti vifuris uel audituris Willifis inifacbe diuina Sti AndF
Epus falfm in vero falutarj - Nowit vniuersitas tra nos p falute anime
fire et pro falute aiay aficefloy froy et fuecefloy cfoy {ti And¥ dediffe 7
in pp'os vius cSceffiffe 7 hac nti carta fira cdtirmafle deo 7 bte marie et
Keetie {te trinitatis de dunfermlyn Abbi et wonachis ibid deo fuiétib;
7 in ppetuit fuit*is Capelli ex aq'lonali pte paflagii Regie ci decimis
obuééoibs; et omihs aliis ptinéciis ad dita capella de jure 7 antiq'tate
ptinétibs feu aliq® iure ptine¥ valentib3 i fut*um cui? capelle jus pat *nat?
ad dim noft™ Regé deuolutii p cid dim Regé diéis mo*chis 7 ppetuii eft
cdcefli - Ita viz q di&i mo*ehi et coy fuceeffores Tueniat duos capellanos
in diéa capella diuia celebrantes i ppetuii 7 ipam capella reparet 7
coftruat fiptibs fuis di&a q capella fie cd{tru&a i ppetui cofnét vna efi
calice veftimétis libr€ 7 aliis ornamétis cdpetétibus que in dita capella
Iuenire debeat et fucri¢ requivéda - In eni? rei teftionia pntib; figillai
noft™ fecim? apponj- Dat» ap* fém And¥ die wercurjj i fefto cinft {ti aplj
Anno do' @illefimo tricentefimo vicefimotercio -
Tice eft vera et indubitat> copia confirmacidis Epi fanéi andF i
capella {Gi Jacobj p me andrea pacok pfbtm fGi andy diot Notaria
puted facra ap* et Regali auto” collacionat et origiali 7 cit eod
ocorda¥ rept* manu alti? fidelit feript? Nil addei aut diminuédo
qd@ ei? fubam 7 a'quo varia¥ poffit tranflumpt’ Signo q nole et
fubferipcide meis folit? 7 ofuet( fignai - Rogat? 7 requifit? 7 fide
et teftimonia premiffoy -

Anpreas Pacok.


--- Dunfermline_page304.png ---
368.

569.

29
oe
tO

REGISTRUM DE (sec. xiv.

Carta de ferifelde -

Robertns dei gracia Rex Seottoy : Omib3; pbis hdibs tocius Pre fue :
Clicis 7 laicis faltm - Sciatis nos diuine caritatis intuitu : 7 p falute aie
noft® ac p falute aiay Gium afcefloy 7 fuccefloy troy Regi Scocie :
dedifle concefliffe 7 hac Plenti earta fira conf*maffe deo 7 beate marie
u'gini 7 conattio ‘fe Tnitatis 7 beate cargarete Regine de Dun? ac
Religiofis uiris Abbi 7 monachis ‘idem deo Suientibs 7 inppetua feruitut
Pram sued uoeat® le feng ifelde iuxta Intikethy n cit ptinenciis - qua Galf'dus
filius GilBti de nob tentit ¢ 7 qua Pram eit ptinenciis Idem Galf*dus cord
magnatib; Regni fri p fufti 7 baculii nobis furtit reddidit 7 refignanit + b
ac toti jus 7 clamii q°d in déa tra huit ut q' "litenq, habere potit spies
heredibs fuis q'hsciq, omnino q'etii clamauit Ippetuii - Tenend 7 habenda :
cifd Religiofis 7 eoy fueceflorib; de nobis 7 hedihs iris 7 feodo 7 hedi-
tate: 7iliBam pura 7 ppetua elemofina : liBe qete ¢ plenarie 7 honorifice :
ci omimodis 1Btatids ? cémoditatibs ¢ ayfiament 7 juftis ptinenciis ¢ ad
pdéam Pram {p*tantibs feu de iure fp‘tare ualentibs in futurii - facié
nobis 7 hedibs firis d@i Religiofi 7 eoy fucceflores in defenfione regni iri

Biaies yO) Ae _—— eee
tantiimodo Suicii de pdéa tra debit 7 ecdtuetii - In cui? rei teftiom
Bfonti Carte fire Sigillii n?m Beepim? apponi - Teft

yo.
De cuftuma magna - CaMlario -

Robertus dei gia Rex Scottoy Camlario fuo Seocie 7 miniftris fais qui p
tempe fuerint Sltm ¢ Cum nos p falute aie fire et animay Antecefloy et
fueceffoy roy Regum Scocie dederimus concefferim? et carta tra confir-
manerim? monachis firis de Dunfermly ibid@ deo fuientib; 7 imppetut
fuitu¥ tota nouam magna cuftuma fram que puenire potit de terris et
hominib; fuis pprijs p totii Regni: nfm ta infra burgos fuos pp"os q* extra
intra fuas Pras pp'as 7 tenandias fuas ¢ Ita qd didi mo*chi habeant et
ytant® - Coketa fua pp'a fedin libertates Regalitat¢ fue : et putes oeetfide-



--- Dunfermline_page305.png ---
REG. ROB. 1.] DUNFERMELYN. 253

firas in omib3 Pris Pdiee ¥ Qua quidé Cokctam cognotei 7 adm'ti volume?
ab omibs burgenfih; 7 hominibs firis et ext*neis ineatoribs p toti Regni
nim; Vob madam? 7 fini? Peipim? quats déos mo“chos firos eo,
homines feu minittros cout® tenoré carte fire qua fup donagde de nouc
cuftiie de nob habent ¢ nullaten? inquietetis feu ab aliquibs impediri
vob ci opportuerit oftenden-

pmnittatis - In eui? rei tetti6m hay tras fra:
das 7 penes détos Religiofos ppetuo remiafuras fieri fecim? patentes apud
Dunfermlyne vicefimo fédo die Julij Anno Regni iiri vieefimo p'mo -

Copia dona’nis officii Elemotinariatus -

vel andituri-

Onuibus fantte matris ecctie filiis Pfens feriptum vituri
Robert? de Karall permiffione diuia abbas de Difernilyii falute 7 dno -
Caritate diuia inftigante et Laborum pmente fareina nd pro tmio fet pro

Dus et conto

ppetuo otinuada filiis firis tempore firo ponderote

ipoita indtali? confiderata - Nos aut dictori fratri et focior’ labores in

parte remunerare et corti folacia aliq“liter augmétare affectuote cupictes
et pauperd egenorti fopia et miferia firis de bonis et elimofinis fubleuarj

et adiuuarj 3elo et motino bono inflinéi - Statuim? igit® et ordinam? ¢

hi fri loci in ofticit, elimoti-

confentu dri eapli Roberti Terwerac coms
uariat? fire domus de difermlyi + prebentes igit® ipi Roberto madatih
tpéale et elemofinariis quibufenq, futuris ut omnes efeulentori et pocu-
leutori firord’ Nouiciori reliquias donee prefbiterat? ordiné reeepint vel
t difpentata col

alia eauta racionabili ipis per abbaté at et recipiat
p te vel eius fubftiti vna cit poft'mo edulio ceterori confratri: firori: et
cafdem reliquias 1 domo fira elimofinaria extra portam iuxta capelli
fancte Katherie v'gis panpib? hora poftmeridiana ferotina diftribuat aut
Jift'buere faciat - Propt q® ifm elimo™ pfouté et futurd hora poftmeri-
diana et edpletorio exonam? et difpentam? dando et cdcedédo dietis
Ha fancte Katheric ef orto domib? infra ponté teftudiné

elemori

cape
i mo“fte

het

. » z . ~ ae s,
5 ij vulgarit voeat the gyrtht bow - jacef ifra domin

regalita ide

® noftra cii vna acra tre iaceit ex pte horeali et ocei® Lei hi



--- Dunfermline_page306.png ---
254 REGISTRUM DE [sEc. XLV.

difermly ci rtitudie eiufdé q° data flit i dote fida’nis dite capelle {te
Katherie ci duab? acris et p'dio jacefi ex pte boriali oppidi eiufdé q*ri
yna vocat humida acra debet Anuati vna bolla ferrie dad paupib? 7
elemofina i fefto fe Katherie ci quatuor folidis pro fuftenta’ne luis ad
iA capella foluédo ecia nobis et feaccario firo auuati noué denarios « Et
q fapS ex dict duab? acris et p‘dio i efculeii cdffib? 7 folaciis exifteli
coRtat® ci Ctis aliis ac's jacet ppe Ati b*gi ci aliis ccid Gbufdé anuis
reddib? ifra b@gii vel ex" acqfit et acirefi et molédio de Leffedy ci
aftrit’ne mult®e ei9dé viz vni? p*te ex quig, modiis trart fray de baithis
cragdueis Blaru’ Blarueis Coklaw W¥derig3 Refeobe Gafk et Leffotis -
Qua quidem capet dios ac*s anuos redt? mo ct bibs fuis uti’? puen’®
pticiis quib%ciq, habit vel habeii Nos pfati abbas et coiit? dam? ct
coiim? 7 pura et ppetna etina dict elério et fuis fucceffSb? eledriis adeo
libere pure plene et 1 pace fic' nobis cdce* et do“ fucre vna ci fpéali et
gen" licé* nim moti: exeidi pteripta omia eXcendi vifitadi et y® ad
foliin fri cOuét? reqrat* emédi ct pquerédi grt ex par et fupio™ incibit
officio « vel q"tii de iure pot? - fine reuoca’ne obfiaculo retini® quibufeiq,
hine et 7 futur - Si quis aut bane dona’né et firaz edceflioné 7 pte vel i
toto diminuere auferre fine delere nitat* . Sors ei? Loc? et manfio ci
datan et abiron quos viuos terra abforbuit 1 perpetuo pmaneat Amé - Et
vt offiia p miffa robur perpetue firmitatis obtineant sigillo capelle fire pus
feripti: roborat® tefte caplo - Dati apud fepefatii nim mo*fteriii die decio
menf mereij Anno gfe miHi™ tricétefimo vigefimo feptimoe -

Queda inquifig fea de tra de Orot ptineii ad - - «

Inq fiéd f%a afd Orog vifefimo die wayi Anti dni - «° - ccc’ « xxviij’ - p

fubfe'ptos - s + RoBtum de ly muockys - Alm de Glafmonth - . - - - tee
Gylleny - Ricard fit oargarete - ad braciatoré - Witm Gord - --- Johem
Ruflet - Rog - de c*iet - Rob - fit... ++ - magno fac*mento iuratos - qui

iuvati diet - q RoBtus de Oro’ obiit ueftit? - 7 fayfit? - vt de feodo - de
tra de Ort et ptiti prq'm de tra de Sybbalbe de q* Symé de Oroé fili?


--- Dunfermline_page307.png ---
REG, ROB. 1.) DUNFERMELYN. 255

sn? fuit 7 eft sayfit? p dies 7 annos - Soluendo iii Pddo - R- pat tuo dum
sc@aud 7 de tra | dr Weftirorock® » de q® fymé tit
fymois - filii ricardi fuit 7 ¢ veftit? 7 fayfit? p dies 7 annos solnend ii
pado R- da
dieiit q Sym6 de Orock & fit ei%dt Pde RoBti q* legitim? 7 ppingior heres
Padi - R- 7 q & legitie etatis . If dict q Pd&e tre de Orock 7 de
slebalbe efi pti valent p anit - xij - lib - If dieat q Pde tre ci ptine’
tenent® de dnis abbe 7 eduentu de Daf - Soluend inde annuati eis -
solid 7 tres fectas ad t'a placita capita
Pmiffis . Tf dicht q Pda tra et pti exiftit - nie po difeet Pasi - Rin
manib3 dG abdb - se'pt
sig --.-. Pasi vna ch sigit q’rund Ave Inq iédis inteffentia patnt

nixit annuati - ii

it +7 heredibs suis p? defeeffii ipi? annuati - xij-d- It

ce

jaa p ani + sine summoiionibs

aitis die 7 loco 7 anno fnp*noiat? 7 inelnfis sub

appofitis «


--- Dunfermline_page308.png ---
873.

Copia ofeffionis Johis vicarij fup deGis bladi croftoy ville de Intkethin -

Pateat vnitlf p pntes q die fabbi pxima poft feftii sti mathei apli 7
ewangelifte Anno dni - w° - ccc’. xxx™- Johannes de kinrof ppetu?
oftendés viris religiofis dnis

vieari? de Intikethin venit apud Dunferm
fuis ADbi 7 ouétui eiuflé loci ftatii fui videlicet p plures exaccdes 7
ot'buédes ti aplicas q” regales &e depffam 7 onatum ita q nd fufficit pp?
Pmiffa ad ornaméta chori de Iniikethin et repaGdein eiufdé que ptinét
inti? 7 extins put dees 7 tenet* p ifm adimplenda 7 plicienda + Cui?
lath 7 depfions pdiéi dni fui piderantes coneefferiit Beario q oim
expnfarii cirea di&i chori repaéSem et ornacioné intins 7 extins illa view
medietaté fate fiptibus fnis in fe fipferit ita q ab illa die quo pmifla
flint libere tint exonati + 7 penit? exuti a talibs Deticionihs 7 onibus

jdemgq, viearius qa tempore quo n6 extat méoria pditos dnos faos in
libera_poffetlione peipiendi omes decias garbales pochie de Infkethin ti
campoy q* toftoy + croftoy inuenit put nile iacent vbig, fe cognouit et
fatebatur nulla ins hre in eifd® nec in pofteri fio ppctuo vendicare « Et
ad ofia ct fingla pmiffa fidelit obferudda fe fidemedia corpalit preftita
aitrinxit 7 obligauit renicians p fe in hoe fate omi excepéei doli mali
impet"Gdi 7 oid; alijs remedijs juris 7 facti q Pfat€ religiofis in aliqno
obeffe portant 7 pdi&o Johi pdeffe In cui? rei teftism putib; Pdictus
viearius sigillii fut appotuit patent + Dat a&> 7 fepta die Anno = loco

Pnotate -

Procuratorium pro Alexandro Abbate -

Vnitis xpi fidelib; ad quos Pfent’ tre puenint | Prior et Connent?
coonatti de Diifmelyn s@i Andi dioce3 in Scocia ebnam in dno salém -

Noliitis nos feeiffe - edfirmaffe 7 ordinaffe dilém nobis in xpo- Religiofum
ac puidi viri - dim Alexandra dei gia Abbatem d@i wonaftii fir de
Dunf - nim yeonomii - pe’atorem - aéto¥ + 7 defenforem legit - ad



--- Dunfermline_page309.png ---
REG. DAV. UL] DUNFERMELYN. 257

ipet*ndi in curia romana q“fetiq, tras - tam simplices - gq" legendas ¢'
vel infliciam continentes - Dantes cidem p'tatem agendi - defendendi -
dandi ? petendi ? 7 recipiendi

judices dandi 7 reeufandi libellos feu petic

es

in quibzeumq, [eaufis] cont nos motis sen movendis feu nos qualitenmg,

- arbit's - fou

tangentib; eoram quibs;ctiq, iudieihs ordinariis vt delegat
amicabilib; eSpofitorihs - neend libellis 7 petiCbibs refpondendi lite cou-
teftandi iuramentii de ecaliinia et de veritate dicendi : et qdlz aliud gen?
liciti imramenti in anias firas Pflandi

z artictis ----+--+-+ 7 tefles producendi -- + inft'menta - teftes adufe ptis

ponendi 7 articulandi # pofiGdihs -

inra¥ videndi et cont” tefles 7 coy dta si fibi u
<Ceendi + excipiendi replicandi flat? dri reformaédem petendi quocicus

expedii

fit optunfi cO. ++... e eee eee) audiendi- appellandi - appellact

continuandi + + +

+ +++ profequendi q"feumq, pecuniay simas nobis
debitas «a quibsciiq, pfonis petendi - reeipiendi - et de reeept? tras

aeq'eticie dandi 7 peéatorem feu pe%atores + vnii vt plures loco sui
fubftituendi - et fubftitutii ab co vel subftitutos reuocandi - q*ciens s*
videbit®? expedire » Necnd t ufigendi 7 oMia alia faciendi 2 quer? 7
legitim? peurator face? potit 7 deb3 7 nos fate poflem? si prefentes
effem? - ceiam si talia ftint - q° mandatii speciale exigant et requirit -

romana n' caufa talis

dimim? tn s* p'tatem t*Gandi aliqua tam in Cur
fivit - que neceffurio 7 de fui natura in Curia fit traétanda - Ac volentes
di&ti peéatorem ném ab one fatifdandi releuare p co 7 subftitutis eiY
caucdem exponim? iudicd fifti - 7 iudicatti solui sub ypotheea Gium
honoy firoy + In q’y Sium teftiom Pfent? tras feu inft"mentii public p

Ro notaria public
Pfeutihs sigilli n?m cSmune fecim? apponi - Aé> in Capitlo firo de Dit
Anno a natinitate dni - a - ccc - qnto Indiétione teia - die decimo-
oétano went februa¥ - Pfontib; dnis - HE. de - T+ plore» Wede- C7
- mo‘chis sup“d@i monaftii de Daf teftibs ad Pmifla specialit

infrafe'ptum sub manu publica redigi fecim? 7

voeatis 7 rogatis -

Qk


--- Dunfermline_page310.png ---
8T4.

258 REGISTRUM DE

Lia obligacdnis -

pi fidelibus - ad quos pfent> tre puentint Prior 7 Convent?
coonat tii ae Daf sti And# dio® in Scocia etnam in dno falém - Noltitis -
q hito in Caplo iiro pleno t*&atu - fup | ftatu monafterii firi . penfatis «7
cdfideratis vtilitate 7 neceffitate wonaftii iri. ac fate Regni Seocie - de
cireiifp’cione morib3 7 fidelitate - Religiofi viri 7 difeti domini Ale%i dei
gta Abbatis tri de Dif. Pdéi confidentes déo dno AleXo Abbati firo
plenam et 1iBam concedim? p Pfent> p'tatem peeuniam in quacumq, siima
maiori vt miori ex mutuo a q°’cumgq, s‘ mutuar volenti cit* - vel vitra mare
recipiédi 7 Et nos @onaftia. nfm - bona fira mobilia 7 immobta ecctattica
7 miidana p pecunia s' mutuata obligandi quoq? genie obligaéis + prom'tent
p flipulagoem folempnem - Rig. de iS. Notario infrafe'pto ftipulanti viec
et noie Snitt quoy inteft uel intefe potit in fut®um - q oes pecuniay
fiimas - qs déus dis abbas ex mutuo recipict in fut*i +a q’cumq, fiue
quibufeumg, eis in Pminis p.d@m diim abbatem ftatuendis pfoluem? - Et
si in foluéve eay defetim? Pminis fiatutis eifit mutuantib; déo dno abbati
p’euniam [tam] de dapnis expens€ et inte - fi q vt quas ic*erit re d&e
pecunie fi folute fuis minis 7 loco q@ abfit - q* de p'ncipali ctiiinelenng
nullo pponendo obftante - Reniiciates exeepedihs doli mali non numat
peunie n° in rem firam feu in vtilitatem wonaftii firi verti zin---acébni
7 omnib3 impet*tis tris- 7 oMi iuris bifid « tam ec@attici q* ciuilis - p q¢
robur pfent> potit infringi vt cnuari in pte vi in toto uel qd mutuantibs
in fut?um d@o dno abbati poffet oh&e 7 nob; pdée - In quoy oim teftiim
plent> tras fen inft*mentii publict p-R + de +S - nota¥ public fub manu
publica redigi fecim? 7 sigilli firi_ omunis munimine roborari » A&* ir

Caplo firo Anno dni - @~ ccc - xxxv - Indieée Peia die decimaoéta
wenst februat - Pfentihs dominis - H+ de 1- p'of -J- de. D- 7+ xxij-
coonachis fup"d@i conaftii de - D - teftibs ad Pmiffa tpeciali? noeatis 7

rogat? +

Et ego R- de-S----+-de S- elie? E dioé aue‘te aplica 7 Lmpiali nota?


--- Dunfermline_page311.png ---
3

REG. DAV. IL] DUNFERMELYN. 250

public? Pmiffis Gibs ptens intfui- Eaq, s° fick uidi 7 audiui- put fupin?
u le publica forma manu mea redegi 7 in teftiém Pmitloy
Conuentu fpeciatr rogatus -

fe'pbunt? + 7

signi mewn cdlueti appotui a déis pc

Carta Dauit de Kymbirehame -

Omi; hane cartam vituf vt auditu? Ale& pmniffioue dia AbBbs de Dun

7 ceiufd loci Conuentus humit etna in dno saltm . Notlitis vnififi_ nos
dediffe : concefliffe 7 hac pfenti Carta tira conf'mafle Dauit de Kymbir-
chame burg de Berwié illud burgagium ei oimibs iuftis fuis ptinené qd
q’nd fuit Wiki de Orfeburg qnd . de Berwié . iacens in vieo qt dr
Soutergate’ ex pte orientali eiufd viei int tras AndF dz Napreft> ex pte
auftli 7 dni Wiki de Liuingttof ilit ex pte aq'lonali» tenend 7 hud
do Dauit 7 hedibs fuis de nots 7 succefforibs jiris in feodo et hereditate
plena¥ 7 honorifice - Reddendo inde dés Danit

in ppetuii bit 7 in pace
~ hedes sui dno fro Reg - vj - d- ad tmios cdfuetos nob v7 suecefforihs

~ = sur De o
firis duas maré - anuas legat monete ad duos ani tmios p eq*les porédes ¢

Pentecoft> videlics 7 sti @artini -

Lia octaue ptis [finium] de fyf 7 de flothryf -

Wits Comes de Rob Jufticiarius ex pte boriali oat Scotieani conftitut? -
dno Dauid de Wemis vieccomiti de yf satm - oandam? vob 7 Beipim?
q ‘tin? Religiofos viros Abbem 7 Couentii de Dunfmelyn - vt eoy Etos
attornatos deferuiri faciatis de oéaua pte finiti de ffyf 7 de flothryf . nos”
in itinere fro vitio apd Cup in ffyf - habito . contingentiti put in eartis
doy Religiofoy plenarie vtinet® - Quay q'd - Cartay die vene¥ po pott
fetta aploy Simonis 7 Jude ap* villi de perth - huim? infp‘eioné In cui?
Rei teftimoniad plentibs sigilli nfm fecim? apponi - Dat? ap* pth die
vene¥ Pnotato Anno dni «® - ccc’ - tricefimo nono



--- Dunfermline_page312.png ---
260 REGISTRUM DE [sec. xiv.

Retig"&& terre de Wythker -

Seiant Pfentes ct futuri Pens sc'ptir videntes vt audientes q ego Alan?
de Lybirton™ ante conf*éem pfent’ diis tre de Wythker cum ptinenciis
in tenemento de aufkylburg - qui q'dem tram de Religiofis viris Abbe
et Conuentu de Dunfmel; re hereditario tenui 7 poffedi - déam fram
cit omibs ptinenciis eid fp'tantib; vi de iure fp* tare v valentibs in fetto sdi
cartini Epi 7 Confefforis in yeme - Anni dni - wilt - t'eentefimi - t'eefimi -
Noni - eifdem Religiofis viris Abbi et Conuentni coram magno altari in
eeéia conuentuali de Dunfmelyn / p me et heredib3 meis » p faftum et
Dacula surfinn Reddidi ct q'etd clamaui in ppetui - ita q n° ego n° héredes

niu

nei - vt aliqui alii cui%eumq, condicois fuerint , ex pte jira aliquod ins
vt clamitt vendicare valeam? in pia tra in pott um + In cui? rei teftimdm
pfenti se'pto sigilli mei patent et wannali? appofai. Ani. die 7 loco
snp‘déis - Hiis teftibs - wagris - walcolmo de Gatmylé . Symie de
wayftton® + Johe de ffythkyl cleri And? 7 Henrico de Vallonia -
wiche Squyer - Johe fciflore . WiHo tin&ore 7 Wito filio Colini et
cultis aliis +

Anniverfarium Q) - Waleolmi de Gathmilk -

A)et q conceffum eft p AlXm dei gia Abbatem de Dunfmelyn et
ciufdlem loci Conuentii 7 p se 7 Scefforih; fis inppetuum fideli?. manuee-
perit - vno die in anno. s-in Chino sti biidci in q*dragefima quolib; ano
ufq, ad finem hui? sei celeb? anitthale cf folempnitate - qua dec3- et pleno
fui magift caleolmi de Gathmilk: clerici monafterii pai de Dunfmelyn
in memoria 7 landem dei pro q? faciendo vt pdém eft Pfat? malcolm?
dedit 7 pfoluit cidem abbati 7 Couentni centi 4 ng + maré - ci fex folidis

7 oto ‘denarii -in vtilitatem 7 cdmodi monattii afidéi conttend videl

3

ad emad tra. vt r'diti annvalem Pp petancia fa

eienda Conuentui pdéo in
BN ty earns RG A oe ee
ref,torio die Anittalis pd@i 2 «edio aut® tépe supp'or ple'pti monatttii


--- Dunfermline_page313.png ---
S80,

FERMELYN.

201

REG. DAY. 11} D

hebit tres maré de firmis tre de Wytker in Laudonia anuati ad Bdtam

a fac}

pe ienda m° q? sup‘ - qua tra emeriit ab Alano de Lybirton* - Et

ne recedat a memoria - Iloc memoriale fe'ptii eft in martilogio 7 in

regift? . In cui? rei tefliom - sigilli cémune capitli Pfenti
Et penes Pd supp'oré refidentib; - Dat? 7 A&> ap! Difmely / die Jouis
px’ p? felt bi mathie apli- Anno + Dni + "+ cco’. xxx° - nono « Tefte

eft appens :
eapitlo ci sigillo Abbatis -

Aflifa de nativis -

()emorana q Anno dni cite ccc’ Q*dragetimo / duodecio die @entis
aij in Cimitio Ecetic pochialis de Katy] / cora dno Dauid de Wemys
tune vieccomite de flyfl’ / tranfiit hee aflifa int verlabilé prem dim
Alexandrii dei gia Abbem de Dunfmelyn » 7 Diccani tie comit® de
ffyf® sup Alano quonda filio Conftantini 7 duobs filiis ei? videlic3 Ricardo
z Alano q* se dicebant hoics pdéi Comitis , Set p fidelem affifam fide-
dignoy 7 nobilid cod die facti sit hdies ligii Pdti dni ADbis -

Carta de Kyndun in Ros -

Oinibs ste mat's ecctic filiis Pfenté Carta vifus vt anditu Alexand dei
gia Abbas - ste tnitatis de Dunfmelyn 7 ei%t loci cout? hiit stm in
dno » Noite vnitli. nos» ynanimi cdtenfa 7 voliitate peordit) dediffe
coneeffiffe 7 hac ptenti carta jira ofirmatfe Johi d&o yung” filio 7 hedi
quoda Johis filii clini burgentis de Dinguale p omagio 7 fuicio fuo fideli
nob 7 fueceflorih; fris infut*i impendendis tota tra iiram de Kyndun in
Roflia - ett ptinéeiis tentda 7 habenda déo Johi young: 7 hedibs suis te
legitie 7 fuceeffiue pe‘atis 7 pereandis de nots 7 fuceeflorih; iris in feodo 7
‘heditate inppetud p oiics metas suas 7 Reétas diuifas 7 omia cid Pre bte
ptinétia vt ptinere valétia - in bofeis 7 planis @oris 7 warifiis - aq's 7 ftang-
nis p*tis pafenis 7 paftuY - 7 viis 7 femitis --.- Aneupadd

bz 7 venadvihs


--- Dunfermline_page314.png ---
262 REGISTRUM DE [sec. X1y.

++ ei natiuis 7 legiis hdibs eivd Pre et bracinis - .  - molédinis ¢ et
s placitis 7 queret / cit - - saluis nob queret 7 efchaetis
ad corona R {ptatibs 7 et nifiamétis 7 cOmodib;---+-++-- puenit
se eeees potint de Pra afid@a ta sb Pra q* sup* tram 7 ta nd noiatis q*
noiatis ++se+++Hnuati ipe Johes 7 hedes sui nob 7
fuceetforibs firis duodecim denarios noie ++. +++ ++++ +++ natiuitatis bi

Joh bapt® - q’s soluét i cella ira de Vrehard supp'ori eiufa q' p tempe
+ fuicio auxilio cOfuetudie vi fetlari exacébe q p nos vt

fuecelfores firos ++ +++ esse eee Johe vt hedibs fiis q’etq, m° exigi potiat
yt demadari in futu et pd@s-0 ++ eee eee eee ++ tra de Kyndun

tine deméb“cione vt diminudde pfuatt sic’ fuit -
Pdéa infeodauim? « Dat i cap de Dunf> stdo die wai
sree tefimo q"dragefimo -

Concordia eum J - de Dundas - de paflagio -

: dum q die or enrii_ px afi f™ bi Barth afli Anno dni - willio - ccc” -

+ declinauit Diis AleX dei gfa Abbas de Dun? - ad auft“lem ptem
paflagii Regine ad inftancia Jacobi de Dundaf Sr q*dam otifia mota int
pdém diim Abbem 7 ipm amicabtr ibid declarada p pt‘baédne hoim 7
hatellay dd dni Abbis ad duas rupes inf* flu&i maris iacétes more folito
applicatid q*s q'd rupes dés Jacob? affernit e fuas pp"as ? cui? tn appli-
caddis poffeffice Abbes Pdeceffores {ni / ibe 7 eoy mon“ftia a tepe quo
non extat memoria pacifice gandebat si pt*bagoe aliq* - 7 Sr hoe hut
carta dni BD quida Regis feocie fundatoris 7 p'mi pat*ni eoridé vna ci
ofirma@dibs dittoy regi fucceffoy fnoy p ditlvos fimos potifices pfmat> -
put dés dis Abbas ibid d&o die oftendebat i pfencia sbfe'ptoy : videls -
wagri Joh de Gatemylk - Alani de LiBton® - wich fy'er - Radulph efici -
Joh de Herth - Alani de Difpéfer « Rig fit Witti ferifmot - RoBti young -
Joh fit hérici - Joh de Lochilde - Radulph gtey - 7 filtoy alioy i déo
paflagio hitanciii - raone eius pbaddis dés Jacob? fentécia excom™ p Bfatos
fiimos pontifices i eoy oftmacddibs lata inc’rebat 7 p aliqd tép? aio indurato



--- Dunfermline_page315.png ---
263

Dav. 11.) DUNFERMEL

fuftinebat + vii Pat? iacobus déo die hiitr fupplieauit Pd&o dno ADbi
fedéti Sr oceidétali ore déay rupitt ef q'h3da de cdfilio fuo tig” in
pofleffide eintdt q vellet et abfolite a déa fentétia 7 ipe 2 pt*bagone dtoy
hoim 7 batellay penit? ceflabat ¢ Abbas v’ Pdés hiili fupplieacdi tine
Telinad- ducens illum a Pdéa fentéeia q"ten? i ipo fuit abfolucbat ad
eautelam - 83 q*diu a d@a pt®*bacone coffailit --- qiictiq, noua Sr hoe mohit
queftioné ipoftum q flatim déam fentéeiam inc*reret -

Copia carte Criftiane de Belate q manucepit q Walterus de Befate rat
heb' donacioné fad fétam mo“t'tio de Dun - de terris de Lutkirhunyoth -

382. Omnibus hoe fe'ptii vifuF vel auditu® Criftiana Befeth Reli&a quoda
dni Johis befeth filia 7 vna edi quoda dui Dauid de Hunyoth dni de
klerkinto’ flim in duo. Notte me fide media manueepifie q Walterns
Beteth filius meus 7 heres die confecGis fntium in anglia incarGatus ratas
hebit donagdem coneeflioné remiflion® ac q'ete clamaédem de t'bs lib +
noué ft fPlingoy in quibs religiofi viri dni Abbas 7 ouent? mof bij de
Dun? m* et hedibs meis p parte mea 7 hedii meoy de fino feodo tence" «
de Lutkirunfoth me iure editario otingente tenchant? - eif@@ fa@as p
q“draginta lit, {Tlingoy m' in vrgétiffima neceffitate mea p déos religiofos
pfolut’ ae in redempcdem dé Walteri filij mei et hed ple“ rie coutif
Infup manueapio fub pena cétii libray bone et legat monete fPlingoy g
diétus Walt? fili? et heres meus figillii {ui fe'pto Pd&is dnis Abbati +
ouentui de Dunf- {¥ donaéde : veeflide remiflise 7 q'ete clamaébe confecto
vt in déo fe'pto otinetur ei de maib3 inimicoy fuoy infra ptes pp'as
feocie venit apponet - In cui? rei teftidm figillti met pntibs appotui . Dat
paten?? ap’ Dunf feio decio die mes Septéby Anno dni ®- ccc’ - xI°. vj’ -

Copia quiete clamacbis / dnui feodi de Lutereuyoth -

383. Oinibus hoe fe'ptum viliris vel audituris Criftiana Befeth Reli&a quod


--- Dunfermline_page316.png ---
BN kb

XIY.

264 REGISTRUM DE [sr

dni Johis de befeth filia et vna hedii quod dni Dawid de Hunyoth dni
de Clerkintoi Hunfotb flim in dno fempitna + Nottite vnitth fi me in mera
viduitate mea 7 fpontanea voli - vna ci ofentu 7 afl’ W: alti hefeth filij
mei 7 hede dediffe concefliffe 7 hoe fnti fe'pto meo p me 7 Redibs meis
ippetud remififle 7 quiete clamaife Religiofis viris dis Abbti 7 ouétui
moftij de Dif illas tres lib 7 nou 6 felingoy in quibs diti Religioft
michi et hedib3 meis pro pparte mea et dé&o7 heredt meoy de annuo feodo
toneméti de Lufkirlunyoth me jure heditario cotingéte hucufq, tenebant? -

p quada ffi* peciie videlics quadraginta liby ftlingoy michi in yrgen-
tiflima neceflitate mea p digos religiofos pfolut: ac in redépéom addi
Walteri befeth filij et hed mei ple*rie puerfis de qua quidé {%* pectie
me teneo bene pacata 7 dita donacéom ogceflioné remiflioné 7 quieti
clamagdm Ego 7 heredes mei détis religiofis Cont® Ses hoies warandiza-
him? 7 defendem? imppetua Reniciantes in hac parte / ego 7 déi hedes
mei dimodo iuris clamio qd Ego vel dicti hedes mei in did thy libF 7
none  huim? vel fre potim? I ppetuti - In cui? rei teftiom Sigilld mei vna
et figitt di&i Walti filij mei et hedis ac veilabilis patris in x° dni Wittmi
mifaéde dina Sti andy efi dni tho’ byfeth milite 7 dni Dauid de Wemys
milite tiie vicecdite de fyi fnti feripto é appenfum Dat: pa atent apud Dunt
Peio decio die m@f Noutby Anno dni - w’ - ccc? - quadragefimo feptio -

Carta de Wymeth -

1. dig abb de DunP 7 iad loci pit? hiit. dibs h se'ptii vituF vt aud -
ot. in dno sat - NoWitif vnitli nos ob vtilitat® dom? fre de* « geet. +
he carta ira pftmafle dno . W- de RameS - 7 Elifabeth vxori sue 7
edibs fuis vt suif affig*tis - vt eni vt q'bs de suis - ipi dare - edcede vt
aflig“re volitint # p homagio suo tota tra de Wyimeth q*m archomb abbs
Pdeceffor fir de cdi affenfu 7 voluntate capli dedit michaeli flandren’ clico
fit Jordani fland'n$ in excambiii terre q*m p'? ei dedit q fuit Danid
saddotis iux* ectam de Wymeth - tota - f- ila Pra & in riuulo q’ ar
louenyii fit via pducit? a louenyii p e'ftot’ g‘fmannoy de Bagraw vq, ad



--- Dunfermline_page317.png ---
Dav. 1] DUNFERMELYN. 205

diuifas tre fire de Wimeth 7 tre de Logtuit - 7 fit via pducit® a croftis
grefinannoy de Bagraw vig, ad viam q appellat® uia de ftante lapide - 7
sié cad uia de ftante Iapide pducit® in vid q* it* Yoo Edenbtg’ - gab illa
uia vf5 ad (5te q' appHat® Tous cee? ¢ sh Cambri - 7 totam illa tral q eft
a fonte ecco sb Cambis de Cambruii in oriétali pte viq, ad q*nda Brecea

Sr Cambri - sié dns - A. abb 7 pbi homies sceii pamblarat - 7 a pd&a

Breeea vfq, ad dinifas de Gilmoriftoi sié da semita pducit® ab illa
Breeca uf3 ad diuifas de Gilmoriftoi - Tenenda 7 hnda de nob 7 succell!
jiris in ppetuii -s' 7 Ledibus suis vt suis alli® « vt eui vt q's de suis ipi
dare cdcede vt aflig"re voluint - in feodo 7 Teditate « WBe « qtete - ab omni
Suid 7 cOsuctudine cit UBtate moledi pmo p%t nim demeniit bladi - 7
p'mo p% bladii q'd iuenit 7 t'mmlo « adeo libe - q'ete « plena® 7 honof - si
alig® tra de nob Libie q'eci? pleni? 7 honorifie’ei? tenet? vt toni debet -
Redd? inde annuati nob 7 suceefloribs fris duas lib*s pipis ad Natale -
Reniciam? % p nob 7 succeflorihs tris Si acGOni - Si Puitio - bifico

reflituédis 1 integri - Impet* edi de q’libet modo de alienatis reuocandis -
a q’etq, p'neipe impet*tis 7 impet“ndis - 7 dibz | not pdefle

© oe eS = oe i se. af ave
o° pfatas donagom ecdceflioné 7 pftmaddin : 7 illis potunt refragari -

yz omibs aliis

‘Tefte caplo «

Confirmatio de decimis de Cornethon et Athera -

Vnitl fe mats ectie filiis ad quos pntes tre puenerit Willis wifacoe
>. . ~ 8 eh) bE sg: a ox 5
dia Ecctie Dunblanen$ @inift humilis et ciuf Ectie deeanus 7 Capittm
ee tr, + Oe Oe =. F me se oD
Etna i dno salim - Nott vnilitas fra - nos Copofigdem ila - int’ bone
ou wee a —_ a. ;

memorie dim cauricii pdecefforé nfm - Capittmg, Diblanen’ cc:
pte vna et Religiotos viros Abbem «7 Couentii @onattij de Dunf . ex

pte alta initam 7 cdfe&i - sup Canonica obedia 7 aliis ab abbibs de

7
Dunfmt - Fone deciay garbaliii de Cornethon® 7 de Athera i pochia de

sais pleni? infpexifle 7 hee ttha Pateat
ynillfis ad quos Pfentes tre puenit q mota cdtrouerfia diutina vt Ada
fup* [/upra riz. N. 355.) Qua quidé cSpoficionem puide initam et con-

oy

Logy - p pdeceffores firos duda e



--- Dunfermline_page318.png ---
S80.

=

266 REGISTRUM DE [sec. xiv.

fe&am - Nos Willfiis plibate eectie Dunblanen’ init? humit confirmam?
7 ratificam? » ac in omibs fuis arti¢lis approbam? - Nos eciam Decanus 7
Captm diée Ecctie / hito in eotm Capitulo fire ei concanonicis noft's
finglis cuocandis fup Pmiflis folépni 7 diligenti tractatu  eandm cépo-
fiGone in oi sui pte n° nd 7 confirmaddué ac ratificagonem dni Wittmi
Epi noft' in hae pagina supius infertam ’ ex pleno 7 vnanimi contentir
padi Capituli firi cdfirmam? 7 appbam9- ac inconcuffe valituras decernim?

infuturum - In cui? rei teftimonii - sigilli’ mei Dunblanenfis Epi sup*déi
Baan ~ ner + on. . :

vna ci sigillo cSmuni eapli fri Pnotati pfentib; eft appenfaum - Dat* in
eodm capilo five decimo oéauo die ffebruarij - Anno dui - mitt - t'cente-

fimo - q'nquagefimo - tertio -

De Hurchard .

Danid dei + Rex Scottoy Johi de Haya saluté - Quia p viroy retiofoy
proris 7 cduét? de Hurchard querimoniam - concepim? - déos religiofos . p
thefaurarii: @orauie exacéde cni%dam - penédis - min? - debite in bonis
suis agg“nari - Vob mit - Peipiendo mandam? . q“tin? nde fire Regie
mnaieftat€ ad defencdem 7 citagbem

Proteftatio de prioratu de Urehard -

In dei noie amen - Anno a natiuitate einfdé @illio - trecentefimo quing’-
gefimo - ogtauo - Indicéoii xj - die - 1¢da menf caij pontificat? Sziffimi in
xpo pat's ac dni jiri Innocence” diui* puidencia p*pe vj - anno fexto in

-apitlo eathedralis ecetie @orauieti - Bfentibs retendo in xpo pre ac duo -
dno Johe eed gra Epo worauiei dnis decano *t q'bgda aliis canGicis - ad
hoe fpecialit uocatis » Venabilis in xfo pat? Johes pmiffSe diui* Abbas
@onattij de Difermelyn - afferuit % allegauit - q virtute p'me inftituddis t
fundaddvis p'orat? de Vrehart t ofuetudie appbata optéta- t hue ufq, vfitata -
Vacite d&o p'oratu - Confilii déi dni Abbis fup negocio imminent elecddis



--- Dunfermline_page319.png ---
REG. DAY. 11] DUNFERMELYN. 207

@onachi ipam cleeédem celebraturi Req're¥ ct inftancia ac petere deberét
pteftando dés dis Abbas de infirmacve t informitate vitime Elee@is de
psona dni wichaelis de Infkethyn ibidé celebrate - pfilio fuo ad hoe vt
decuit minime req'fito - Prefat? v’ dis epé ex deliberacde fua t eiufdé
sapitli dixit afferuit t Recognouit hoe debe¥ fieri t futuris téporib; fore
faeiend’: t firmit obfernand’ iuxta tenor’ carte fue p'meue fundacdis
regiftte + nd obftante vt impediente Pdéa vitima cleeGde q* recognouit
+ affirmauit ex cagna cit imminéte pitlo ac impflione wan? laicalis nd
in cdtdpti dt dni Abbis aut in piudiciti juris fui fuille celebrati -Bns v°
por eiufdé loci *t cett wo" chi ibid] pmorates pfentes fueriit t illud idé p
dia t sinZla Pmifla affirmaucriit - In q’y dium teftidium pdés diis Abbas
pits inftraméta p we notaridi: public’ inf feript> se'bi t publicari wAdauit
Plentibs veii t diferetis viris dno Wittm? decano - wagift? Johe de Intlhes
Cauecllar’ - dno Johe de dutfons fuecento¥ - t dno Witm? de lonfordy
candico de morauiei eccte teftihs ad Pmifta voeatis fpecialid t rogatis -
Et ego Willitis boyuil clic? glafgueii dyoc~ public? aucto“te aptica notari?
Pits affernj allegacdnj *t pteftagnj p dém diim Abbem fattis n° nd *t

ae Bea aeaal ag ao 2 = nae :

refpdfionj ac recogniGonj pfati dni epi di agerét? - vna ci pdéis teftibs
rr an F a aa qana

ples intfui- hoc infl’méta in hic publici forma redegi « hie coca pp'a manu

fubferipfi figni’ mei q, foliti appotui rogat? in teftimonium pmitiorum -

InquifiG facta de Edmunditon -

Inquificio fata Apud Mufkylburg die m‘rt¢ pxio poft feftti St michaelis -
Anno gie @° cee? quiquagefimo ix’ coram Ricardo de Cragbarry Ballio
de mufkylburg - p fideles 7 antiqniores patrie - Silics; p Radulphii de
Inuthefk - Witm Waldale - Radulphum Cowe . 7 Adam ffem faum -
Johem palframan - Adam filium fimdis - enricum de Smeithtot - Wittn
de Baryntod - Johem de Baryntofi - Robertum de refecorio - Adam de
camera - Johem de Balereft) 7 Héricit filia vidue « qui iurati dicit q
héricus de Edmundftofi q°’ndam dis eiufd obiit veftitus 7 fayfitus de
teneméto eiuft vt de feodo 7 ad pacem dni firi regis - ct Joties de


--- Dunfermline_page320.png ---
38O,

268 REGISTRUM DE {src. xiv.

emundfioi filius eius lator pnt fuit legitim? heres 7 ppinquior ipi?
Henrich de pi tra» 7 legitie ctatis - Et d@a Pra valnit tempe bone
paci li vj f viij d 7 nite valet x ti xiii 6 iiij Ms za dno Abbe de
Diifermlyn tenet® in eapite 7 cdnttu 7 quibs dififis téporib; tenetur
nuatim in xxxiij f iiij d- videlics ad feftii petecoft? x 6 ad f™ - St
martini x 6 Ad feftit purificaédis ste marie xiij 6 iiij d- Et nie in manu
dni Johis de preftoi exiftit in Warda - In eni? rei teftimonii: sigilli dé
Ballini de mufkylburé vna et figit quorida Pdtoy fide dignoy eft
appenft - Dat die 7 loco 7 anno fipradéis -

ist

Carta de Pethfuren 7 confirmacio ciutdem -

Dauid dei gta Rex Seottoy - Omib; probis hofiib; toci? terre sue :
Clerieis et laicis - Salut@ - Seiat q infpexim? quada cartam margarete
sponfe quent Robti de weygners wilitis nd raftam nd abolitam - n° in
alig” sui pte uitiatam - Religiof viF Abbi 7 Couentui de Dunfimelyii fam
in hee verba « Vnitis xpi fidelibs ad q’s pntes tre pnenint - margareta de
Onyoth - filia 7 vna heres Redum quondm dni Dauid de Onyoth - coilitis
7 Relida quontn dni RoBti de coey, gnis ilitis + Saltm in ng fempitna .
Notit vnitifitas tra me et edfenfi et aflenfu Johis de woygns filii mei 7
jiedis - p talute aie mee - aiteetioy 7 fucectloy meoy dedifle - conceffifie -

ct hae pfinti Carta mea eéfirmaffe deo beate virgini carie - et eectie ste
tnitatis de Duntmel
viris Abbi 7 Conentui coonaftij de Dunfmelyii - ibidm deo feruientibs 7

i + ac ste wargarete Scottoy Regine - 7 religio’

in ppetuii fuituF - videlic3 ad augmentam pue comune antedéj Couent?-
tota tram mea de Pethfuraii - me inre Aeditar rio contigenté p suas reétas
diuifas et omib3 ptinenciis ad déam Tra fp'tantibs sen in futuriy quoq’
modo fp*tare valentib3 - Tenenda 7 habenda in pura - 1iBam - et ppetua
Elemofinam - yna et omib; ayfiamentis et suif’ ptinenciis . in bofeis -
planis - woris - @arefiis - petariis - t*bariis - flagnis - aquis - molendinis -
bracinis - viis - femitis - et pafturis - et ci omibs aliis cOmoditatihs - liBta-
tib; ct ayfiamentis fais tam nd nojatt q* nojatis - sb Pra? 7 sup" fram ad



--- Dunfermline_page321.png ---
390,

REG. DAY. 11] DUNFERMELYN. 269

pdéam tram ptinentib; vt alig’ titulo scu iure ptinere valentibs in futur’ -
adco liBe q'ete plenarie - et honorifice sic aliqua Elemofina in Regno Seot
ab aliquo - KBius quiecius » plenarius - ct honorificenci? tenet® 7 poffideté -
Dei wv religiofi facient vn ciflam Celebrari in Couentu p aia mea
tpecialit in die annitifarij nei annuati ci officio @ortuoy die Peedenti p
tempe duratu¥ ppetuo - Ego v° et Tedes mei pdgam Pram et dibs; ptinene
et HBtatihs fup" déi ris - et coy fuccefforihs cont™ oMes
hoies et feminas warentizabim? acquietabim? 7 inppetuii defendem? - In

ei. Relteiott
+ pfatis Religiof v

cui? rei teftimoniit figillii mea vna ci sigillo Johis de ceygns filij ct hedis
mei pd pntibs patent? eft appenf - Hiis teftib3 - Johne de woncreff dno
ciufdm loci - Duo Jotne Pulte* recéore de Cultyr - Bno Stephano
ppetuo vicario de Clef!’ ct filtis aliis - Quam quidm Cartam donagonemg.

+ conceflioné in eadm content in omib3 7 finglis punétis fuis - articlis
condicionibs 7 modis ac cireumftanciis fuis quibseumq, forma pit 7
effectu - in oiib; 7 p dia approbam? - Ratificeam? - ct p nob 7 hedibs firis
ex certa feiencia in ppetuii cofirmam? - Concedentes de gia ira fpali
Bddis Religiof q ii 7 coy fucceffores in ppetud ab omi fedta de Pata tra
nob debita - q'bsciiz curiis firis facienda - TDi fint penit? 7 q'eti - In cui?
rei teftimoniii - finti Carte fire pf'maddis - Sigil: nfm Peepim? apponi -
Teftibs venabilibs in xfo pat"h; - Withmo Epo sti Andi - et Pat'eio Kpio
Brechiii - Caneellario fro - Robto Senefeallo Scot Coite de Strathne -
nepote fro - Witlmo Coite de Dwelas - RoBto de Erikyne - Johe de
Prefton® - et Danid de Anandia q@ilitib; - Ap* pth - xvij?- die apt - Anno
Regni firi t'cefimo - ptino -

Conf'maé Dauid Regt de Rega iiij* burg -

Danid dei gia Rex Scottoy Omnib3 probis hominib; tocius Pre fire cficis
7 laic€ Slim - Sciat€ nos p infpeeédem cartay quas de pgenitorib; firis
Regibs Seocie habent Religiofi viri Abbas 7 outtus motterij de Dunfm-
lyne Jura 7 libertates Regalitat fue ac ecia burgoy fuoy pleni? intellexiffe :
Nos p falute aie fire et aiah3 oim aiicefloy firoy et fuccefloy dediffe con-



--- Dunfermline_page322.png ---
sor,

270 REGISTRUM DE (see. xiv.

ceffiffe 7 hae pnti carta fra p modi ppetue declaragdis predi&€ Religiotis
confirmafle q videl3 burgentes 7 Meatores burgoy cortdé in finglis burg
fi il; Dunfermlyne / Kirealdy | outkilburgh 7 paflag Regine licite
et libere emie valeant et vende ¢ ac eci

in ipis burgis fuis de q*bufetiq,
bonis et viiciig, venientibs 7 infra oiies metas fines et Pmios tocius
Regalitat? ipoy Religiofoy p totii Regni nfm mereaturas fuas jufte
exteere tam de lanis corijs 7 pellib3 q" de alijs eimonijs qbufeuma,
abfq, impediméto miniftroy firoy feu burgenfli: hroy quoriicumq, Ita
tamé q metas 7 Pmios didoy burgoy fiuoy vel Regit€ fue afidize in Pmitl!
non exeedant / Salua nobis femp mag* cuftia de lanis corijs 7 pellib; 7
cetis Meaturis erefeentib; ext* metas 7 bondas di&oy burgoy et regitt
fup"di&e - Inhibentes firmit’ ne aliqui homines firi burgenfes vel ineatores
de quibutetiq, burgis iris feu quinis alij homines burgenfes aut Meatores
alioy quoriteiq, in Piudicii di&oy Religiofoy aut fuoy burgéfia vel
burgoy aut ehuagoem Pntis declaraédis fire 7 conf'maddis infra Pmios
Regite eoridé jus vel Ptaté Meandi feu Pmiffa cReendi in futur fibi
ptumit aliq‘lit’ vfurpare - In cui? rei teftidm fnti carte fire Sigil nfm
Peepim? apponi - Teftibs yenabilihs in x° Drib; WiHmo Epo Sti andi ¢ 7
Pat'&> Epo Brechineii Cancellario firo « Roberto fenefé Scoé cdite de
Stratherne nepote fro / Witlmo céite de Douglas RoBto de Erf y
Caiilario fro’ Archibaldo de Douglas 7 Jote Hert militibs apud Edinburgh
vieefimo q“rto die O&obr€ Anno Regni firi t'cefimo q“rto -

Carta Dauid Regt de portu de Gellald -

Dauid dei gia Rex Scottoy omnibs pbis hominib; tocius tre fue cliet et
laie€ Sttm - Seiat( nos p fatute aie fire et p aiabs oim aiicefloy 7 fuccetloy
iiroy Regi Seocie dedifle cdcefliffe deo 7 tte margarete Regie Abbatj et
motehis de Dif ibidé deo fuientibs 7 Ippetuii fuitut p fe homib; fuis
burgéfibs et Meatoribs vt heant porti apud g“ngiam de Gellald vel apud
Wetir Roffith ei pfenfu dnoy eiutde p omibs bonis 7 Meat*is ta de lanis
corijs et pellibs 7 ad di&i porti p ciufde Meatores eariandis 7 inferendt


--- Dunfermline_page323.png ---
REG. DAV. IL] DUNFERMELYN. 271

lius vidint expedire -

exportand¢ 7 deliBande libere 7 licite put fibi mel
ot ceteris Meaturis

Salua not femp mag” cufttia de lanis corijs 7 pellil
erefeentib; ex* metas 7 bondas burgoy d&toy Religiofoy et Regatt fne
fup“d@e - Tenad 7 tind eRcend 7 vifitand di&t portii di&e Religiof et fuis
fuccefforibs coy hbibs burgétibs et Meatoribs ippetuh ct omibs et finglis
libertatibus omoditatibs et ayfiamét¢ 7 jufte ptinefi ad didi porti fptantibs
feu in futurii ex fintj conceffide fira fp*tare valentib; quoq’modo / adeo
libere quiete / ple*rie 7 honorifice fieut aliq's portus in Regno iiro liberius
quiecius plenius aut honorifieencius a q’ciq, vel q*bufeumq, tenet’ hetur
eXcetur feu vifitat® - abfq, aliquo impediméto miniftroy firoy burgentii
vel Meatoy 7 abfq, q“ctig, exacéde impugnaéSe clamio vel demada - In
c? Rei teftism pnti carte fire Sigillum nim Peepim? apponj - Teftihs
vertabilibs in x° prih3 Witto Epo Sé and? Pattcio Epo Brechinefi Can-
cellario firo Roberto fenefé Seot Coite de Stratherne nepote firo Wittmo
cdite de Douglas Roberto de Erfky Caiflario firo Archibaldo de Donglas
et Jotie de Heryce militib; apud Edinburgh vicefimo q‘rto die O&obrt
Anno Regni firi t'eefimo quarto +



--- Dunfermline_page324.png ---
272 REGISTRUM DE (see. stv.

Carta de Aldecambus -

Vnits ste matris Ecclefie filiis ad quos jntes tre puenerit Johes pmiffione
Dina abbas conafterii de dunfermel¥ 7 eiufdm loci conuent? Salutem in
dno fempitnam - Nouerit vnitifitas ¢ra nos de ofilio 7 affenfu dni michis
Prioris p'oratus de Cold¢gham 7 focioy eiufdim ibid cdmorantii Juris
forma que in alienacione rey 7 pofleffionii ectie req'ritur omiode feruata
dediffe cdceffiffe et hac fnti Carta fira cdfirmaffe Nobili viro Bno Georgio
de Dunbar comiti @archic heredib; fuis 7 fuis affignatis ofts Pras firas
De Aldeambus et colendio eiuft p fuas re&as metas 7 diuifas que
incipiit ab auft‘li pti Ville Pde De Aldcambus t@dédo uf, Greynfide
7 deide ufg, Redeluhewudys fic tra culta diuidit? a edi 7 & deide ptédédo
vf qwyteheftrys 7 s° uf} wenieclaw ac s* t@diido uf; cap" Eichinchuy-
hevyd sict Tra culta Diuidit? a edi 7 Boteo plano 7 nemoribs p*t¢ pafeu
+ patturis Moris carrefiis viis femit€ aueupacdibs venaddibs ac dibs aliis
iuft€ ptinéciis ad Déam tram fptatibs seu {p*tare valétibs i futurti ef dibs,
{nis libertab; comoditib; 7 ayfiaflitis tam fi noiatf q*m noiatt 7 liberi

exeambii p fexdet mafibs hufbaidori et noué mafib3 cotagioy 7 herbagioy
cit vna bracina i villa de Chimyffide put in carta déi Comite pfate ptori
z monach ide of‘ta plenius otinet® ac p fuis bonis meriti i

auxiliis pfiliis
7 fauorib; not pori ac firo p'oratuj de Coldygham exhibit€ 7 1 pofteri:
exhib@dis Tenéd 7 hatnd ptato dno cditi heredibs tuis 7 fuis affignatt
imppetuii offis tras pd@as de Aldeamb; ett fuis ptingeiis vnitlé de nob 7
fueceflorit; firis q' p tpe fuerint adeo libere 7 q'ete pacifice 7 honorifice
fie’ nos antdés p'or de Coldygham feu aliq's pdeceflo¥ fuoy ipas Pras de
Aldeambs; tenuim? feu tenuit poffedim? sen poffedit - Et fi otingat qd
abfit aliq’ ciu p qifetiq, viros ecclefiafticos ut fectares fepe déas Pras ett
ptinéciis a pfe'pto Bno Georgio vel aliq’? heredii fuoy euinci aut reeupari
volum? 7 cdcedim? ex fe qd plibat? Georgius aut aliq's heredi fuoy aq?
de Tre cuineiit® aut reeupantur ad Bictptas Pras de Chyrnyfide liberi heat
recurfa 7 regreffi fine q’uis ipedifito fri aut fuccefloy roy - In cui?
rei teftionifi Sigilli n?m cdmune Piitibs fecim? apponi - Data patet



--- Dunfermline_page325.png ---
393.

2

73

PERMELY

REG. ROB. 11.)

ap’ nim onattii de Difermelyn Deeimo die if marcij Anno Bni

wit? - cec® - oftog’ -

rta dni - Jo. Lyon - de flothrof

Ofitibs hac carta vith. vt andif.- Jo -  abb wo de dak
7 cinfd Loci - Connet? etna; in dno faim. Nowit nos ed - edfenti yall.
toci? capti- jiri - hito . f¥- hoe - pus diligtti 7 matn¥ tractatu - Veil? -
+ phiti carta - in - edit -
ar. Scot - intuitu - 7 -

coon . firi + Peipue penfat dediffe  cSceft! 7h"
Dyno - Jo - Lyon qiliti dno - de glait nie C
recbpenfaé - fuidy laboy - 7 cémodoy nob - 7 iro won - fFoy + 7 peutoy
ac ed - intuitn + donoy pp*oy fioy nob i in releuaine neceflarioy | on + Bri
7 fingtas « tras firas de flothrof® 7 de Schenvalé -
nis 7 pifea® - ac ab - pti - fuis iax® paflag de
affignate -

gratan? exhibitoy - om:
cit + Cunictariis - Ware
portyne*g - Tenend 7 bud déo - dno. Jo- heredibg - fuis - 7 fu
‘". p offs + rectas » wet + 7 diuilas

de - nob - 7 fuct - firis in - feod 7 here'
fuas «in - bofee 7 plati - wolendis - oultwt + et eoy fingt [fequelis] -
ancupacdibs - Venaédibs - Cunietariis - 7 pifcat nnd - ef ofibs at 7 fin,
libertatibs - cOmodif - ayfiam - 7 iufte pt quibufeiig, ad det Tras {p‘tant feu
{p'ta¥ valent in futuF - Be - q‘ete - plenaric - integre - 7 honorifice : faciend
ind nots - 7 fucceffor - tris - dés Jo - hered - fui - 7 fui affignati ¢ homag -
fidelitaté - 7 confilii p déis tris - ct pt. Et - redd - ind nob « 7 fuct irris -
dés Jo-he- fui? 7 fui aflig'- vnit par - caleariii alboy- yt. - xij. d+ argéti
ad f+ pent. ap'- flothrof dd - fi petant® fm noje albe fme - p Ward -
releii - oarit + curiay fect - 7 at fuid q'b3oq,- faluo ju¥ regalie ire in offibs -
Nos v° abb 7 conuct? pdti et fucd . fri. ofis - 7 fingt - d@as Pras -
pifcarias « Cunicta? ci pt in - dnibs 7 p omia vt Pde eft - cdt® ofits hoies
z feminas - Varandizabim? - aeq'eta - 7 inppet defendem? - In - cui? rei

+ Teft firo capi”

Qu


--- Dunfermline_page326.png ---
SUA.

REGISTRUM DE (sec. xiv.

Robert? feds de Recog’cde magne cuftiie 7é eifdé Religio’ Reititut> -

Robertus dej gta Rex Scottoy omnib3 probis hominibs fuis ad quoy
noticia fntes tre puenint Sttm qr alias infor*ti fum? q Abbas et Religiofi
viri mo“fterij de Dunfermlyne in reeepéde euftiie alias fibi p predeceffores
iiros conceffe de tira mag* euftiia viurpabant econeeflionis fibi face metas
excedendo in nim non modici preiudicit q*obrem tron 7 enftuma
juflim? ex ordinaéde eontilij
inftaneia tamé Abbate et Reli iroy Pditoy et deliberacde eonfilij
Hiri recognigdé 7 areftam huidi relaxauim? 7 relaxamus ad fine vt heant
et gaudeant cuftuma debita cis et ab Pdecefluribs iris eis conceffa ae p
nos confirmata nd vfurpando cuftuma nob debita fub pena oim que erga
fram regiam maieftaté valeant am'tere - In ¢? rei teftiom pntibs Sigillan
uim feeretum apponi feeim? apud Htheu vieclimo pmo die méf noutbrt
Anno kegni Bri q*rto decio -

areftarj et in manus firas recognotei ad
joforit



--- Dunfermline_page327.png ---
REG, ROW. U1] DUNFERMELYN. 27:

Pas

Carta de Balwery -

5. Oni; lane eartam vifuris vel audituris - Johes abbas wonttij de Dun-

fermelyn 7 ciufd loci céuentus Salfm in oim Saluatore - Seiat€ nos dediffe
edceffiffe 7 hae puti carta tira céfirmatfe Wittmo Scot tota 7 iteg
de balwer} cit ptinéeijs infra vieeeomitati de fif que fra fuit ciufit Withni
7 q*m idé Willis 16 vi aut metu duétus ne errore laptus 13 mera 7 spon-
tanea voluntate sua nob in mo“ftio firo paitto in pretia plium fidedignoy
p fafti 7 bactm surfum reddidit - pureq, 7 fimplieit refignanit ac totii ius
7 clameii q in dita tra et ptinencijs habuit vt hre potuit p fe 7 heredib;
fuis offiino quietii clamauit inppetuii -Tenend 7 habend eid Witmo 7
heredib3 fuis de eorpe fuo legittime pereat€ seu pe‘and - quib; forte quod
abfit deficientibs cichaeli Scot filio nat®ali eiuft Wittmi 7 hedibs fuis
mattis de corpe fue legittime pe‘andis - Quib; forte deficientibs; Andree
Scot filio e&- naturali pfati Wittmi 7 hedihs suis mafélis de corpe fao
legittime pe‘andis - Quibs forte omibs deficiétibs veris 7 legittimis hedibs
Pdidi Wittmi quibsciiq, de nob 7 succefforib; firis in feodo 7 heditate p
oes rectas metas 7 diuifas fuas ci botlis 7 planis moris marrefijs - p*t?
pafeuis 7 pafturis - Vijs - Semit€ aq's flagnis auenpaddib; venaGib; 7
pifearijs molendinis - filt*is 7 eoy feqlis neend ei omibs alijs 7 finglis
liBtatibs comoditatibs afiamett 7 inff ptinée- - quibsefiq, ad détam Pram

in trant

ei ptine Sp‘tantibs feu q’q’m’ iufte sp‘tare valétih; in futurii adeo
liBe 7 quiete plenarie integ’ 7 honorifice in omib; 7 p oiMia sicut id
Willis vt aliquis Bdeceffoy fuoy déam tram ef ptinicijs liBins q'ecius
plenius integri? 7 honorificentins tenuit fen pofledit - faciendo inde nob 7
fuceefforibs firis
pe‘and - Quibs deficitibs pfatus michael - 7 hedes fui mafeti Bagi - Quibs
defieiétihs pfatus Andreas 7 hedes fui mafeti Paci - q'bs forte omib; defi-
ciétibs vi 7 legittimi hedes pfati Wittmi legittimi quictiq, homagit 7
Ruieii debitii 7 cdfueti - Et soluédo inde nob annuati q*tuor libs
ftlingoy +v3-q"draginta solid ad fefli pntecoft 7 alios q*d“ginta solid
ad feftii sti martini in yeme p eq*les porétes - In cui? rei teftimonia pti

id Wllins 7 hedes fui de corpe fuo legittime pe‘at> - feu



--- Dunfermline_page328.png ---
300.

276 REGISTRUM DE

XIY.

carte Sigilli ede Capti fri € appent'i - ap" - wo “tit nim pdém Pe decio
die mé6 iunij Anno dni @™ - ccc” - Nonogefimo LO -

In? Abbem 7 cust 7 editaté de Dit

Hee indentura apud Dunfmlyn confesta decio die menf oftobris ino ani
c@itmo cece? nonagefio quito inter yenabilem Prem Johem abbem mo’ £tij
de Dunfmlyn ipieq, couentii ex pte vna 7 aldirmani ac cditatem burgi
de Daf ex alta plene teftatur q dei dni abbas 7 puétus locaueriit 7 ad
firma dimiferit jmppetuii prefatis aldirmano 7 eBitati oftis redditus dei

Burgi ad eoy feacariai ptinétes cum puis cuftumis ftallagiis 7 exitibus
euriay ac totu bu in plena LiBtate et omibs fuis emaditatibs rectitu-
dinibus iurihs 7 ayliamétis quibuseig, ad eid burgii fpecétantib; feu fp‘tare
ualentibus q’quo m° in futuri adeo libere in oMibus et p ofia fieut aliqui

Burg dni regis aliqué Burgi in regno de d@o dno rege ad feodi fma tent
hint ant poffident - Saluis déis, duis abbi 7 couentui tris in déo burgo

Anuis penfidihs de dil Pris Uti burgi

luc" tis fine Ine‘ndis itinere camarii
mo*ftio debitis - ac correcéde balliuoy q’cieus otigit cos ac eoy quilibs
in iure fen in iufticia facienda fine exequenda delinque? p quibus q'd
fupius cdcef Paci aldirma? 7 cditas foluét Annati imppetud memoratis
religiof} x 7 tres marcas vfuat moncte ad iiij ani t*mivs pfuetos p eq*les
porédes fine dilacde cauillaéde dolo feu malo ingenio - et fi cdtingat eos
in ay Pmioy notatoy de pfe'pta fima vt Pmnittit® in pte vel in toto
defive qd abfit obligarit fe Sia bona coy edia q'bus p pte vel p toto nd
fuflicientih; ofa bo" eoy fpecialia ac coy poflefliGes ad voliitat® pfatoy
religiofoy fore naamada capienda 7 diftngenda don® filit cis de déa sima
Jampnitq, 7 7 expe fi que t quas Plibati dni Religiof fuftinuerit t fetint
oceafide Ptacte foluddis 7 a'quo tioy Pnotatoy ut Pm'tit® nd fee plenarie
fatiffacti - In q’y oim teftionid pti hui? indenture penes religiofos dnos
abbem 7 ouéti remanenti Sigilli: ee Burgi de Dafmlyn @ appenfum - pti
vero remandti pds aldirmano 7 cditati figilli cde capitli Pfatoy reli-
giofoy eft appentum die 7 loco 7 anno fup“dittis -



--- Dunfermline_page329.png ---
=

REG. ROB. 11] DUNFERMELYN.

~

Carta de terra Hofpitalis juxta Inuerkethyne -

Omib; hane Cartam uifuris uel audituris Johs pmiffione dinina abbas
monaftij de Dunfermlyne & ciufdem loei connétus etnam in duo Salu-
tem- Nowlit vnittitas fira nos vnanimi ofenfu Of affenti capituli firi dedifle
eoncefliffe Q hae Puti carta pfirmaffe Dilecto & fideli iro Johi de
{pitale de Kinynmonde tota fram ifiram gue vocatur tra hofpitat iuxta

nillam de Inflkethyne ex parte oricntali eiufdem uille iaeenté que facrunt
dist Johis heditarie / quas tras idem tohs cum ptinétijs nd vi aut metu
duéus nee» errore lapfus ) £ mera & {pontanea voluntate ; fua in manus
firas per faftum Q bactm apud monaftia noftrum fupradiéii furfam
reddidit pureq, ¥ fimplieiter / refignauit » ae) totum Jus & clanei que
in ditis tris eum ptineneijs huit ut here potuit / quoq’ modo p te
 heredibs fuis Gino quietum elamauit . ippetuii Tenend & habend
predigtas tras ci ptindeijs cidem Johi Of crifliaue / de Kynymond filic
didi Johis & heredibs ipam alexandra de Lothrefky maritum fut
legitime pereat? feu pereandis quibus forfan deticientibs dite eftiane
lieredib3 fuis legitime pereandis quibs forfan deficientib; mergarcte de
Kynymid forori dite c'ftiane & filie diéi iohis Y heredibs int? ipun
matheit inglis maritd fui legitime pereatis, fen pereandis quib3 forfan
defieientib; ueris legitimis & ppinquiorib; heredibs dicti Johis quib
de uob & fuceetloribs firis in feodo & heditate ippetud per ds reétas
metas fuas antiq’s Q diuifas ef dib3 & fingulis libertatib; omoditatibs
ayfyaiit@ Q iuftis ptinéeijs quibufeiiq, ad diétas Pras et ptinécijs {pectar

tibs feu fpeare ualentibs q’m*libet / in futurii adeo liBe quiete plenarie
itegre & honorifice bij & iu pace ’ in omibs & p oMia fieut dictus Johs
diétas Pras ct ptineneijs » de nobis ante di&a refignaéd3; nobis facta
liberius tenuit feu pofledit ; Reddendo inde dictus Johs & ofiis talliati
Pdiai nob 7 monattio firo duas mareas annuatim ad duos tminos ¥5 -
penteeoftis 7 fan@i martini p equales porciones ef fuiciis debitis 7 ofietix
In cui? rei teftimonii -



--- Dunfermline_page330.png ---
sO8,

278 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xv.

Carta H - de Ferendrach , de Lytilkethic -

Ojmiibs hane Cartam vifur€ ut anditurt Johes de Torry dei g*cia Abbas
conattij de Dafmlyng et eiuftm loci conuét? fattem in dno fempitna :
Noffite nos infp‘ciffe quadam Carta dnj Jacobi flray# de fferendrach tenétt
iri Pray de Cupmaculty ffordin Dulfnak et lytil-iXethic infra vit de Pth
fact Henrico de flerendrach 7 heredihs fiis de déis tr€ de lytilkethie ei
pt? in noie albe fme p foludbem vui? part alts cirothecay ad niidinas de
Dide fi petat? nd rafam nd abolif nd cancellat n° in aliq”
ted omit labe 7 fufpiéde carent - Qua qnidé carta in omibs fuis puncte 7
articut put in fe pleni® otinet* appham? ratificam? 7 p nob 7 fuccefforihs
iris impp” cOfinam? - In Cui? rei teftioniid Sigilld nim cde fntibs eft
appenf ap’ dém wonaftium de Dunfmlyng Die q*rto men® DeetbF Anno
DBnj cwittie cecc™’ q'rto -

fui pte viciat



--- Dunfermline_page331.png ---
JO,

400.

REG. JAC. 1] DUNFERMELYN, 879

Donatio in augmentum vefture monachorum -

Uniuertis quoy inté vel intée poterit quomodolibet in futura Johes de
Torry diuia pmiffione abbas moftj de Dunferml¥g Salfm i oim faluatore
Nott vnilifitas tra q nos matura delibera’ne p‘habita citi vnanimj cdfentu
capli fi confiderantes offiia Ge cariora q* fuertit tporib3 retroaétis q ad
veftura feu iduméta mo*chorti neceflaria funt feu oportuna facim? contti-
tuim? et ordinain? ac pntj feripto coneedim? et conftmam? mo*chis cduet?
fir afidi&> p'fentib? et futuris q pro tpe fuerint in augméta’nem vetture
eoriid q fingli eord figtis annis ct hoe 7 ppetuo Feipiant a Feeptore genalj
de edibs reddi®® mo“ftij firi atidi@> - x] - 8. vfualis monete nite c*rétt ad
duos anj mios petecoft> et fani Mtinj ihyeme p eq‘les porciones
fie viterio¥ dila’ne fraude vel dolo - Quaquid@ dona’né coceflioné et
ordina’né rata et firma habem? ae pntj feripto cofmam? ppetuis téporib?
duratura - In cuius rej teftidm figilli officij tirj vna ct figillo edi eapli dri
pitj feripto funt appéeta - Dati i caplo fire fup*dicto Peiodecio die meh
Junij ino Hj milli’ - cccc™ - nono - tefte caplo -

A nt A A P a
Copia carte donaédis dauid menyheis / de annuo redditu noué mearii
vndecim folidoy de terris de Lufereuyoth -

Omnibus hoe feriptum vifuris vel audituris Dauid de menyheis diis de
Weme Salutem in dno fempitna - Nouit€ me caritat intuitu ac p falute
anime mee et aiari parentii meoy ac etia pro aiab3 oim antecefloy meoy
7 fuccefloy dediffe concefliffe 7 hae Pnti carta mea contirmaffe deo 7 ecctie
t€ de Dunf Abbati et mo*chis jhidé deo fuientib;

bte margarite {Ge trin
ac imppetuat fuitur€ vn annui redditti fex librari 7 vndeci folidoy m*
annuati de tris de Lufereuyoth debiti ae p me 7 Bdeceffores meos
hueufy, p man? balliui qui pro tempe hit de mufkilburgh recepté Tenend
7 hnd ditt annuii redditum fex libray 7 vndeci folidoy di&e religiofis et
fuis fucceflorib; a me et hedib; meis et fuecefforib; in libera et pura


--- Dunfermline_page332.png ---
401.

280 REGISTRUM DE [sEc. Xv.

elemofina imppetut, Adeo libere ; quiete ple“rie , integre 7 honoritice
fieut alig’ elemofina datur in Regno feocie vel poffidet* - ant dari fen
concedi poteft bene et in pace in omihs et p dia nichill nob et hedibs
firis inde reddendo Pter oraddnii fuflragia p me 7 aiabs aiidictis Et fi que
tre / indenture vel muniméta aliquo modo in contrarit’ hui? libere dona-
odis mee oftendant? - vel repiantur ' volo q de ceto nullius fint fmitatis
vel roborf Et ego Dauid de menyheis aiidi&? heredes mei 7 fueceffores
pdé&am donaédm mea di&i Anui redditus cont® Ses mortales warandiza-
him? et p pofle Tppetuii defendem? - In cui? rei teftidm figilli met eft
appéfum ap* Dunfermlyn « pntib3 Nobilibs viris dno Andrea Haig / dno
Archibaldo fenefé Wito de Dola¥ / Andrea gudfwaii Henrico
Ket Dauid cumf feutiferis » Thoma tw¥ no‘rio pu® - et alijs mult¢ -

Anno dni om. ccc’ - duedecimo In vigilia bti thome apli ante natale

Ani fri Jiu spi -

Vt non Pfumat quis fibi puitioné a Ro‘na curia p q’eiiq, offo moftij ipet"?-

Benedi&? Epus fous fuorum dej/ Ad ppetud Rei memoria Seinte deuoddis
affe&us quem dilecj filij Willermus Abbas et couent? monaftij de dun-
fermlyn ordinis {¢i Biidéj Ci andy dioé ad nos et Romana gerit ecctiam
non indigne meret® ut petiGdnes fuas illas Pftim que ipi? monaftij vtilitaté
Rofpicitit quati et

ideo pofluin? ad exaudicbis gram admittam?- Cum itaq,
ficut exhibita nobis nup p pte Abbis et oudtus Pdi&oy peti& ptinebat
officia dita einft moftij a magnis cicra temporib? confuevertit ad nutum
abbatum ipi? monaftij qui fnerit p tempo? ef confenta Pdi&oy oust?
monachis eiufa mot tif affignarj / ac intdum mo*chi quib? officia Rmdi
affignant® affignaéde; eau obtincat p fedem aplicam confirmarj feu de
illis fibj anéto® ap® puideri in ipi? mo“ttij pindicium et g*uamé p pte
ipoy Willermi abbtt et cduét? fuit nob hiilir fupplicatum vt offieia ef
ofenta puétus Pli&orum reuocabilia exiftant et ad difpofigom ipi? abbaté
ci confenfu fimili ptineant ftatuere ac eciai ordina® de benignitate ap™
dignaremur - Nos huidi fupplicacionib? inclinatj aplica auctoritate fntit

¥-



--- Dunfermline_page333.png ---
DUNFERMELYN. 281

REG, JAC

tenore ftatuim? ae ceia ordinam? q de ceto cad offieia p tras afieas
impetrantes ad ipa ecia fi tre ipe elanfulas fimiles feu equiualentes inte-
rius defignat€ contincant nullaten® admittant® fed cum illa fimul vel
tuecefline exnune inantea vaca? contigit ad difpofigoné abbatt p tempore
exiftent€ ci outtus Pdidori confentu ptineant et fpectent — ae extune
ad untum huidi ci confeniu fimili renocabilia exiftant Et fie deineeps
it ut Pfertur illa ad

quotiens cad officia obtingtes al ipis renoeare contig
difpoficdncm cand ci fepedi&o otentu ecii ptineant et fpectent - Non
obftantih? quibutetig, conttitucdib? et ordinacionih? apliet ac flatuté p'ui-
legiis et confuctudinibs mottij ct ordinis Neend fundacdib? feu inftitu-
tionih? officioy pdictoy contrariis ecii juraméto contirmacde ap® vel
quaciiq, firmitate alia roborat¢ aut fi aliqui fup puifionih? fibj faciende de
huidi ofliciis vel aliis heneficiis eectiattic€ in illis ptibus {Pales vel gene-
rales aplice fed¢ vel legatort cius tras impetrarint ecia fi p eas ad inhibigom
refuacom et deeretum vel alias qiiolibet fit peeflam qnas quid tras 7
peeflus hitos p eatit ad offieia Pdi&a volum? nd extendj & nulla p hoc
eis quo ad affecucioné officiori aut Liificiord alioy Pindicium genari » Et
quibuteiig, puilegiis indulgenciis et littis apd genalibus vel {Palib? quorii-
cfg, tenorii exiftant p que pntib? nd exprefia uel totalit’ no infta effeéus
cari impedirj valeat qfiodolibet vel differr} et de quib? quoriiq, tenorib?
tot® hnda fit in firis littis mencio fPalis - Nos ent exniie irritum detnim?
et Jane fi feens fup hiis a quog* quauis audoritate feient vel ignorant
contigit attéptarj - Per hoe aut® nolum® nee jutédim? oflicia puiéta
obtinétibus de fintj pindiciai aliqnod g genari » Nulli ergo dino hoim Tieeat

Pavan)
na Hrovd ftatutj ordiacbis confirmacdis ct voluntat¢ infringe vel

hane pa
ei anf. tela’ ot‘ire - Si quis aut hoc attemptare Dfirmpfit jndignaéom
dej oMipotéte et beatoy pet® et pauli aplorum eius fe nowit incurfurum -
Dat’ panifeole dertofen diot Peio Id? dectby Poiit? Sri Anno vicefimo -

De fayfina Willelmi de Maifterton -

102, Anno ge mimo q*dringen™ xix die xxiij méfis marcij IndicéDe decia
Qn


--- Dunfermline_page334.png ---
103.

282 REGISTRUM DE ts

Peia polit? Stiffimi in xfo pris ac dnj

yj wartini dina puideii pe quiti
apud Difermelyn in domo caplari ciufit diis Wliifis de fo andrea pmiff*
div'a abbas mo“ftij de Difermlyn de offta 7 aff fai oudtus pp? h° caplarit
pgregati recepit in vafallti 7 tenétem fui 7 mo ftij pda de Difermlyn
quéd Witm de maiftto’ fil 7 hedem q’nd Johis de maift tod sibi q
noua fayfina 7 flata heditarid: dari madauit de villa de maiftton ci fais
iufi€ ptindt fieut anteceflores dti Witmi q’nd tenuerit 7 huerat déas tras
de ipo abbte 7 mof tio atidéo de Diferml¥ 7 aiicefforibs fuis / proteftado
in ibid expfe p fe 7 mo"ftio fuo. q eid Wittm ibid de nouo recepit in
tenétem faluis omib; 7 finglis iurib3 arreragiis debit penfionib; anuis
redditib; aliisq, emolumétt déo mo'ttio de Difermly de Pris Pdtis de
naiftton p eid WHm 7 quofetiq, aiiceffores faos debit€ 7 hacten? nd
pfolut€ / nnd 7 alijs iuribs 7 clameis cid dno abbti 7 tuo mottio aiid&o p
n'eligéa; foriffati 7 defecti déi etia WHmi ae q’yctq, ateceffort ciuft
bene acquifitt - A&> fucrit hee ano die méfe » Indi&» 7 pofitu fnp™déis
Pitihs ibid excellen™ - p'neipe dno roBto Senefeatt guBnato® Seocie dno
in’-daco Scnefeal c° p'mogéito 7 lociiteneii ret” in x° pre Henrico eo
S@ andy / roto SenefeaH de Lori magris Johe Senefeal recéto¥ de
Flysk Johe Schevas re&o¥ de abbuthno / et me Johe feldew no“rio pu”
fubfe'pto in teftionii pmifloy p dém do™ abbem requifite 7 rogat@ - In ¢?
ecia fidem 7 teftio™ ego Johes feldew h” manu pp'a fe'pfi caq, dia 7 fingla
pmnifla fic fieri vidj 7 audiui in nota recepi et fignd mei foliti: 7 ofnetia
appofui rogat? 7 req'fit? in fidem 7 teftio” oim premiffoy -

+1. Fenpeu -

Lia mifla Bno Abbi 7 9™ Cot" pore de Vrquhard -

Coliba mifagoe Dia Ep& worauici Ven" - in x° pat’ Abbi mo"ftii de
Dat 7 civd loci pueii faléz et ePalem biidiecom » qr - p Fras tras patates
geepim? Dim Joh fehaw {fem 7 cOmochi viz 7 dete licedi - 7 in facra
pagina Baca de ofilio 7 affenfu reg - ad vilitad iq'red coniged 7
reformad p'oratii 7 p'orem celle Fre - fre didee - de Vrquhard + ppe nonulla


--- Dunfermline_page335.png ---
404,

REG. JAC. 1] DUNFERMELYN. 285

cinia feclera 7 tlagicia - defe&? et deformitates de poratu 7 pore pdi&e
Frit intonata ut de inure pfinetudinali 7 Puilegio fp: i a tépe quo
xtit memoria 7 a fidae celle Pde p cartas Fras nob demdit*tas
appuit ct dicit? vob opete fat iuridice fuiffe pftitutii 7 ordinati
¢"ppter Religidis selo caritatt intuitu 7 fanore pfone ad vifitad mifle . ira
vifitacde tra nd obttante not falua  cidem dedim? firas tras patentes iris
diocifanis de anxilio cdfilie 7 fanore exhortates cofd ut ipm juuent et (bi

aurib:

nG ¢

Dt

dae

renelét defect? feu c'mia de ploratu 7 plore pdiett corrigédos vt corri
reformados vt reformada cid aflignado ef fro cdtilio 7 cdfentu tim + v-
noni dié mé@f febru® - ad corriged reformad fen fiiand ei fro céfilio 7
ofl’ in Capta de Vrqubard fi que fint cimia o° ipm Andrea Raburii p

fui iy'ficdm phata feu notoria t manifefta juenta 7 alia faciéda | vob cea
reformacd; tdéo poratni fit nedia vt oportima Dat ap" Eley tub figillo
offit fini vent viri magri Tho® Jong - i deféu sigilli Bri pp'i qd p*tr p tie
B hnim? Anno Do! «™ cece™ vicefimo nono - die mé6 Januarij xvij - Cora

clico firo ro Edwardo Crafurd no“rio 7 at -

Lia monitoria Epi coraniei cont® p'oré de Vrehard -

Yo fre. Ts we 5 : ~
Colitha mifagse Dia Epus moraniel vnit® + fingtis pbris curate 7 nd
31 = — ness

Salfm 7 Epalem biidicGom vot vnittair
s firas 7

eurat€ notarijs ct tabellidihs
fingtis infolid 7 cnit; vim cui piites tre puenit com'tim? vie
p'taté dam? Suppli'*- q‘tin? dfim Andrea Raburii p'oré celle de Vrquhard
fire Didc€ + moneatt - fub t'plici cdito ynico in cdtextu ut edpeat cord
nob - vt dno Johe fchaw penratore mot tij de Daf - in debtis licéciato 7
gina Bacalla¥ in capella p'orat? de Vrquhard nono die mat
februarij ad audiéd 7 reeipiét ordinagom detmiagom fitiaz vt fitias - 7
eift ftand qua vt quas « nos vi al? nim plat®i fum? feu di&i cont® ipm 7

foper reformacde Pddi porat? ordinaturi fub pena a uacdis ab offigd 7
biife Certifiedt? cid fine venit fine nd in dvo tio peedem? iutticia
mediate - Dat ap’ Elgyn tub Sigillo offt iri magri tho* Gong - q2. pp'a p

in facra



--- Dunfermline_page336.png ---
405.

284 REGISTRUM DE [sEc. Xv.

tie nd habuim? Anno w™ cece™ vieefimonono die Januarij xvij Cora
Fro Edwardo de Craufurd clico ire 7 no‘vio «

Lia fatine Jacobi de Edmondftoi -

Jacobus dei gia Rex Scottorii Abbati 7 ougtuj mo“fterij de Dunfnlyn
falut? - Quia p ingigdem de madato hiro p vicecomité nim de Edinburgh
f@am 7 ad capellam iiram retornaté compti eft q quod Dauid de Edmond-
fton de eodé pater Jacobi de Edmonditoii jator€ pntiti obijt vitio veltit? 7
fafit? vt de feodo ad pa eftir 7 Weftir ci
pt jaceii inf vicecditati de Edinburgh 7 q dittus Jacobus @ é legitim? 7
ppinquior heres eiufdé quéd Dauid pris tii de di&e tris cit pte et eft
in capite - vobis Beipim?

7 fidé Dram de Pris de Maly

legitie etat€- 7 q dée terre cit pt’ de vobis ten
7 madamus q“ts cum jdé Jacobs vobis fevit p dis Pris ef pt quod de jure
facere tenct® fibi vel fuo certo attor"to latori fmtid fafind dart trava ett
pt? jufte hre faciatf 7 fine dilaée faluo jure cuiuflibet 7 hoe nullo modo
omittat? Tefte meipo apud Streuelyn vicefio die méfis Aprilis Anno regni
ri tricefimo -



--- Dunfermline_page337.png ---
106.

REG. Jac. LL] DUNFERMELYN,

Contractus inter abbatem et cSuentum mo*{tij de Dunfermlyn et dauid
2
Ifaket de pambulacone trarum de petfurane -

Pis is p° decret gevyu 7 delinit at Dunfermlyn pe laft day of pe moneth
of Julij pe gher of our lord a thoufand four hundreth thretti 7 fevyn - Be
ys Robert of leuenfton of Drumry John of Cokburn of torry knychtt -
Jamis pele of p' ilke Willjhame of glen - And Willyhame of Walwod
Jugg edpofitourt of p° debait 7 control mouit betwix a venerabill
fadir in erift Androw be pe grace of god Abbot of Dunfermlyn and p*
eduet of pat ilke on a pt And Dani hacet of lifennen on pe tothir part
belangand p®° landis of petfuran w' ptinés - In pe fyrft be caufe we fand
p' pe oxgang of land of pe chemis ptenand to p° faid Abbot 7 couét wes
lefe na pe weftir oxgig of lid 7 chemis of pe faid Danid And for p* thrid
part of pe Ward be north haulf pat ilke chemis - We haue delinit to pe

Abbot 7 cdust als mekil land liand on pe fouth half par oxgang
fafand a gate liang betuix of fourty tute brede pe qwhilk land to pam
delittit is of quatite tua aeris thre rud¢ 7 fyften fal in pe hale Alfua we
deeret 7 ordanis p' pe gate liand betuix pe faid Dauidis orchard 7 his
Weftir oxgang extendand fra pe chemys of pe faid Abbot 7 cOuent to
pe gate liand be north pe herber hill be coiioun to baith pe partt 7 pat
it be thretti fut brad faufand pe yhate betuix pe bern 7 pe biir of pe
faid Dauid pe qwhilk fal remain of pe famyn quantite pat it is now of
pe qwhilk thretti fute par fel be ten fute of pe rynryg of pe Abbot 7 pe
cductt 7 tueti fute of pe rynrig of pe faid Dauid f* it pas pe bern 7 pe
biir northwardt to pe gate extendand to pe herber bill - Allfua pe land
liand betuix pe eftir oxgang 7 pe orchard of pe faid Danid 7 pe march of
canil comon to bath pe part. Alfua bath pe part¢ fel kepe lanchful ftent
7 noth exeede - Alfua pat gife ony rynryg be les pan it ancht to be it fel
be amendit at pe ficht of men of knawlage - And pai fel kepe p* watis
lauchfully vnfkathand vthir- Alfua nan fell pind vthir ynlauebfully - In
witnes of pis decret 7 delitlans pe fet of pe faid Robert of leuentton -
Jotin of cokburn knycht€ Jamis of pele 7 he comon fell of pe chepter of



--- Dunfermline_page338.png ---
107.

286 REGISTRUM DE [sEc. Xv.

Duntinlyn 7 pe fell of pe faid Danid haket interchangeabili ar to put Dai
7 plas be for faid -

Carta data domino dauid fteuart de Pris de Clunyis -

Omnib3 hane cartam vifuris vel audituris - Andreas pmiffione diuina -
Abhas mot tij de Duntmlyn 7 ciufd loci conné
fempitnam + Nohitis nos ex vnanimi concenfu ct affenfa domini firi
Regis Jacobi et tocius capituli fri dediffe conceffiffe 7 hae pnti carta
ira confirmafle nobili viro 7 diléo firo domino Danid ftewart de Roffith
militi pro homagio 7 feruiGd tuo totas 7 integras Pras jiras De Clunyis
cum ptinencijs jacentes in Schira fira de gaytmylk infra vieecomitatum
de fyffe quas quid ras enm ptinécijs quond mordacus comes de fyffe de
nob tenuit hereditarie 7 ob foriffa&uram di&i comitis domino firo Regi
fadtam dicte Pre ad manus Bras puenerit tenend 7 habendas dictas Pras
eum ptinéeijs predo dno Dauid 7 heredib3 fuis de nobis 7 monafterio fro
in feodo 7 hereditate imppetuii p offis re@as metas fuas antiquas 7 diuifas
is bofet planis pratis pafeuis 7 pafturis filuis aqui
molendinis multuris 7 eoy fequet ci curijs 7 curiarum exitub3 cum
herield€ 7 merchetis mulierti ac eum omnib; alijs libertatibs coModitatibs,
et aifiamentis ac juftis ptinencijs quibufeumq, tam fubtus Pra q® tip"
Pram ad Pdtas tras cum ptinéeijs vel aliq’m ptem earund {p'tantibs fen
infte fp'tare valentibs q’modolibs ifutuy Reddendo inde annuatim patus
dominus Dauid 7 heredes fui de pddis Tris em ptinéeijs nob 7 moftio
fro vigenti folidos argenti vfualis monete Scocie ad duos anni terminos

° falutem in domino

in moris mare:

ftangnis

videlie3 pentecoftt 7 (Gi martini in yeme p equales porédnes leuandos ac
Warda 7 relenium enm contigint 7 tres feétas eurie ad t'a placita capitalia
jira tantum pro feruiéd firo f@lari - In cuius rei teftimonium figillam
cdmune capituli fri Pntib; eft appenfum - Primo die menfis Angufti
Anno domini millefimo quadringentefimo tricefimo feptimo -


--- Dunfermline_page339.png ---
108,

409.

REG. JAC. 1] DUNFERMELYN.

19
«©
3

Lfa faifine ciufdem -

Andreas pmiffione diuina Abbas mot ti de Difermlyn 7 eiufdem loci
conuentus + Balliuo fro in hac pte Witmo Walwod falutem qv edcefli-
mus hereditarie nobili viro 7 diléo domino Dauid ftewart de Roffith mil
totas 7 integras Pras firas de Clunyis eum pt* jacentes in fchira ira de

gaytmylk infra vieecomitatum de fyfle vobis precipimus 7 mandamus
quatinus vif Pntibs faifina hereditariam digarum traram eum ptinencijs
pred&o domino Dauid vel fuo certo attornato feeumdum formam earte fue
de nob inde confectam iufte haberi faciatis 7 indilate falno tamen iure
eniuflib:
Augu

+ Datum apud Dunfermly fib figillo capelle ire primo die menfis

Anno Domini millefimo quadringentefimo tricefimo feptimo -

Carta de Halis -

Omnibus xi fidelibus hane Cartam vifuris vel audituris Andreas pmiffione
dina Abbas mote ij de Duntermlyn et eiuft loci ouent? Salutem in Domino
fempiterna - Nottit vnitifitas veftra nos vnanimi confenfu qaflentau eapituli
fri dediffe cdceffiffe et hac fnti carta fra confirmafle nobili et potenti
viro Domino Witmo de Crichtoii Bno eiufad militi p tuo confilio et auxilio
nob 7 mo“fterio Kro impenf 7 impendend oes 7 finglas terras firas de
Halis eftir 7 weftir cum ptineii jacent’ in Baronia de cutkilburgh infra
vieccomitatii de Edinburgh - Quarii quid tray feodii fuit dni Roberti logane
dni de Reftalrik militis hereditarie liberi vero tenemétii dni Jacobi de
Edmondttoii de cod militis put in pignore / Et g quid feodi 7 q vero liberi
tenéti diéay terrari ci ptinéeijs déi dni Robertus et Jacobus non vi aut
metu duéi nee errore lapfi {5 tuis meris puris 7 fpontanijs voluntatibus
nob et mo*fterio firo - p fuos penratores et tras fuas refig@dis coram
fubfeptis teftibus in Caplo fire p fuftum 7 baetm furfii reddideriit pureq,
7 fimpliciter refig*ueriit ac totum ius 7 clamet pprietatem et pofleflioné
qne in feodo et libero teneméto digari terrari feu in dite terris et pt


--- Dunfermline_page340.png ---
288 REGISTRUM DE [sEc. xv.

habent hueriit feu q°uifmo’ - tre potueriit p fe et heredibs fuis omio quit
clamand imppetunm - Tenend et hnd offes et fingulas Pnojatas terras
Witmo de Criehtoi heredibus fuis de nots mo*fterio

cum pt’ prefato ¢

iivo 7 fuecetloribs iris in feodo ct hereditate imppetui - p omes rectas
metas antiq"s 7 diuifas fuas put iacent in longitudine 7 latitudine - in
hotee planis mort marrefiis p*tis pafeuis et pafturis vijs femitis aquis

ftangnis - riuulis 7 lacubus petarijs turbarijs columbarijs et carbonarijs

lapide 7 calee cum molendinis multuris et coy fequelis aucupaéonibus
venaGnibus 7 pifeaonibus ett curijs 7 curiay exitibus heryhelde 7 Hichetis

muliera cum cdi paftura et libero introitu et exitu ac cum omibus alijs 7
fingnlis cSmoditatibus libertatibus et afiamétis ac iuft ptinen fuis quibuf-
cumg, tam no noiatt q" nojatis tam fub terra q* fup* terra tam ppe q*
penl ad pdidtas terras cum pt fpectantibus feu infte fp'tare valentibus
quomodolibs in futuy adeo libere - quiete ple“rie - integre honorifice - bene
et in pace fine retineméto vel reuocaéde aliquali fieut di&? diis robert?
logane feu dius diis Jacobus de Edmonfto® aut aliquis antecefloy fuoy
oes Pdictas terras de Halis ftir 7 weftir cum pt ante refig"Gom_ not
liberius quiecins aut honorificencius tenuit feu poffedit Red-
dendo inde atuatim di&? Wills

inde faaa

de Crichto® 7 hedes fai nob motte
firo et fuceefloribus iris fex marcas viualis monete Regni feocie nomine
Anualis reddit? ad duos ani terminos viz ad fetta Penthecoft> et {Gi martini
in h¥eme p equales porgones cum wardis releuijs Et faciendo inde forin-
feet feruicii cum edi fecta curie 7 alijs feruicijs not inde debit€ 7 contue-
tis - In cuius rei teftidm figillum ede eapituli tri huie puti carte fire eft
appenfum apud Dunfermlyn fexto die menfis maij Anno dni qillefimo
quadringentefimo trieefimo oétauo cora hijs teftibus viz dno Dauid ftewart
dno de Roflyth milite Edwardo de Crichtoi Stephano feot feutiferis
Wittmo de Walwode thoma de bra burgeii de Difermljn . Roberto
michaet de Hyrmaftot Johe bothuel 7 Johe gudfwan no‘rijs picis cum
multis al



--- Dunfermline_page341.png ---
+10.

REG. JAC. 11] DUNFERMELYN. 280

de ainuvo

Copia carte donaddis dauid de menyheis /-7 Johis de menyhei

voth /

redditu nouem incara 7 vndeeim folidoy de terris de Lufere’

Omnibus hoc feriptum vifuris vel andituris Dauid de menfheis de Weme
miles Slim in dno fempitna - Nouit® me cum confenta 7 afl". Johannis de

menyheis filij mei ct heredis caritat€ intuitu ac p falute aiay ray 7 aiay
mariorie et Elene vxorii mearii pentiig, meoy ae eci’ p aiahs ofm aitcefloy
et fuccetloy iroy dedifle conceflifle et hae pti carta mea confirmafle

deo 7 ccctie fe tnitatt de Dun? 7 tte margarite Regine Abbati et

mo*chis ibidé deo fuientib; ac ippetua fuituris vn: annut redditi fex

librarii et vndeci folidoy michi annuati de Pris de Luferentvoth debitun
ac p me 7 Paeceflores 7 aflig"tos hucufq, p manus balliui quip tempe
filit de mufkitburgh rece len qui quid annu? reddit? fuit ipignat? p meos
aficeffores p Bm“ centi vigi

ti librart ftlingoy aiiquoy Ade de Brwnhill
burgefi de Edinburgh et fais aflig“t€ a quib; p me fuit redépt? p medium
Abbis ct ouentns mo“fterij de Dunt qui fiima predi&a ad mei inftanciam
integ*liter dederit ad redempéGem et recupacéoem huiufnis ipigneraddis
Anui redditus Tenend et hnd dict annuii redditi fex librari et vndeci
folidoy di& religiofis et fais fucectioribs a me 7 hedibs meis ct fuccefforibs
in libera et pura clemofina ippetui Adco libere quicte plenarie integre 7
lonorifice ficut aliq® elemotina datur in regno feocie vel poffidetur aut
dari fen eoncedi potett hene et in pace in of

5et p oia Nichil nob vel
hedibs jiris inde reddendo ter ofoni fuflragia p nob et aia; adit Et

fi que tre jndenture vel muniméta aliq’? modo in cont*riti hui? libere
donaédis mee oftendat® vel repiantur volo q de ceto nulli? fint fimitatt
robor vel mométi Et ego DD mévheis aiidict? heredes mei 7 fucceffores
Pditam donacdem mea digi Anui reddit? Cont* des mortales warandiza-
him? acq'ctabim? 7 ippetut defendemus - In cui? rei teftidm Sigilla mei

yna ci Sigillo Pda Johis de mentheis fi

ymei 7 hedt pntibs é appentum

ap? Dunt? vicefio die méf} maij Anno dni o°- cece’ - trieefimo oftauo

pntib; honabilibs viris Dauid Stewart de Roffith milite Edwarde de
20



--- Dunfermline_page342.png ---
411.

2

290 REGISTRUM DE [sEc. xv.

Crichtoii / Wittmo de Kirealdy » Witto nari Alex’ boy Wito Walwode
feutifere 7 burgéfib; de Dunf’ Johe de bothwell no‘rio pu. ci multt
alijs teftihs ad pmifla fPaliter vocate -

Carta de Gartinke? -

Vniuerf {e fiiris cedie filijs ad quoy noticias fntes tre puenerint Andreas
pmiffione dina Abbas mo“fterij de Dunfermlyn Saluté in eo qui ¢ om

falus - Noueritis nos ex vnanimi ofent 7 affent toci? capituli iri peeffiffe
7 ad feodofirma dimififle Jacobo fehaw de Grenok / dileéto 7 {peciali fro
dimedietatem Prari firay de GartinkeF ei pt° jacétii infra regalitaté
firam de Dunfmlyn quas quid tras dit? Jacobus ad firma huit a nobis 7
Pdecefloribus firis p multos annos Tenéd 7 tnd eidé Jacobo 7 heredibs
fuis de nob 7 fuceefforihs tris in feodo 7 hereditate p offies rectas metas
vfiamentis 7 fuis infie

7 dinifas fuas ci omibs libertatil

3 omoditatihs

pt? Reddendo inde nobis 7 fiecetlorihs firis Bdi&? Jacobus 7 hedes fui
Aanuatim quadraginta folidos viualis
termios medictaté

monete regni feocie ad duos Ani
3, ad feftum Penthecofl€ 7 alia medictaté ad fetti ti
martini in yeme ci fuis pn

ad nim jter Jufliciarie p omi alio fernicd

exacéde feu demida | ab eodé 7 heredibus nis exegi poteriit vel requiri -
In eni? rei teftism Pnti carte fire figillii cde capituli Tri ¢ appenfi apud
mo*fteriii nfm de Dunfermlyn afidém nono die me Junij Anno dni
millefimo quadringentefimo tricefimo nono -

Carta ciufdé -

Vnititis de fiiris eetie [filiis] ad quoy noticias fntes tre puenint Andreas
pmiffione dina Abbas mo“tlerij de Difermlyn Salut® in eo qui

oim
falus Noueritis nos ex vnanimi ofentu et affenfu tocius capituli. tiri
oceflifle 7 ad feodotirma dimififfe WiHmo brwit de fauchy dileéto 7 {Pali


--- Dunfermline_page343.png ---
REG. JAC. 1] DUNFERMELYN. 291

iro dimedictaté terrari fray de Gartinke¥ eum pt> Jacentii: infra regali-
tat@ fram de Dunfermlyn quas quid terras dit? Willis ad f'ma buit a
nobis 7 pdecetloribus firis p multos Anos Tenéd 7 hnd cidé Witmo 7
heredibus fuis de nobis 7 fnecefloribus Bris in feodo 7 hereditate p omes
reéas metas 7 diuifas fuas ef omib3 libertatibus pmoditatibus ayfiamétt
+ fais iufte pt’ Reddendo inde not et tuccefloribus firis predit? Willfiis 7
hedes fini Anuati quadraginta folidos vfialis monete regni feocie ad duos
1 feftii Pentheeofte 7 alii medietaté ad fefti
io feruig

anni termios medictaté v
fG firtini in yeme ei fuis pieijs ad nim Iter Jufticiarie p ot
exaeéone feu demanda 7 ab code 7 hedibus fuis exegi pobat vel requiri -
 appenfii apud

e fire figilli: ede eapituli fri

Tn cni? rei teftiom pnti ¢
mo‘fteria nfm de Dunfermlyn afidém nono die méf Junij Auno ani

milletimo quadringentefimo trieefimo nono -

Conuéeio inter Abbem 7 conutti mo*fterij de Dunfmlyn 7 cOmunitaté
burgi de Perth {up edificacione fuftentacione 7 repacione ppetuis chori -
ueftibuli - ueftimétoy 7 oim aliori ornamétori ectie pochiat de pth -

Hee Indentura fa apud Dunfmlyn xx° die ment caij Anno dni w° -
ecce’ + xl? Inter venerabiles ae Religiofos viros Andrea pmiflide dina
abbem mo*fterij de Duntmlyn 7 ciuflé loci puentii ex vna ac honorabiles
> cireumfpestos viros Patricia: charteris ppofiti burgi de perth balliuos
> eSmunitat® ciufdé ptibus ex alt” - in fe pportat 7 teftatur q Ppofitus
halliui y oitas di&i burgi pprijs faptibus 7 exjinf} funditus et de nouw
edificabunt Chori 7 veftibulii cetie pechiat déi burgi de perth prout eis
placenei?  honefti? videatur ac eadé poftq* fhint edifieata ppetuis tem-
poribus fiftentabunt in omih; 7 fingulis repacionib; choro 7 veftibulo
ptinétibs tectura viz parictibs feneftris oftijs vitriacione pauiméto neend
libris eappis ealicih; ae omibs 7 fingulis veftiment 7 ornaméte chorii 7
altare concernentibs ita q de hui?mo' di&i mo*fterii ppetuo exotabunt - :
faluo tamen q in vino pane 7 cera ipa cSitas non onetur ppetuo {3 tm p
tempe eo quo dict ectiam ipa cditas fibi hebit arrendata Infup pro expnf



--- Dunfermline_page344.png ---
292 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xv.

edificacione repacde 7 fuftentacione aiidi&e prefat? Abbas 7 guentus libere
donaueriit Pdicte cBitati chord antiquit libros calices 7 ornaméta tempe
hui? ptract? inibi repta vna cit veftibulo ferineis 7 cittis ‘hide exiftentibus
InPea diet? Abbas 7 out? pro fe 7 cori fiaceetToribs fepulturas inf® chorit
noui ei cdmoditatib; ex hui%no' fepulturis putientibs dée cSitati 7
eortide fnevetforibs p hui%mot omib; fupportande lie p ppetuo gceflerit -
ita q inf chora abl, editat€ confenfu nullum corpus fepeliat® - 7 emolu-
méta p fepulturis fiend infra chorti cditas ipa ppetuo peipiet ficut in
naui ectie 7 ext” chorii hneutq peepit faluis tn ipis Abbi ouétni 7 eorh
faceotforibus omib3 7 fingulis alijs inribs furlalibs ext tempa arrendaéonis
feu fmarie fructui d&e ectie p

fate eOitati fe vel faciende racide dece-
dentiti ptingentibs - Ac ecia dict? Abbas 7 putt? vnanimit’ gceflerit
locaueriit 7 arrendauertt Pde

cOitati dam ecéiam ct omib; et fingulis

fructibs ohuéGdib; puentibs 7 emolwmett circa viea 7 rectoria eiuldé
ectie de Pth p fpacio fex anori imediate fequétii arrendagbem fructua
d&e ectie Criftino de Doufn 7 Roberto Harwa¥ alias fam ptingentibs
feu q’nifmo’- p diéto tempe de jure aut laudabli ptuetudie tinge ant
ptine valentibs - Ita tn q cOitas p q’libet déort fex annoy Abbi 7 cduttui
Pde quig*genta marcas viualis monete feocie ad duos Ani ios gluetos
coartini viz 7 Penthecoftis p eq“les porédes pfoluat ci onibs pot 47
quas di¢ti Criftin? 7 Robert? - in faa arrendacde fat aut fupportare
tenent® - viz t'genta quiq, mareas vieario q' p tempe fit p fia penfione
yna efi vino pane 7 cera in q"nti ADbi 7 ouétui incibit durante déa
arrédacbe - Infup peordatii eft q fi ad requetla Abbi

7 oust? plati Criftin?
7 Robertus in fanor® cditatt velint arrendadbem eis fam céitati furfa
dare vel ocede Abbas 7 ouét? piatos Mmarios exonabiit deinceps
placens 7 ratti hebut fie q cOitas p q’libet ano Pferipti arrendaméti teu
firmarie Abbi 7 puétui quiq*ginta marcas vfualis monete ocurrent€ vna
ce omibs onib; dict€ Criftino 7 Roberto vigore fue arrendaéonis inehiben-
tib; pfoluat ad Ymios in eadé arrendacde expilatos oiiib;

7 id

fraude dolo
dilagie excepede 7 eauillacde exclu® penit? 7 remotf- Et fi licencia 7

7
ptenfus déort firmariori negat obtineri dicti Abbas 7 puet? cditati pidge
p q’libet q“tuor Anorit q'b3 dicti fmarij hebit déam ecdiam tibi arrendata


--- Dunfermline_page345.png ---
REG. JAC. 11] DUNFERMELYN. 293

- . oo - 2. oe
aut Abbas 7 puétus p fe tenuit vel alij arrendaltint quiq'ginta mareas
monete pfoluét ad felti sti martini in hyeme data pntii imediate

fequés incipiendo in folucoe vigenti quiq, marearii 7 aliara vigenti quiq,
marearii ad feftii Pentheeoltes pxio fequétt 7 fie de Pmino in termini
otinuando durate arrendacde fup*dé

Criftini 7 Roberti preferiptorii fie q p
diétum Abbem 7 ouétii eorig, fuceeffores aut fmarios atidée editati dueente
maree p diét€ q*tuor anis integ" lit pfoluat? » Et vt Pmifla in omibus 7 p
Oia {miter 7 fideli? fiant pimpleta déa cditas faeiet pprijs expnf jnté ocor-
did 7 appictuagdem ordinaria autoritate oftmari vel fi ordinari? id fa
reenfallit eadé cditas faciet dimidietat® expnfarad 7 Abbas 7 ouent? refiduit
pfoluét p ofirmacide apliea obtinéda - In quorit oim 7 fingulori fidem 7
teftidm Pmiflord Sigilla cémunia déora AbBbis puent? 7

n¢€ hart in-
denturari ptibs altnatim funt appenfa loco die menfe 7 anno fup*dictt -

Obligacio Balliuorum et comunitatis

Burgi de Perth fuper edifieacione
uftentacione . ae reparaeione / chori ueftibuli ueftimentori et oim aliori
ornamentoy eedie de perth -

Vniuerfis pateat p pntes Nos patrieiii charteris Bpofitum burgi de Perth
balliuos cOmunitatem ciuft et fires fueceflores teneri ae tenore pntit
firmiter et fideliter obligari venerabilibg ac religiofis viris Andree pmiffide
dina Abbati mo“flerij de Dunfmlyn 7 eiufdé loci puentui eortiq, ficeello-
ribs ad edifieacioné fuftentacioné 7 repa@bem ppetuas chori et vettibuli
ecéie pochialis de Perth viz in parietibs ianmis feneftris pauiméto vitriacde
tedura 7 cetis ad edificagem fuftentagoem 7 vepacdem dicori chori 7
veftibuli debite requilit¢ iris pprijs fiptib; 7 expnl neenon ad inuéésem
fuftétacioné 7 repagdem librori ealiei eatul

‘i albarum tuniearii eappar
lintheamint 7 pallari altaris ac oim aliora 7 finglori veftimétora 7
ornamétori ad dém ehorii 7 magni altare fpectantia ad quoy inuéédem
fuftentacoem 7 repacdem dici Abbas et puet? de jure feu ofuctudine
rade dite ecelefie de Perth olim tenebant* - A quib3 vero edificagonibs,
fuftentacdnibs repacdibus inuéédibus 7 vniuerfis ac fingulis onerib; pdi&e



--- Dunfermline_page346.png ---
204 REGISTRUM DE xv.

Blatos Abbem 7 ouétii eoriiq, fuceeffores ac mo“fterifi de Daf - afidém
exonam? 7 TiBos quietos et exotiatos Ge 7 fore volum? ppetnis temporibus
p pntes iposq, cont* q“feigq, pfonas a paiais edifica@dibs fuftentacdibs
s waradizabim?
acq'etabim? 7 Ippetua defendem? p q’ri quidé edificacdibs fuftentacdoibs
repacoihs 7 ontibs 5 pdi&C fupportande iti Abbas 7 9uét? nobis 7 fueceflo-
vib3 firis gceflerit ac cori mera liBalitate donauerit autiquii chori. 7
veftibulii ei omiibs libris ealicibs vettimatt ciftt 7 ferineis 7 vnitiS ac
fingulis alijs ornaméte in dié¢ choro et veftibulo p niic exiftentibs vna et
in choro de nouo edificando imppetuii ci pmoditatib; ex huime’
pudientibs fimili tn modo q? emoluméta ex hmdi fepulttis
peipim? in nani dée ectie faluis dite Abbati 7 puétui eoriiq, fuecefloribs
oimibs 7 fingulis alijs juribs fuialibs - Infup prefati Abbas 7 ouétus ex
cant fup dite dederiit ac fideli? 7 integ® - nob in peennia nnutfata pfolu-
ert dueétas im:
didtA ec@iam fad de Perth ed omibs fib; 7 puctibs fnis ad Pminti fox
annorit poft finé terfii arrendaéois fen firmarie p cent maré anuati 7
libere fée Criftino de Donjn 7 Roberto Harwa¥ pxto 7 imediate fequétin
foluédo inde dite Abbi 7 ouétui finglis nis digori fex anor quiq*ginta
mareas vfualis monete regni feocie ad duos ani ios vig SG martini in

repaddibus innécbih3 7 onerib; vniver’ 7 fingulis - afidé

eas + nee non obs arrendanerit et ad f'ma dimiferiit

hveme 7 Penthecoftes p equales porddes Et fimiliter vicario einfde ectie
qui p tempe flit triginta quiq, marcas anuati ad vfuales 7 eonfiuetos ‘Pminos
ci omibs 7 fingut alijs oneribs 7 odicdibus in jndenturis inter nos 7 di&os
abbem 7 ouétit exinde ofeétt pleni? 7 latius ptentt et expreflatt - Q'd fi
otingat nos ant fucceflores jiros vel editaté atidéam in pmift vel aliquo
pmiffori deficere aut o‘uenire q abfit obligamns nos fuccefloresq, noftros
+ déam cditaté terras pofleffiones ac ofiia bona fira 7 fucceflorii firori
ieteg, cditatt mobilia 7 Imobilia vbiciq, flint inuéta five repta fore
difiringenda namada areftanda 7 capienda ecia fi uece fulit ad voliitates
diclort: abbis 7 ouent? cori, fcc vendenda donee de principali yna
ct expnt aunt laboribs 7 indefle fi que fecint aut fuftintit ple“rie
fuit fatiffem - Ae pro pleniore obfcrudcia 7 adimpledde oim 7 finglori
pmifford fubicim? nos noftrosq, fuecetiores et déam cditaté juriflieéoi 7



--- Dunfermline_page347.png ---
HS.

REG, JAC, 1. ] DUNFERMELYN. 295

coherédi dni fri epi Sti andree eurieq, ciufd@ Tppetui in hoe catu diitaxat
fi eirea premifla vel aliq’d premiflorii ptigerit nos defi¢e fen o*uenire
sepcde juris 7 Fei reniiciat(

omihs frande dolo eanillacde ciretine
penit? exelu® 7 remot@- In quori oim et fingulori fidé 7 teftism pre-
miffori Sigilli: de editat pntibs eft appenfii apud perth nono die met}

Junij Anno dni w - cece’ + xl" -

7 ex

Declaracio cOmunitatis de perth tuper donacione fepulturarum cis facta
per Abbem 7 conuenti mo*tterij de dafmlyn -

In dei note Am@- Per hoe pns publicum inftrumentum Cunétis pateat
euidenter q Anno ab inearnacione domini m™ + cccc™ - q*dragefimo
Indiétione Peia ac @en® Junij die decia q*rta pontificatus {@iffimi in x°
pris ac dni fri dni Eugenij dina puidencia pape q*rti Anno decio in frorit
notariori publicora: 7 teftii fubferiptori: Pneia perfonalit oftitut? venera-
bilis 7 religiofus vir Willfis de boyis mo“eh? mo“fterij de Dunfimlyn
ordinis £2 bididi {Zi andree Ayot peurator vt affuit venabilit 7 religiv-
forun virorii ac dnorii Abbis 7 eSuentus mo“fterij de Dunfmlyn aiidi&i
rie apuit conceffionis feu donacionis

Quad tram de pgamino vt p'ma fe
omoditatua fepulturari: inf*
figillo eSmuni capituli moftij Pdei figillata p vertabiles ac religiofos
viros Abbem 7 ouétii mo* frij de Dafmlfn aide honorabilibs 7 ceiifpeae
viris Ppdito balliuis 7 editati burgi de perth eoriq pofterijs ct fuecefforibs
pube€ fubferipte tradidit

chorti 7 ee@iam perochialis burgi de perth:

nnp féam in manu faa tenens nobis no*

plegenda cord diferct€ 7 ciretfpe&e viris Patricio charteris ppdito burgi
prediai de perth 7 ofulib; einfdé ad hoe fpecialiter voeatt 7 congregatt

cui? tenor fequit® 7 eft talis Uniuerfis x* fidelibus ad quorit noticias putes
tre pnehint Andrcas pmiffide dina Abbas mo"tterij de Dunfmlyn 7 eiutde
loci oust? faluté in oim faluatore Notit€ nos vnanimi ofenfu 7 affontii
tocius capituli firi vtilitate fira in hac parte puifa 7 penfata dedifle con-
ceflifle 7 p fntes pro nobis 7 fuceeflorihs noftris imppetuti donafle pnid¢
7 Coumtpeae viris Ppdito balliuis 7 cdmunitati burgi de Perth eorum«



--- Dunfermline_page348.png ---
296 REGISTRUM DE [sec. xv.

pofteris et fuccefforibg libera fepultura inf* Chori ectie pochialis d@ burgi
et pmoditatib; ex hui%mo’ fepulturis puéientibs fieut ipa cditas in naui
diéte ectie ct ext® chor huculq, emoluméta fepulturara peepit p fuften-
tacione 7 repacione chori veftibuli ornamentori calict 7 librora: ad fuos
pprios vfus pro huidi onerib3 fupportand€ pro ppetuo applicand? - Ita q
deinceps p ppetuo nullii corpus infra chorii nee ecia ectiam abfq, cditatt
confent: fepeliatur - Et ut pdiéa noftra libera dona
temporib; inuiolabiliter obferuet’

cio 7 conceffio ppetuis

- fi otingat q’d abfit nos Abbem aiidém
conuéti noftrii fucceflores firos aut aliqué aliti de madato jiro pntem
donacioné inpugre aut Ppditi hallinos aut editaté fucceflores vel pofteros
coridem moleftare vexare inquictare pturbare aut a peepcione emolumé-
tori p corpibs inf* chorti aut ectiam humatis 7 fepultis realiter 7 ci effeu
impedire e:

ile p extite 7 econifo volum? gq d@a cditas 7 eoridé fuecet=
fores quig, mareas de fructibus eccie fire de perth anuati peipiant vna cit
omoditatihs ex fepulturis infra chorii 7 ecéiam vt piicit® - pudientibs quas
quid@ quigq, marcas e
p pmtes p onibs ec

< fira liberalitate mera 7 ppetua extune cifdé ocedim?

ie di&e cditati inctibentibs leuius fubportande quoctiq,
iure puilegio ftatuto 7 confuetudie in o“rit Pntis peetlionis nd obftantibs
Saluis tn nobis et fuccefloribus firis omibs 7 finZlis alijs juribs funalibs
racione decedentiti aut funerti q°’modolibet oting:
pnt

sntibs - In eni? rei teftidm
figilli ntm cde eft appenfi apud d&m nFn mo“ftium ix" + die moh
xl’ - Pott Cui? quid tre lectura dict? Willifis
peuratorio ndie quo fup* clara 7 intelligibili voee folompnit eft

Junij Anno dni a. cece" -

de boy:

proteftatus q Abbas 7 oust? afidiéti non ocefleriit nee donauerit n° ecia
dant ant ocedit vigore de donacionis diet ppoito ballinis
eortdé fuccefloribus oblaciones ceri

cOitati ant
ari equoy armor aut aliort
mortuariori racbe decedencit aut funeri cis 7 ectie fue de perth q°uifm’
ptinétia ueend aliq® alia jura funeralia 13 foliimodo diitaxat porcioné
peciiart feu ipam pecunia que dat® aut in teftamétt decedencit reling't* -
p apcde fre fen p locis tumulori aut fepuleroy infra chori 7 ectiam de
perth aiidi@ta p funerihs feu eorpib; defiictori inibi fepiliend¢ aut humade -
Ad que ppdit? aiidi&? nove 7 ex parte dee editate ofulibs Pui&e ofencien-
tihs ~ fibi madantibus refpondit 7 pu’ ofeflus fuit dia Pdicta Ge 7 fore

ai peed



--- Dunfermline_page349.png ---
REG, JAC. 11] DUNFERMELYN. 297

vera 7 q nullii jus ad predidas oblaciones u ad qeumg, alia jura funcralia
di ebitati aut cori five cofforihs pretextu dée peeffionis cis

Ge competit

Anorit affedagnis eis p

futurii copet. e potit nifi_ p tuto tm fi
Bat abbem 7 outtum coeetfe 7 fe Nt falua cis Pdi&a poreione pecii-
arum feu ipa peetiia que datur pro apede Tre infra cetiam 7 chort aiidém
p funerihy fou corpibs deficori vt pmittit? - tamuland déasq, oblaciones
vnitllas 7 fingulas neenon Jura funeralia Getiq, ad dios abbem 7 puentil
tine aliquo clamio dicorum Bpditi alliuoy cditate fpectare 7 de jure ptite
> Ge ippetuai nd obftante Pdéa geeffione fap omoditatibs fepulturara
ppdito balliuis editati 7 eord fucecflorihs p patos abbem 7 pustum oeefla
+ facta - In quora oim et fingulor’ fide ct teftiom Bmifforii déus Wilts de
boyis noie peuratorio quo fup" fintes tras feu hoe peas pubeti inftfm exinde
fieri 7 p nos no“rios pubcos fubferiptos feribi 7 pu. petijt Sigilliq, d&e
editatt obtinuit appentione cOmuniri - Dati 7 acti ap* perth in eetia préli
{dé {ub anno indieéde mente die et pontifieatu quibs fupra | Pntibus
ibidé honorabilibus 7 cireiifpe&f viris Johe bunch vno ballinoy d@ burgi
And‘a de Inchmartyn deeano gylde Roberto de fpenfa Thoma de I¥n
Wittmo de ftratherii Johame de Hadingtoune Johe currou® Roberto
Iarwa¥ ct Roberto de {palding diéi burgi burgentibus ac (agro Johe de
Don§n vieario cetie prot de pth teftib3 ci mult€ alijs ad pmiffa vocate

{paliter 7 Rogatis -
Et ego And‘as vmf"y cleric? Sci and# dyo¢ ae curie cditate: burgi
de pth feba edis jurat? putiens saucto’ «ap® novi? Pmifl! dibs +
figlis di fie vt Pur'tit? digent® 7 fierét vna et pnoiate teftibs fins
int'tui caq, fie fieri dici vidi 7 eli Tdeoq, Pntes tras p modi
inftru" - pu - manu no*rij fubfe'pti me alijs negotijs oceupato
fe'ptas figno et fubfe'péde meis folit€ 7 ofuct? vna ci appéfione
Sigilli c&is d&e editate fig"ui Rogat? 7 7 reqfit? i in fidé 7 teftiom oi
7 finglora piifforum -
Et ego Walter? de Baleancolle clic? Sti ande dyot pute? auto® .
Gis di fie vt Pm'tit® - ditent?
agent® - fierét vna ei pferipto no*rio 7 teftibs pte'pte ns intfui
eaq, Sia 7 fingla fic fieri vidi feini ct ulin + Ideoq, fntes tras p
QP

jmpiali novi? Punitt dibs 7 fin


--- Dunfermline_page350.png ---
416,

v.

298 REGISTRUM DE [s

moda inftru® ofeétas pp'a manu fup* 7 fubt? ofe'ptas figno 7 noie
meis folit€ 7 ofucté fig“ui rogat? 7 reqfitus in fidem et teftism oim
et finglori premiffori -

Confirmacio viearij gerlalis et capituli Sci andree fup ouencione 7 obli-
gadde int mo*fterii de Dunfermlyn 7 cdmunitaté de Pth - penes edifica-

Gem fuftentagoem 7 repacdem chori veftibuli veftimentoy 7 aliori
ornamétoy ectie pochiat de pth -

Vniuerf {%e matris eectie filijs ad quoy noticias jintes tre puenint Jacobs

miferacbe dina prior ecdie cathedalis Sti andrec ac eiufdé eo in remot?

agente vicarius genalis 7 einfdé ectie capitul ffm in oim faluatore - Duas
tras vnii viz indentata 7 altam patentem non intentata cdi Sigillo hono-
rabilil: viroy ppofiti balliuoy 7 cOmunitatt burgi de pth Sd ande dyot
figillatas venabilibs 7 religiof viris Abbati 7 ouétui mo" £0 ij de Difmlyn
ordis St bitdti dee Sti andree dyot - fup cert€ ouéédibus inf*te'pee
ofeétas fanas 7 integras nd rafas non abolitas non eancellatas nee in
aliq’ fui pte viciatas £5 omi prfus vicio 7 filpiciGe carentes nobis ex pte
dicori: Abbis 7 ue
ogregat ad confirmand jfntata

us in capitulo ectic cathedalis aiidée capitularit

reeepifle plegi fecifle 7 ad pleni intel-
lexiffe nowit€ in hee verba Hee indentura facta 7

- yt fup* in conuencide
* r Ss res rialie ~
[riz. V. 413.] Tenor vero altius tre tie incipit Vniufis pateat p pntes -

vt fup® in obligacione [réz. NM. 414.) Poft quart quidé trari: pntacbem +

a a ——— A < aes Ane
recepebem fuim? pro pte digori Abbis 7 oustus requifiti qt’ pdéas
tras ad caraid® maioré fecuritaté 7 futura rei méoria approbare ratificare
~ confirmare dig*rem® - Nos

v’ Jacobus prior 7 vicari? aiidi&? hito fup
hoe eum dico cap’: tro diligenti tractatu ae matura 7 digefta deliberacbe
phita Pfertim ei religion

zelus dicoy religiofori virorti 7 deuoconis
ficeritas pmerent? 7 nd tito nos indueiit vt ca illos fanorabilid: gia
pleq*maur q" eort fore neceflitatihs pf] s tras necnon
oudeoes obligaéoes 7 gcordias in cifde otentas in oi D5 fuis elautialis
paete articulis condiédih; modis 7 cireumftancijs forma pit 7 7 effedu in

A 39
jcim? oportuna pd


--- Dunfermline_page351.png ---
17.

209

REG. FAC. tL] DUNFERMELY

omibs 7 p omia vt Pmittit® de cdi oim uFm ofentu et aflenfi autoritate
ra ordinaria qua figim* . 7 capitulari approham? ratificam? 7 tenore
Putid ippetui confirmam? In quori oim Pmifforir fidem 7 teftiom figilld
offici) Tiri vieariat? yna ci figilli cOmunis eapituli tri appenfide Pntibus
eft appeufit ap" Stm andrea ptino die méf Septemb's Anno dni mil

quadringentefTo q“dragefimo -

mo

© O.-
‘Tranfumptum conuécionis obligacduis et declaragonis int mo*ftii de
Dunfmlyn 7 cditate de perth fap cdifieade faftentacione 7 repacione
Chori vettibuli veftimétori 7 aliorii ornamétoy ectie pochialis de pth -

In noie dui Amen Vniufis et fingulis pos pubed infttm infpecture
Jacobus miferacde dina p'or ectic cathedalis Sti andree ae einfde epo in
remot¢ agente vicari? generalis (lfm in dno - Nouit¢ q religiofus vir frat
Willis de bois mo‘ehus moftij de Dunfmlyn ordis fi hide Sei
andree dyoé peurator 7 peuratorio noie Abbis 7 ont? déi moftij put de
fue penracdis maidato futlicienti nobis conftabat documéto quafila tras ct
quoda inftritto quoy tenores inferi? {tt inferti co <libuit ae
indicialit pntan' 7 pduxit petens hiifr a nob vt hui9mdi tras 7 inftim
t*nfumi 7 exemplari madare dig*remur ad futura rei memoria ex autori-

a nob

tate ordinaria qua figim’ in hae pte ita 7 talit q ipi t"nfumpto poffit 7

debeat vbig, ple‘ria fides adhiberi ficuti dict tris 7 inftrite pu’. fii

medit in eort originali forma pducent® - Vnde nos Jacobus prior 7 vicari?

Pfatus huidi petiGdi fanorabilit Gnuentes volentesq, in huidi negotio rite
peede vt tenemur d@as tras neend 7 ple'pti pubci: inftrin diligen? in-
minauim? Et qr poft diligenté
¢ ecia teftii depofigoem ppim® huidi tras 7 intt
inte

fafpie

{pexim? ae e:

xaminacoem 7 infpeccioné

iti pubeti fore fana

illeta nd viciata nd cancellata non abolita 1 omi prius viei
ide earentia neend 7 figilla ac man? 7 figna fore illort fienti in i
"pues narrant® + Leeireo Nos Jacobus prior 7 viecari? aiidiét?
p tribunali fede huidi tras y initim pubet infra fe'pti tnfumi 7 exem-
plari ae in pubead t‘nfiipti forma redigi madauim? 7 iuffim? ad futura

tris 7 inftru



--- Dunfermline_page352.png ---
300 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xv.

rei m@oria q*ri vero trari p'me viz tenor feq't? et eft talis Hee indentura
faéta 70+ vt fup* in eSuencione [riz. V. 413. ] Tenor vero altius tre talis eft -
Vniuerfis pateat p pntes 72 - ut fup* in obligacione (viz. N. 414.) Tenor v°
inftru" pfe'pti talis eft - In dei nomine Amen 7@ - vt fup* in declaraGe -
[vic. Y. 415.] Tenor eet p'mi notarij talis €- Et ego Andreas 7.
yt fup” in inftru’ . Tenor vero fubferip@dnis alti? no’ “rij
fic incipit Et ego Walterus 7é - vt fap" - in Paigta declaracide - Postq,
oimia 7 fingula fup*d&a Nos Jacobus por 7 vieari? Piatus pins tnsumpti

d&e declara

pubet ct ipis tris 7 inftru® - originalib; diligen? aufeultari collacionari 7
concordari feeim? - Et tandé qr poft diligent® collagdem 7 anfenltagdsem
opim? fins t*nfumpti eit ipis tris 7 inftru® - originalibs Steripe in omib;

+ pomiia gcordare 7 in nullo diferopare - Tecireo autdte ordinaria pata
dee reuim? 7 tenore nti detnimus q pnti t*ufumpto pee + tang” pfe'ptt
tris 5 snftrn® + origi

ib3 vbig, locorti ta in iudicio q* ex" judicit Mito

poflit + debeat ple“ria 7 indubitata fides adbiberi ae talis 7 tanta qualis
et q’nta di&t tris 7 inftru’ - pu” - adhiberetur fiin mediti ‘pduSent? - In
quori oim 7 fingulori fidé 7 teftiom Pmifford hoe pus pubed inftim fine
t“nfumpti p no*rii pubeti infra feripti: feribi 7 publicari figilliq, offieij
iri vieariat? inffim? 7 fecim? appentione pmuniri - Dati 7 a&a in domo

eapitulari cetie cathedalis St andree fib anno incarnaddis dnice millefimo
quadringentefimo gq*d*gefimo indiecoe Teia ac mes Septemb’s die Peia
pontificat? Séiffimi in x° pris ae dni fri dni Eugenij dina puidencia pp*
q*rti - Piitibs ibide yenabilibs virt fratribs Roberto brog fubp'ore Roberte
Horfbruk teio pore  Jotie de Kingorii canonié reglaribus dée ecéie Sti
andree @agift? gilherto de galbrath liceneiato in deeret€ pu - no“rio -
ano Roberto de Kinmont. vicario ectie pochialis de Cup’ - 7 Duo Roberto
fehort pu® notario ei multe alijs teftih3 ad Pmifla voeatt fpecialit 5
rogatis «

Et ego Willfis de boyis Séi andree dyot alme: vnitfitat€ einfle
bedellus juratus pube? antoritate impiali no*ri pmifh oimibus 7
fingulis di fie vt Pmittit® ditent® 7 ficrent vna ch Pnoiat¢ teftibns
pns intfui eaq, fie fieri 7 dici vidi 7 andiui ac in nota fumpfi ideoq,
pns t'nffampti pubeti p modi inftru® . pfe&i manu mea pp'a



--- Dunfermline_page353.png ---
REG. JAC. 1. ] DUNFERMELYN. 301

feriptii figno 7 noie meis folit€ 7 confuet€ vna et appentione Sigilli
officij diG@i dni vicarij genalis fignaui rogat? 7 req'fit? in fidem 7

teftidm oim 7 fingulora pmiffori -

L¥a refignaédis dni patrieij lyon -
418. Omni
Glan
metu dudum nee errore Japsum {3 mera 7 fpontanca voluntate 7 de con-
fentu 7 affenfa amicoy meoy hito tip hoe diligenti tractatu 7 contilio
pure 7 fimplici?’ refignaffe 7 per fufté 7 bactm furfum reddiditfe « Vene-
rabli in xpo pri ae dno - dno Andree pmiflione dina Abbati mo*fterij de

5 hoe feriptum vifuris vel audituris Patrieius lyon miles diis de
zi ae + ayn " .
ys flfm in dno {€piternam - Nouit vniufitas veftra me non vi ant

Dunfermlyn 7 eiufdé loci ouentui omies 7 finglas tras meas de flothrot} et
litate de Dunfmlyn 7 infra viceco-
ot dinitas 7 ed omfibs lihertatihs

Mery

de Schanwalle ci pt* iacentes in Ri
mitati de flyfe p oMes rectas metas fu:
cdmioditatibs 7 ayfiamétt ac jufte ptinécijs fuis q'bufenma, Ita q nee ego
nee heredes mei nee aliq's noie firo vel ex parte jus clamed poffetlions
vel pprictaté in terris prediét€ nee in aliq* parte earidé aliq‘liter poto
vel potint vendieare fed ab omi titulo juris ti petitorio q* poflefforio
fimus in etni abfoluti penit? et exelufi In euius rei teftidm Sigillim

mei pntibus ¢ appentum apud Glamys deeio g*rto die més Septemb's
Anno dni millefimo q“dringitetio quadragetimo -

Lia procuratorij déi duj patrieij Lyoi -

419. Vniuertis pateat p pntes me Patrieii Lyone milit? dim de Glamys fecifle
conflituifle 7 ordinafle neenon p putes facere conttitue 7 ordinare nobiles
viros viz; Dauid ftewart militem dim de Hertfchaw Johem de Arnot
diim eiufdé et Henrieti de Arnot peuratores meos aétores fEores 7 nicios
{pales - Danté 7 ocedeii eifdé 7 eoy alti giié&im 7 diuifim mea plena 7
libera Ptaté ac {pale madatii ad refignand pure 7 fimplieiter nnon p fufté


--- Dunfermline_page354.png ---
jus vel clameti potleftione vel pprictaté in tris Pdiet nee in aliq*

302 REGISTRUM DE (sec. XV.

7 bactn ac p tras meas patentes furfti reddend in man? Reilendi in xpo
pris ac dni dni Andree pmiffione dina Abbat€ mo*fterij de Dunfmlyn 7
ciufilé loci puent? ofies 7 finglas tras meas de ftothrof 7 de Schanwalle
pt iacei in regali* de Dunfmlyn 7 infra vicecomitati de f¥ffe ci

7 finglis libertatib; omoditatib; 7 aifiamétf ac iuftt pt> fuis q'buf-
4

oni

cumq, « Ita q nee ego nee edes mei nee aliq ali? noie iro vel ex parte

te
earidé aliqualiter poto vel potint vendieare + Ratii 7 grat hnté 7 hituri
tota et quicquid padi

s vel eoy alt conitidim vel dinifim
noie meo in Pmiffis duXint vel duXit faciend vel aliq? Pmifloy «In cui?
rei teftidm figillum meum pntibus ¢

mei procurator

appenfum apud Glamys decio quinto

dic méf Septéb’s Ammo dni millefimo quadringintefimo -

ta dni patric

Lyon militt -

Oftibus hane carta vifuris vel audituris Andreas pmitiide dina Abbas
mo'ftij de Dafmlyn 7 einfdé loci out? flim in dno fempitna Notit
vnitiitas ra nos vnauimi ofenfa 7 ailentu toci? capituli iiri deditle
ocellifle 7 hae fnti carta jira cGfirmaile Nobli 7 potenti viro patricio
lyon mili dno de Glinis p {uo humagio et feruicio nobis et mo“iterio
jiro impenf 7 impendendt oiies 7 finglas Tras firas de flothrof et de
Nehanvale ci ptinéeijs iaceft initia. regalitaté fram de Dunfermlyn 7 vit
de fy’: Que quid@ tre de ffothrof 7 de Schanvale ci pt fuerit di dni

patricij fon hereditarie - Et quas dict? patrici? non vi aut metu duct?
nee errore lapfus 13 fua mera pura 7 fpontanea volu‘ - nobis et mottio
jiro p fuos peuratores 7 tras fuas relig*Cdis patentes cord teftibs in eaplo
jiro p fuflim 7 bactm furfi reddidit pureq, 7 fimplicit refig“uit ac toti
jus = clamet pp’ retate 7 7 pofieffioné que in déis tris ca pt het huit feu
quouitin’ - bre potit Pp fey heredibs fuis omino q'eti clamauit imppetuii -
Tenéd ~ hndas offi cum pt- - pfato dno patricio
lyon heredibs tuis de nobis mo'ftio bro 7 fuceefloribs firis in feodo a
edi + imppetuii p oMes rectas metas antiquas 7 diuifas fuas put iacét in

fi ul

Puoiata aS i



--- Dunfermline_page355.png ---
DUNFERMELY

longitudie 7 latitudie in hofet planis moris marrefiis
aquis ftangnis riuolis 7 lacub3 petarijs turharijs colibarijs carbonarij

p'tt’ palenis vijs fermite

lapide 7 calee cit molendis multuris 7 coy fequelis auenpaconibs vena-

»5 pifearijs 7 cunicularijs et curijs 7 ecuriari exitibs heryheld¢
Mehet¢ mulierd et edi pattura 7 libero introitu 7 exitu ac ef omibs alijs
7 fingulis pmoditatibs libertatibs 7 7 ayfiameet ae jutte fuis pt? q'buteumaq,
ta ud noiatt q* noiatt ta fubt? tn a q* fup" tra ta peut q ppe ad: pdéas
tras ci pt’ fpeétantib; feu iufte fpectare v yulentibs q’modolibs in futuri
adeo libere quiete ple*rie integre honoritice bii 7 in pace ficut aliquis

tenés infra regalit® fram aliq‘s tras de nob 7 mo"{tio ire in warda +

releuio ten3 feu poflidet fine retinemento vel renoeaéde aliq'li - Red-
dendo inde anuati di&? dis patrici? ct heredes fui nots mo*fterio firo +
fuccefloribs firis quadraginta folides viualis monete regni feocie Anualis

reddit? ad duos ani tmios viz ad feft> pentheeoft> 7 {@i martini in hyeme
p equales porédes ett warda 7 releuio - Et faciendo inde forinfeen fuicii:
cum t'h; fe&C eurie ad firas tres curias capitales ap’ Diifmlyn ei: alijs
feruicijs inde debit et confuet - In cui? rei teftidm figillit ede capituli
ini Pnntibs eft appenfam vicefimo Peio die mek Septembris Anno dui w""-
quadringentefimo quadragefio -

La fafine eciufde -

Andreas pmiflione dina Abbas monatterij de Donfmlyn et eiufdé loci
oust? Johani de Arnot de eodé halliuo tro in hae parte flém - Quia
geeffim? hereditarie nobili viro hobisq, dileto + patteio Won dno de
G lammys militi totas 7 integras tr

firas de ffothrof 7 de Selianvale cit
an de Dunfermlyn 7 vieceditati de

ptinécijs iacentes pny regalitaté 1
fy Quare vobis peipimus 7 madamus qs vifis Putih; fafind hereditaria
dé hci pt® Pdi&o pat" Ion vel fuo certo attor"to fedm forma
7 tenoré carte fue de nobis inde pfeéta iufte 7 indilate tradatis faluo
tamé iure cuintlib; Dat? apud Dunfilyn fab fig

a tra

lo capelle Tre q"rto die
me O&obris Anno dni w™ - quadringentcfimo quadragefine -


--- Dunfermline_page356.png ---
423.

304 REGISTRUM DE

Acquitancia dni Jacobi epi Sci andree de fubfidio caritatiuo -

Notlint vniufi p pintes Nos Jacobi mifacde dina Epm Séi andree habuitle
ae recepifle p man? venabilifi ac religioforti virora Andree Abbatf de
Dunfmlyn 7 eiufdé loci ouent? totum et integrum fubfidium caritatini
nob in aifipaie Hira ad ecctiam Sci andree de ectis eoridé infra dint
firam eXntihs debiti vi; of&oginta Marcas vfualis monete Regni Scocie
de quo quid fubfidio caritatio noie 7 caufa fupius expilat nobis integre
pioluto tenem? nos hii otent’ 7 pagat* 7 Pfatos ABbem 7 ouétum monaf-
teritiq, fip* dita 7 offies fios quietos inde deniiciam? imppetuil p fintes -
In cui? rei teftidm Sigilli nfm rotid fntib; appendi juflime apud
Dunfermlyn penultimo die més Januarij Anno dni @™ - cecc™ « quadra-
getimo p'mo -

Copia enid tre cont* magfm Johem Wricht

Of Sti and¥ vniub 7 finglis ectiay Reéoribs ppetuisq, vicarijs
capellais euratt 7 nd curate if* dyoé Sd andF dina celebrati fup execucoe
pntid debite req'fite flim in dno Vob 7 vim cuilib3 7 v'tute fe obeditcie

+ fub pena fufpeii a dnis ftri&e pei - madam? q“ts moneatt le" « p?- £° -

teio 7 péptorie vnico in ptextu p t'plici ed@o magfm Johin& wry' fe
gerét® p vieario eetie prot de mutkilburgh {Gi and? dyot - 7 qué nos
tenore Pntiii monem? vt if vigiti vnii dies mdiGdes huidi_ px 7 imediate
tequeti a’y vigiti yni? diey fepte pp’: fepté p £- 7 reliq’s fepté dies p
Feio 7 péptorio tio ac cano® - moiéde eit magro Jobi affig*m? 7 p vos
yolum? affig*ri / Vi chabilibs 7 religiof viris dno ricardo Abbti 7 oustui
moti de Dif Ses 7 finglas decias garbales de le fand¢ ani iftantt de
ah; ipos Abbaté 7 uti p fe 7 fuos oplices {poliauit / reftituat t falté
de eifdé ad vert valor fatiffaciat in q'b3 p tram fétéeia diffinitiua cift
Abbti 7 ouétui extitit fentéciatr odépnat? necnd 7 de q*d“ginta folidt p
expnb in hnidi Ga cord nob facet et i q'bs modacoe phabita eadé fira fitia


--- Dunfermline_page357.png ---
424.

REG, JAC. 1.) DUNFERMELYN. 3035

diffinitia cif Abbati 7 puétui pfoluéd odépnat? extitat inf® tmina pdictia
ple*rie 7 itegre fatiffaciat eft eff@u fub pe“ excois Qua in ifm madat¢ huidi
nO parété eit effEu exniie put extiic 7 est lapf oer xxj°- diebs ditaq
candica mdie Pmiffa feeim in hijs Ple'pte Et vos fii? autori® - fira ferat€
Et qué vos excdi" in ecclijs tris omibs diebs dniet 7 feftis pu - deniicieté
a dita deniiciad@e nd eeflaii donee tup ipius abtolugde a nob hueritt in
madatt Has tras debite exceutas ci fuerite requifiti uot rem'tentes -
Dat? fub figillo officij firi iy Stm audrea xvj® die méf Decembre Anno
dui m™ - cece” - x1 +

yj"

Copia carte proceffus et ordina@nis Abbatis de Dunfermlyn fup Anexioe
villaram Schire de Gaytmilk 7 theoleneo ac correceione firmarioy facta
cOmunitatibus burgorum de Duntermlyn et Kirealdy -

In nomine domini iri Shu xpi Amen - Ex ferie huius putis pu" - inftru® -
Vnittis et fingulis tam fintib3 q* futuris conftet Inculenter 7 apareat
euidenter q Anno ab incarnadve dni millefimo quadringentefimo q“dra-
gefimo ogauo mentis vero Decembris die decia jndiede - xij - Pontiticat~
{iffimi in x° firis ae dni firi dui Nyeholaij dina puiden* pape quiti Anno
{Gdo « Prouidi 7 cireumtpesti viri - Johes Wright / Ppofitus / Thomas de bra
et Johes chepma balliui / Johes de bothuell 7 Johes de Cup? - burgenfes
burgi de Dunfermlyn ex vna + 7 difereti viri AleX de boyis 7 Johes de
kirealdy junior ballini - Johes bell, Johes muryfoi 7 Thomas de baleancole
burgenfes burgi de Kirealdy ptibs ex alt* - Coram venlabli in xpo fre ac
domino Ricardo pmiffione dina Abbate mo*tterij de Dunfermlyn + ndib3
7 ex ptib; di&ort burgorum 7 editatum in a feu debata a longo tempe
habit inter diaas ptes fup aflig"e annexione et theoloneo Sehyre de

Gaytmylk ae eorreecbe firmariori: 7 hufbandori eiufde ac ilar: oeea~

fide legitie eitat? ad hoe eum futlicietbs mandatf feu peuratoriis déarum

editatt figillis ciby déort i burgorit figillat€ in domo cap" - moftij de

Dunfmijn andi? pfonalit copueriit quori mandatori: feu peuratorii

tenores fequit? - 7 p'mo tenor peuratorij burgi 7 pmunitat¢ de Dunfmlyn
2a



--- Dunfermline_page358.png ---
306 REGISTRUM DE [sEc. xv.

7 Gtalis - Vniuerfis et fingulis / pntes tras infpecturis pditus balliui 7 tota
cOitas burgi de Dunfmlyn Slim in oim faluatore Nott vnififitas ¢ra nos
ex cain pfenfu Z affenfu di&e editate feciffe conftituiffe 7 ordinafle
neenon fale conttitile 7 ordinare pid Pp pntes difcretos 7 cireum{pectos
viros Johem Wricht Johem chepma 7 Thoma de bra ppditum 7 baitios
di&i burgi ac Johem de bothuell 7 Jotem de cup’ - firos gburgenfes
Pdil&os 7 cori quélibet in folid firos procuratores 7 gmiflarios fpecialid
deputat? ad pparend p nobis et pte fira apud mo*fterii de Dunfinlyn
deeia die menfis Decembris Anno dni ° - cccc® - quadragefimo oéauo
efi otinuadde dierii cora veria® - in xpo fre ac Domino dno firo Ricardo
pmiflione dina ADbe mo‘fterij de Dunfermlyn aiidi&> 7 fuo confilio Dati
7 peedeh di&t firis peuratoribs 7 eori cuilibet oiunéim 7 fepatim fram
libera et ple‘riam poteftatem ac madati {Pale ad agend 7 defendend p
nobis coram déo Abbe ei%q, confilio pro lite feu debat? mota 7 longo
tempe habit> inter burgenfes 7 cditaté burgi de Kirealdy ex vna 7 nos ac
diam cditate noftra ptib; ex alt’ /fup libertate theoloneo 7 anexione
Sehyre de Gaytmilk ac aliis cont°uerfiis quibufeumq, n‘non p Bmiffis p
nobis pponend allegad proband iurand ppmittend 7 arbit‘um feu fentencia
da dni Abbis eiusq, confilij fubeid petend audient 7 recipient fup
Pmiflis - Promittimusq, nos ac diéa firam coité rath gti ftabile atq,
firmi imppetuo hituros quicq'd 7 totii p prefatos iiros pmiflarios pitéti
vel fepatim noie 7 ex pte noft's - Aé> fact feu gefti fitit in BunitP feu
aliq? Bmiffori - In eui? rei teftiom Sigillum cditate di&i burgi fri Pntibs
é appenfum p ppetuo remafu¥ ap’. dém nfm burgii de Dunfmlyn nono
die im@fis 7 anni prenotat* - Tenor vero peuratorij burgi 7 cditat€ de
Kirealdy eft talis - Vniuerfis et fingulis fntes tras infp‘tur€ ballini ac tota
cditas burgi de Kirealdy flém in oim faluatore - Nofiit vnitifitas fra {nos]
ex vnai ofenfu ct affenfu ae cditatt feciffe conflituifle 7 ordinafie n’non
fate conftitae 7 ordinare pi? p putes diferetos 7 c'ei{p*tos viros Alex” di

hoyis 7 Johiem de kirealdy ballios burgi fri afidi&> diim michaelem fiukar
vicariii ectie de Kirealdy aiidi& Henricum de boyis Jotiem de Kircaldy
fenioré Johem muryfon / thoma de Kyninmonth / Thoma de balcancole 7
Jotiem bell / firos oburgenfes Pdileétos 7 cori quéliby in folit firos peura-



--- Dunfermline_page359.png ---
REG. JAC. 11] DUNFERMELYN. 307

tores 7 omiflarios {peciali? deputat? ad opend p nobis 7 eal fira apud
motftium de Dunf Decio die méfis DecembF Anno Do* - «” - cecc™ -
quadragefimo oéauo ci ptinuacde dicrii cord vert. in x° pre ac dno
Ricardo pmiffide dina Abbe mo"ttij de Dunfmlyn afidi&> 7 tuo pfilio
Dant* 7 ocedefi déis ris peuratorih; 7 eort cuilibet oiundi T fepatim
Tram HBam 7 pleria Ptat® 7 madat> {Pale ad agend 7 defended p nobis
cord di&o Abbe eci%q, confilio p lite feu debata mot 7 longo tempe hit
in? burgéfes 7 cditaté burgi de Dunf: ex vna 7 nos ac dia Hram cBitaté
ptib3 ex alt*/ fup libertate theoloneo 7 anexide Sehyre de Gaytmylk ac
aliis pt°uerfiis quibufeiq, ntnon p pmiffis 7 cord finglis p nots ppoued
allegand pband iuradt opm'ted 7 arbita feu fentécia dei dni Abbis eiufq,
confilii fubeund petend audiend ac recipiend fup Pmifl » Promittimus q
nos ac ditam Aram coité rat® grat ftatle atq, {mii Ippetuo hituros quieq'd
7 totii p pfatos firos omiflarios pii&i t fepati note 7 ex pte firis aét> fact
feu gefti ttit in Pmif? fou aliq’ Pmiffora /In cui? rei teftidm Sigilli coite
déi firi burgi Pntib; & appentii p ppetuo remafuF ap* burgii nim de
Kirealdy afidict quita die m@f Decembr€ Anno Do! @™° - cece” « q*dra-
getio o&auo - Demi de mandato dicti dni Abbis p no“vid pubcii infrafe'ptii
tie ipi? dni Abbate curie feriha di&f peuratorijs reeept le&e 7 publicatt
_Pfeript€ peuratorib? d@ari ptitt ocordit admit} propofittq, ipart petiédibs
ac Fnfionibs ad eaft fate - nnd plat 7 pduc€ omi inftriit® ac
pbaddibs quibs de ptes vti voluerit in Pmiff tand mediantibs in? ipas
viris prudentibs 7 famofis ac ifari ptiii amicf intis in ditm vertatlem
prem 7 ei? offi qd ad hoe duSit affiméd protic tag” in arbitra arbitra-
toré feu amicablem opofitoré ab ipis ptibs cleat 7 concordit’ nofati
fuper omib3 7 finglis mi? caufis feu debate in? ipas motf feu habit€ in
haffo vel in alto feien? et {ponte fine vi dolo aut metu / ofentierat 7

ppmiferit ac fuis ordinaoi 7 decreto fe pofueriit 7 wna? fabmiferit
Infup dée ptes p fua iura®- in maibs déi no*rij pu® - fubfe'pt- corpali?
pftit pmiferit fentencia arbit“lem feu deeretii dGi dni Abbis ci%q, confilij
p fe firosq, hedes 7 fucceffores ippetud fide? fine aliq® ot*dicéde tenere 7
obtépare fave 7 adimplere ae inuiolit obferuare quieq'd 7 tott déus dis
Abbas de aflenfa ipi? confilij in Pmiff duit ordinad cdpdd pniiciad



--- Dunfermline_page360.png ---
308 REGISTRUM DE [SEc. xv.

fiatuend feu q’modolib; faciend Di&? vero dis Abbas ad inftaeia ipari
on? Pmifle opmiffidis feu amicabilis opdiddis gratan? in fe affumés - ad
pniieiad feu pferend fad ordinagdem fen fentécia arbitralé 7 dee‘ti in
Pmill dié vieefimit Pelt dei meh ipis ptihg aflignando limitatt ipis p'mit?
ad hoe de ipius madato legitie citat€ - Quo die Pfat? ptib; in domo cap" -
aiidict cori pfato dno Abbe pparentibs ac {ud ordinaem pniiciaem
feu fentencia arbitlé cit inftancia de® - ferri peten’® meritt caufe diligen?
p'mit? exaiatt de confenfu 7 affenfu inr€ pitort et virori: prudentii ad ofilit
fait huidi p ipm elecora 7 noiatora in jncia Pmiffi no“rii_pu®. infra” - 7
teftii infrate’ptori di&ta fua ordinaGSem fen fentencia arbit“lem 7 dec‘ti
tup pmif! pniciando protulit in hee verba In nomine dni fir thu xpi
Ami - Nos Rieardus pmitlide dina Abbas mo“ftij de Dunf: - ordis {di
biidéi Sei and dyod judex arbit feu arbit*tor a ptibs infrafe'pte ocordit
eles? in Ga fon edis in? cirei{p’tos 7 diferetos viros Ppofitii ballios 7
coité burgi jiri de Dif ex vna 7 puidos viros ballios 7 coité burgi iiri de
Kirealdy ptib3 ex alt* cora nobis mota feu mot fup aflig“e 7 anexide
fehire re de Gaytmylk 7 correcéde tenttit 7 fmariori einfdé 7 cart
oceafione put in forma opromiffi di&ari ptii cora no"rio pu® - infra

-in
jira Pneia fati pleni? otinet® - Audit p'ns ptiti dictari: peticoibs Fnfionibs
allega’s. fup pit cetisq, juribs tris 7 inftriit€ ac aliis phaddnihs exhibitt
7 pdu&@ ac p nos vif} rimat€ 7 exaiat€ ac ad pleni difeut 7 intellect
mattisq, 7 diligetihs eit ofilio iiro cdicabe 7 deliberage phabitt p nulla
ptia predZart iura nobis oftabat - Ad qua iparii AneX¢ afig*é 7 eorrecéd
pacari {p*tabat feu ppetebat - p bono tn pact 7 concordie ipay ptit ex
vigore di&i ppmiffi x‘ noie p'mit? inuocato p hane fram fentencia arbi-
tralem qua ferim? in hijs te pniiciam? deGnim? declaram? ordinam?
laudam? arbit*m® - 7 fentencii? - diffinim? - neenon de confenti 7 aflentiu
Adi fri ofilii au’ - ecia fira de nouo di@a Schiram Pfatis ptib; in mod qui
fequit® - affig'm? 7 Aneétim? viz villas firas de Stantod — flinglaffy

Inchederny  Cafkybarian Gaytmylk / Kynglaffy / ftynmont » 7 Ardeny
ci ptinéeiis di@o burgo firo de Dunfmlyn ac Ppofito 7 ballis qui p tempe
fuint 7 cditati eiufdé villas vero de Petyhochif / Petlochy 7 tenendie
fire de Clunyis ei pt pfato burgo firo de Kircaldy ballis fimiliter qui p



--- Dunfermline_page361.png ---
AC. 1] DUNFERMELYN. 309

RE

tempe fuerint 7 coiti eiufdé quo ad aflig*@em Anexacdem 7 correeéoem
pd@ari futuris ppetuis tempib; folide opete 7 {pttare deberi Et hee
dicim? atq, inniolid fi 7 obferuari a ptibs pLeripte preeipimus in futur
virtute iura - ipard cord no*rio pu® - infra’ - 7 teftibg ydoneis in fi
Pneia PRiti 7 exhibiti - Dat 7 act ap* mo‘ftinm nim de Dif afidém
viee™ . tereio die méf Decébr? Anno Bui w™ - cece’ - q"dragefimo
oéauo Qua quidem ordinagdem feu fentéeia arbitralé vt Pm'tit® - pled
7 Pnieiat’ Pleript” ptes audierit 7 recepert 7 p fe 7 hedibs fais 7 fuc-
ceffSb; approbauctt 7 omolagaueft Et vt hee ordinagd feu fentencia
arbitralis futuris ppctuis tempib3 robur f'mitat€ obtineat / 7 ne vilo
tempe gtenta in ipa in ferupulii refidiue prtifie relabant® - Pars pntt
inftru - penes Ppofitum balliuos 7 cditat® di burgi de Dunf: p ppetuo
rematura Appenfione Sigilli edis eapili moftij de Dunf? vna cit Sigillo
coitt pfati burgi de Kirealdy ae fuble'péde no*rij infra’ - ex mandato dé
dni Abbat@ eft roborata - Simili? 7 pte huidi inftru" - penes ballios 7
coité burgi de Kirealdy remafura appentide Sigillorii dé eap" - 7 coitt
burgi de Dunf vna et fubte'pede pfat no“rij d&e ptes obtinueFt pmuniri -
Dat 7 act Anno mae die loco indieéde pontifieat Pnotatt putih; dé
veniabilibs ae Religiofis viris Andrea auftyn pore / Wittmo de boyis
facrifta . Ricardo p'our fubp'ore mot tij de Dif aiidiet « ac pbis virt
Roberto de Orok . Johe flemyg / Tho" flemyng / 7 Danid harcafe armigis
ei mult€ alijs puide 7 diferet€ ad pmiffa vocat€ ac in fid@ et teftiom
veritat? fpeciali? Rogat 7 requifitis -
Et ego Williiis de Sehellis Baie glafgueti dyot publie? Autoritate
Impiali no*ri? ae veriablis pris Ricardi pmiffide dina Abbatt
mo"fterij de Dunfml¥ antediet eurie feriba pfetpt déari ptit
opiGdi peuratoriori exhibiddi 7 reeepédi ac huidi arbit'j fen

7
ecdpmiffionis fiuniffioni aut opmiffioni iuram@oy Pftacdi trari 7
inftrumétoy depoicdi 7 exaiacdi tmiorit affig"€di déi dni Abbatt
ordinaédis feu fentécie arbitralis plaédi ac omibs alijs 7 finglis
pmifli di fie vt pmittit? agent? - divent® - ac fierent vna eft Pnoiate
teftibs fins intfui eaq, offiia 7 fingla fie fieri vidi dici 7 audini 7 in

nota fumpli jdeoq, putes tras p modi inftru® - confectas me alijs


--- Dunfermline_page362.png ---
310 REGISTRUM DE (se

oceupato negocijs aliena fidé? manu ofcriptas Signoq, 7 fubfe'péde
meis solit¢ ac confuet€ vna cii appenfione Sigillori Bdidori me
fubferibendo fignaui a pfe'pt€ partibs rogat? ac requifit? in fidem 7
teftism veritatis oimq, aliori’ 7 fingulorum Pmifforum -

Inftruméti declarag@is fup poffeffione o&aui denarij de fyffe 7 fothryfte
fact p dnos de confilio regf Jacobi feeundi 7 ciufd feaccarij -

In nomie dni Ami p h’ fins public inftriiti - Cun& pateat euiden? q
Anno ab incarna@e eiufit cille™ quadringen™ q*drage™’ nono menf vero
inlij die decia ofa® jndicéde duodecia ac pontificat? Sanéif'$i in x° Pris 7
ani fri dni Nicolaij dia puiden“ pape quiti ano Peio In mei no“rij pu® ac
tefti: fubte'ptoy fintia sup ot°uerfia feu debata nup orta in? fap*mii diim
nim Regé 7 ei? ofiliit ab vna 7 venabilé in x° prez Ricardii pmiffione dia
Abbem monatterij de Difermly 7 eiufd loci ouéti ptihs ab alt® penes
Recepddem octaui denarij cui%libs finis feu finicie jtiner jutticiarie tenend
infra vicecoit de fyffe 7 fothryffe eift Religiof in pura 7 ppetua elemofina
p quod recolende memorie dim regé Dauid filit fe Mgarete Regine feocie
donat> 7 cSceft ac etia p oMes inclitos Reges feotie ab eod rege Danid
linealit difeendeii ufq, ad Diim nim moderna reg? of'mat> ut ipi Religiofi
afferit ficuti in cart 7 ofirmaddib; fuis defup pfeét€ pleni? oting’ Dni
auditores feaccarij 7 confilii diéi fup'mi dni firi Reg€ p ipius o* fie decla-
raéve otidentes 7 iura ac enidencias diforit abbatt 7 puét? cora eis pdua: -
Audientes eoft dim Abbem 7 cOuentii ad recipient h°mo' ofauii denarii
calihs finis feu findcie jtinis infticiarie tenendi inf dm vieccoit* veri
ius habuiffe 7 here ac ipos i poffeflione recepédis p*diéi oftaui denarij
fuifle 7 &e fufficiétib; documét jnueneF Et id de vnii pfenfu 7 madato
dnoy anditora 7 cdfilij rege vine voet oraculo dno Johi de Scheves clerico
Rotulori 7 Regift' p'fati dni firi reg? ac Alexand’ narfi de fandfurde
defup faéto ad mifa feaccarij ofedentibs auditorib; cit aliis deputat€ p ora 7
organa eorad iidem dni Auditores feacearij 7 cofilij rege vice 7 nomie ipoy
pmulgari 7 declarari feceriit Nobiliq, viro dno RoBto de lewingfton de



--- Dunfermline_page363.png ---
4263,

REG. JAC. 11.) DUNFERMELYN. sil

Driiry militi vicecdit? de fyffe tie finti noie q’tup® dederat in madatt

bie

q‘ten? di&€ dnis abbi 7 puétui de o&auo denario cuirlib; tinis feu fin:

jtittis iufticiarie inf* vieccditat’ de fyfte 7 fothryffe a die int’it? fui in

officit: viecE p*déi ufg, ad diz confeeédis fntt inftru® tenti 7 futtis thibs
tenendi prompte Fnderet parer3 7 itender3 ci efféu fine obftaculo feu
p%dGe aliq*li sup quibz oMib; 7 fingulis p*fat? diis abbas a me n“rio pu®’ -
fibi fieri petiit Pus publict inttriithi - Ata fueFt hee in domo feacearij
fup'mi dni fri regf tenti inf* burg de lynlythq” - fub ano indicée die
mete 7 potificatu quibs fup* / pntibs ibidé déo dno roberto de lewingtton
vicecde Johe quhytfoul magro Dauid bell no*rio pu® - jotie de futhes 7
vittmo de ftapilgortout feutifere ci Milt€ aliis teftibs ad ptmiffa vocatt
fpecit 7 Rogatt -

fupfe'ped no*rij
Et ego Dauid kay petbie fan&i andse dioé
lari? ac vicari? ppetu? ecctie pochiat de kingour p‘mifl) omib; 7
fingut dum fie agent? intfui 7 b° Pns publici inftriiti manu pp'a
fe'ptir rogat? t“didi fignog, 7 nomie meis folitf et confuet? fignaui
in fidem 7 teftimo” - veritat€ omit et finguloy p'miffoy -

in inre candico bachu-

Lia declaraédis fup poffeffione o&aui denarij de fyffe dat? 7 coneefla p
‘obi fecundii 7 eius confilium ad inftacia Ricardi bothvell tiie

Regé
abbate -

Jacob; dei gfa Rex feotori jufticiario vicecomiti 7 battis fais de fytle qui
p tempe fuerint faluté Sciat q p infpcdem cartarti quas religiofi viri
Abbas 7 cduét? mo*fterij de Difmlyi habét de p'decefforih; noft's Regibs
feocie cuident compim? q d@i religiofi temporib3 p‘deceflort trorti: Regi
feocie plenarie peipe ofueucrit octaud pté luc'rii 7 finid ad regia maiettaté
{p'tantia 7 ipis téporib; cdtingentii infra vicecomitatii de fyfle pdém
Quare vobis midam? 7 firmit p‘cipim? quaten? déos religiofos 7 eorit
fueceffores de ofaua pte luc’ri 7 finii p*déorii plenarie defuiri faciatt -
Dat? fub iro magno sigillo apud edinburgh decimo die menf - o&obr¢ -


--- Dunfermline_page364.png ---
428.

312 REGISTRUM DE [sEc. xv.

Anno dni qillefimo quadringentefimo quad*gefimo nono Et regni noftri
. o.
decimo teio -

Litta exoneraddis de ppidde 7 fect p Pre de luferevyot 7 de dolare conceft
p rege Jacobum fecundi ad infticiam Ricardi Dothwell abbat¢ mo’ “ttij
de dif -

Jacobus dei gfa Rex feotorti Omibs probis hdinibs fuis ad quos pntes tre
puehint fatm Sciat¢ nos certt de cans aim ném ad h° mouétih; exottaffe 7
tenore Pntii p ppetuo exoneram? vettabilé in x° prem 7 Religiofos viros
dile&os oratores noftros abbem 7 puétii monafterij de Dif 7 eori fac-
ceffores ab omi ppidbe 7 feéta facienda vt geréda in curiis vicecomitatuil
frora de ffyffe at clakmanaii aut aliqua iparit race Prara de lufes vyot 7
de dolare di&¢ abbi 7 guétui {p'tantiii - Quare vicecomitibs firis de fyffe
7 clakmanaii 7 corti battis qui p tempe fuerint firmit inhibem? ne d&os
abbem 7 guétii feu cori fucceffores ad ppigoem feu fecta p'déam facienda
opellant ut cori aliquis ppellat feu prop? nd opiédem aut fedéta nd gefta
in di&€ curiis t aliqua illari ipos quouifmo” diftringant fub omi pena que
pete potit in hac pte - Dat fub magno figillo tro ap* edinburgh Deeimo
nono die menf februarij Anno dni qillefimo - quadringe™® - quadragefimo
nono 7 regni noftri decimo Peio -

Litta fup eod - ad replegiand fignat inhabitafi tras de lufereniot 7 Dolar
Ad regit? de Daf cdcefl p regé Jacobi feeiid ad inftatia di&- dni
Ricardi Abbate -

Jacobs dei gia rex feotori nil 7 fingut iutticiariis catilariis vicecomitibs
burgorii p‘pofit€ 7 eorit ballis aliisq, officiariis 7 leg€ miftris firis quibsciq.
fatm - Quia nob clare conftat tras 7 poflefliones monafterio de Dif
ptineii in plena 7 libera rega'* p reeolende memorie jiros pgenitores eid
monatterio fore cdceflas volentes ecid ut d@m monafterii fua regali® in



--- Dunfermline_page365.png ---
429),

REG. JAC. 11.) DUNFERMELYN. 313

plena lBtate gaudeat temporih; affuture - Vobis iutticiariis cailariis vieceo-
mitibs burgorii prepofit€ 7 cori ballis aliisq, officiariis 7 lege miftre P dite
preeipim? 7 madam? q*ten? tenentes inhabitaii 7 incolas q*richig, trart
7 fignan? trari de Dolare 7 lufe'viot p*fato monatterio de Dut {p*tait
ad curias Fras quafeiiq, arrettat - fen attachiatos - abiq ulla diflieultate
feu retenéde ad libertaté 7 p'uilegii regite preddi moftij relaxcte 7
reduci ac replegiari pmittatt fub oMi pena que compete potit in hae
pte - Dat» uh firo Sce‘to figillo apud edinburgh vicefimo quito die men?
februarij aa

+ Anno dni qille™ . quadringen™ - quadragefimo nono 7 Regni

noft* decimo quarto -

{nftramentum publicum de terris de Arlory -

In dei nomine Amen Per hoe pus pu - inftfm cuné&{ pateat manifefte
q anno ab inearnacde ciuflé millefimo quadringentefimo quiquagefimo
Indicéde deciatercia menfis vero Junij die fexto pont? {tiflimi in xpo
pris ac dni fri dni Nicholaij dina puiden* Ppe quiti anno q*rto Coram
reflendo in xpo pre ac dno / dno Witmo Efo Glafgueti ae nobli et
potenti dno Wittmo dno Crichtoi 7 cancellario Scocie 7 Nobilibus dnis
7 pfonis fubferiptt excellentiflimus princeps ac dis fir metuendiffimus
dis Jacobus feottori: Rex illuftriffimus ofies 7 finglas terras de Arlory
cum ptinveijs jacci inf vice de Kinros verabli in xpo fri ac dno dno
Ricardo de bothuel Abbti de Dunfmlyn iux“ tenorem 7 effectum carte
dicti excellentiffimi reg? ditto Abbti defup confeéte in pura 7 ppetuam
elimofina contulit 7 mortificanit / quas ecia terras Willitis eurour forft
ci omi jure 7 clameo 4. fibi My iHmo aut hedibus fais quociq, jure aut
titulo ptinuerit feu ptine potunt in futurum in vltimo confilio gettali
apud Perth tento cora tribus Regni ftatibns jbidé in magno numo congre-
gat p fuftem 7 baculum fia mera 7 fpontanea voluntate furfum reddidit
pureq, fimpliciter refignanit / Super quibz omnibs 7 finglis Pdiéus verta-
blis in xfo pr Abbas a me no“rio pu® - fibi pu’. vel pu - petiit fieri
inflm vel inftru . Act fueft hee apud caftrum de Strivelyn in magna
2R


--- Dunfermline_page366.png ---
314 REGISTRUM DE [sEc. xv

catia afifati excellentiffimi reg€ hora quafi vndecima ante merediem -
Pittibus abdéis retlendo in xpo fre ac dno dno Wito Epo Glafgueii ac
nobli 7 potenti dno WiHmo dno Crichtofi cancellario Seocie et honora
bilibs viris dno Wittmo monypenny de eodé dno Jofe carlele militib;
verlabilihs 7 cireumfpe&e viris magro Johe Arois glafgueii archi” - magro
Georg fchorifwood recore de cultre dno niniano fpot eapellano - Roberto
ot 7 Roberto coxwele ci multe alijs ad pmiffa

napare © Roberto her
voeatt {Paliter 7 rogatis -

Et ego Willis blare clicus glafgucii dyot pute? antoritate jinpiali no‘ri?
pmitl! omibs et finSlis dum fie vt Pmittitur fierét drent® 7 agent? - vna ct
Pnoiaté teftibs fs ptonaliter intfui ea fic fieri vidi feiut 7 audiui 7 in
nota fnfeepi Ideoq, hoe Pus pu inftFm pp'a mann fe"pfi 7 ht me fubfe'pfi
figniiq, mei ofuetii no“riat? offic) appotii rogat? 7 req‘fitus in fidem 7
tefti6m veritat@ om 7 finglorum pmifforum -

Scocie de terris de Arlori conceflis

Copia carte Jacobi fecundi regis
Ricardo Abbati de Dunfermlyn pro una capellania fundanda in ec
mo“fleriali de Dunfermlyn -

Jacobus dei gfa rex Scottorum Omnibus phis hominibus tocius terre fie
clericis 7 laicis falutem - Quia Willffis currout forftat omnes 7 finglas
terras de Arlory ci ptinécijs jacentes infra vieecomitatum de Kinroffe in
manus firas in firo vitimo confilio genali apud perth tento Anno fubferipto
cord tribus regni firi ftatibus fua mera 7 fpontanea voluntate p futtem 7
haeculum pfonalit furfum reddidit pureq, fimpliciter refignauit , Et eum
non minus falubre ct meritoriii apud deum q® landatle 7 Belarii apud
homines exiflit vt indubitanter credimus virorii religioforum deuota ftudia
ac ppofita fancéa regali munificencia ad finem dedube clementer poptatum
Et ex relage vencrabilis in xPo fris Ricardi Abbis mo*tterij de Dunferm-
lyn intellexim? g ad augmentaédem dini cultus 7 feruicij vni capellaniam
infra cectiam dicti mo“ftij deo dnce fundare pponit « Nos attendeii jnnio-



--- Dunfermline_page367.png ---
REG. FAC. UL] DUNFERMELYN. B15

lablem ipius deuoédis 7 fidei finceritatem qua erga nos indefinent’ nofeitur
huifle - Confiderantes eeifi onera expentarum que ad nfm honorem clare
is grata 7 accepta feruicia que ipm Tauda-

fubiiffe pbatur Neenon alia
biliter haétenus nobis exhibuifle cognofeimus 7 indefeffe ad pns exhibere
fentimus ae exhibiturt p firmo credimus in futurum Et p falute anime
re ac Cariflime confortis fire dne marie Regine 7 animarii anteceflornm
7 fuceeflorii firoram regi Seocie dedimus 7 conceflimus ae fntis carte
tenore damns 7 concedimms deo et beate "Margarete Regine prefatoq,
vellabli in xo pri ricardo Abbti de Dunfmlyn ad fupplementum funda-
Gdis dée capellanie vt pmittitur per ipm Abbem fundande offies et finglas
fupdigas tas de Arlory cum ptinéeijs de quibus Pris ptatus Abbas vni
vfualis monete regni fri ad termios
de Arlory cum

anni redditum quatuor marearii
confuetos retroaét tempib3 lenanit 7 peepit / quas t
ptinécijs Regalitati de Dunfermlyn incorpam? aneétimus 7 vnimus Tenend
7 hnd ofties 7 finglas pfatas terras de Atlory efi ptinéeijs dais Abbi et
capellano p ifm infeodando in pfato mo {tio 7 7 ipius capellani fucceffori-
bus in liberam puram 7 ppetua elemofina 7 ‘ad mant mortua jn bofet’
ijs femitis aquis ftagnis pratis pafeuis et pafturis

planis moris marrefiis
molendinis multuris 7 eort fequelis aucupaconibus venaconib; pifeacdibus
petariis turbariis carbonarijs lapide et calce fabrilibus bracinis bruerijs et
geneft¢ bludewet@ hervhelde 7 Mehet@ mulierii 7 et omoditatihs in Pris
et in aquis 7 aquaria decurfibus et libero introitu et exitu curijs 7 cari
exitibus Ac ei omibs alijs et finglis libertatibus cémoditatib; 7 afiamétt
ae jutte ptinéeijs fuis quibutcumg, tam nd nominate q* noiate ‘ad pfatas
Tras en ptinéeijs fpecantibs fen jufte ipetare valentibns in futur Et
adeo libere quiete plenarie integre honorifice bene 7 in pace ab oni
exaedde ferniciog, ftlari fieut dicti mo* fii Abbas 7 conuétus aliquas tras
{ melius liberins quiecius 7 honorificencius retroaét temporih; tenu-
erit feu poflederiit - faciendo inde annuatim déi Abbas 7 capellanus
isq, antecefforibus 7 fuceelloribus oFonii
m Puti carte Hre magni sigilli ném

Dfatus qui p tempe fit p nobis Br
fuffragia denotarti In eui? rei teft
apponi peipimus - Teftibus Retiendo in xfo pre Wittmo Efo Glafguet

Witmo dno Crichtoi firo cancellario 7 plang'neo pdilecto - Cariffimo



--- Dunfermline_page368.png ---
431,

316 REGISTRUM DE [sec. xv.

confang’neo jiro Witmo comité de Douglas et de Anadale dno galw\die
vertabli in xpo pre Andrea abbate de melros iro ofelfore 7 thefaurario
dileétis ofang'neis fris patricio dno glammis magro hofpicij tiri Andrea
dno le gray magris Johe Arous Archidiacono glafgueii 7 Georgeo Schorif-
wode Reéore de Cultre apud Strineline feptimo die métfis junij Auno dni
millefimo quadringentefimo quiquagefimo - Et regni firi decimo q"rto -

Copia reniiciacionis ; clamei dni de Letly de terris de Balharde -

Vniuerfis fanée iiris eectie filijs ad quori noticias fntes tre puenint
Georgius diis de lefly Slim in oim faluatore Nowite me nup ex affercione
quorada intellexiffe q nonnulli aitceffora meori dnori de fithkill Pras de
balbard ad Abbem 7 guentii mo*fterij de Dunfmlyn nite pprie ptinétes a
di&e Abbe 7 puétu p vno certo Anno redditu ei homagio 7 feruicio p
aliquod tempus in feodo 7 hereditate hucrit et poflederiit . Set quia bone
memorie Georgins de Lefly miles meus Auus 7 Normanus de Lefly meus
pater quoda dni de flithkill exilitaté d

homagia 7 feruicia dicig, anuii redditii_p

ri de Balbarde ae ditta

le confiderantes 7 q modici
feu null omodi ex di&e terris hre potant | ipas integvaliter refutantes

poffeffioné ipara feu ingreflum  poffeffionis pete nolentes ipis digis Abbati
7 guentui realiter 7 cum efftu dimiferat fie q ia didi Abbas 7 puentus

ipas preferipéde longiflimi tempori

A FON lpn iar =
canonice ac legitie ple'pferiit ac ipas
inconeufle ac fine aliqna interrapéde hneutg, poflederit  Quare vettigia
digtori quoda Aui ae }

is mei in hac parte volens imitare toti iu
clamet q dicti aiieeffores feu pgenitores mei q'ciq, tempe hueriit feu
aliquis coy hucufq, huit in vel ad didtas terras quociiq, titulo neend q'd
heo feu fre in futurum quoq’modo poto aut hui feu aliqi dicebam me
here vel aliq's hedii feu fucceffori aiiceffori feu pgenitort meora p me
edibs 7 fuccefforih; meis neenon p hedibns 7 {necefforibus aiiceflora feu
pgenitori meoy pntib; 7 futur¢ quibufcumgq, fine aliquo retineméto 7
reelamaéde reniicio 7 déas tras ett pt in manibs venablis in xpo pris ac
dni ricardi Abbatt dle Dunfmlyn p fntes re’

no 7 furfum reddo fine


--- Dunfermline_page369.png ---
REG. JAC. U1. ] DUNFERMELYN. BIT

aliqna inquictacde ot*dieccde 7 clameo meo vel alicui? hedum ant fuccet}

i vel pgenitorii meori quoriciq, ippetuii Ad
. a) Py : 7 7 ~
predi&a vero fideliter ac ppetualit obferuanda obligo me hedes et fuceet-

fori meorii fen aiiceffo

fores meos fntes 7 futuros neend hedes 7 fucecflores dictori aiiceffora
7 pgenitori meort quofeumg, p fide mea qua in manu disti dni A bbtis
dedi ac p fae*mentum corpale qd cori code fponte Pftiti q nee ego uce
aliquis hedit vel sneceffort meori pntiii 7 futurori nee cei aliquis
hedum aiicefforii feu pgenitorit meorii q*riiciiq, cont hic mea reniicia-
cioné 7 relig"G@em aliquo tempe p nos feu aliqué nfm aut int pofitam
pfona q’eumq, jure clameo feu titulo veniemus Qi fi in aliquo tempore
otingat q abfit me feu aliqué hedum aut fueceflora meorh pntid 7
futurora vel aliqné hedum aut facceffori aiiceffori aut pgenitora meort
quortieumg, ot" premiffa mea reniiciacionem ant refignaédem feu quiete-
clamagdem venire feu contradite quocigq, titulo feu jur

vel tras quaf-
cum, fen brenia a capella dui reg feu Abbate de Dunfmly in futurit
pete feu pet re aut lité feu queftioné cori quocumg, judice fup di t
vel ptindeijs Pfatis Abbati et guentui motte aut fate aut cori fuecefforibs
obligo me hedes 7 fucceffores meos quofvumq, neend hedes et fuccetfores

aiieefforii ac pgenitori: meortt 7 eori quélibet qui hoe attéptare ptipierit
ad foluédum dueentas libras vfualis moncte regni Scocie fabrice eectie de

Dunfmlyn noie pene afiqua in aliq’ judicio fup dictis terris audiatur 7 ad
hoe gpellendii fore p Epm Séi andé fen cius officialem qui pro tempe
fuint fine aliqua exeep@e feu remedio juris candiei aut cini

bs tris impetrat 7 impetrandis ecia regie phibiddi 7 omib; a
que ifta reniiciacioné feu refig*@em vel quic teclamagoné nnon Pdice
pene folucdem potunt quouifin’ - iunpedire Cetum oftia 7 fingla inftru®
eartas 7 tras que 7 q

$ Reniieiando

ecia oii

as de dittis tr

s aiiecflores mei vel aliquis coridé
aliqno tempe hnerit feu ad fins heo vel acquirere poto pfatis Abbati 7
ouctni p me 7 hedibus 7 fuceefloribs meis quibufeumq, necnon p hhedibs
7 fuecefloribs aiiceflori 7 pgenitorii meort refigno 7 ipa inftru® . cartas
et tras dictis Abbati 7 puentui indilate me reddituri obligo p pntes et i
pmnitto ac omi Juri q’d nobis feu alicui nfm ex eifdé petit feu opete
quonifmodo pot) it expile reniicio ac quictii clamo imppetuii Ita q fi ptingat



--- Dunfermline_page370.png ---
318 REGISTRUM DE [SEC. Xv.

aliqua inftru®- fen eartas aut tras huidi cum aliquo inueniri ipofterit: nnlli
Jus m' hedibus feu fuccefforibus meis feu hedib3 aut fuecefloribus aficef:
forum 7 pgenitori’ meori ex illis feu aliquo aut aliqua iport vel iparnm
nobis feu alicui nfm vendicare poffum? {3 tang” falla 7 falfas reniiciata 7
reniiciatas cancellata 7 cancellatas ab omiihg heantur nee aliqua fides eis feu
alicui iport aut iparnm in judicio feu extra ab aliquo adhibeatur - In quorti
oim 7 finglorum fidem 7 teftidm Pmiffori Sigillam med Pntibs eft appen-
fum apud Dunfmlyn feeunda die mf Septéb's Anno dni millefimo
quadringentefimo quinquagefimo hijs teftibus Bno Danid de boyis vieario
de Cleft Johe de bothuell Dauid Wey? burgenfib; de Dunfinl¥ Johanne
tho® 7 Jolie lindiffay de lundo¥ ac Johanne hill elerico -

Uacacd burgi de Kyrkaldy -

Hee indentura féa apd ditermlyn vi
® cece’ quiquagefimo in? verlatiles in x° fires ac do™ Ricard pmiffide dia
Abbe; mo fei de Difmlyn ct eiuft loc} puétii ex yna 7 ballinos ac
editaté burgi de kyrealdy ptibus ex alta - in fe pportat 7 teftatur q déj
diis abbs 7 ouent? ex vnaimj conti" 7 aff" ocefferiit locanett 7 ad feodo-
firma dimite?t di&e balliuis 7 eitat] 7 coy fuceefforib; imppetui burgit
illoy de Kyrealdy ac porti: ciutt ofiisq, firmas burgales digj burgj ei puis
cufiumis 7 theoloncis ftallagiis ci curiis 7 eayd exitibg / nnd ci cdi
paftura in mora de kyrealdy ac cetis infte ptineti quibufciq, adeo liBe in

efimo die men Januarij Ano do'

oimibs 7 p dia fie! burgenfes burgj de difmlyn dém burgii feu aq’ burgeii
faj a'gué burgii de ditis dno abbe 7 puétu ad feodiftma tenét habét t
poflidét - Saluis ditis dno abbj 7 ouétuj eoyq, fucceffo® imppet - tre
burgagiis in dito burgo de kyrealdy fic hit¢ 7 p eoft poffel? ac % luc*te
lue‘ndt g’¢q, iur€ titulo - Itinihs jufticiarie / Cafflarie / anuis reditibs
peidihs de dite tris 7 burgagiis digj burgi eifd do® abbj 7 ouétuj debitt

at

ac correcdde ballinoy dig} burg} y’eiés otigit eos at coy a’qué in iure feu
Ae Pye ye - ae 9) - pa

in iuftitia Miftrada fiue exeqnéda delingre at defiGe / nnd molendinis 7
fituagdibs molendinoy q‘rieiq, - yna ed carbonaria ac falinis ia exiften


--- Dunfermline_page371.png ---
REG. JAC. 11] DUNFERMELY 319

fituaédibsq, falinay vbitq, infra limites 7 liBtat® did} burg ‘gj fedm q eis
magt videbit® expedire - p q'bus q'd tapi? geet didi balliui 7 editas coyq,
fucceflores imppt folutt dnuati pfatt dno abbj 7 pustuj eoyq, fuecetli”
imppet < tres f 7 iiij d vfualis monete regt feo". ad duos anj emios
otuetos piticoft> 7 1%} martinj in yeme p eq‘les pédes / Et fi otingat digos
ballinos 7 cditate ac coy fuceeflores in ay tpe in foluéGe dige fame in
alg? pet ptoy tmioy in pte t in toto de five q abfit obligarat fe faosq,
fuccetiores imppet - dia bo" coy cdia - q'bz p pte t p toto nd fufficiétibs -
Sia bo“ eoy {alia mobilia 7 imobilia ac coy pofletlides - ad volitaté
digoy abbis 7 onétus eoyq, fuecefloy fore namida capienda 7 diftringéda
do® fuit eis de diga fiima dapnisq, 7 expeii fi que t quas pfati abbs +
puent? eo, fucceflores fuftinuerit t fecerit oceafide tate folucdis in
aly? Pmioy Plelptoy vt pmntit? ué fe plenarie 7 intig® eifit fatiffacti - In
q’y om 7 finGloy fid 7 teft” Pmiffoy ptj hui? indenture penes ditos abbex
7 putt remanétj Sigilla cde dit} burg] de Kyrealdy ¢ appenfi — pt} vero
remanetj cit Pdidis halliuis 7 cditate Sigilla ede capitulj mo“t'ij de Dit
fimilit eft appentum - die loco 7 anno fup*fe'pte 7é -

Neat, ~ ten ¢
Copia bulle de c6medendo butirai ipetrat p Rettend patrem Jacobum
epm Séi and? -

Nicholaus efus fernus feruoy Dei ad futura rei memoria Et fi ciittoy
vott honefta petentiti ex inid&o nob defup applice feruitutt officio benignii
ipeiamur affenfi jlla et nobis plertim 7 tedi apliee deuott pfonis libenter
gaudemus concede que eay credim? indemnitatib; veref‘iliter pfutura
Cum vtiq, fi® vetlabilis frater ir Jacobs efius Sti and¥ ap’ digam fedé
ptonaliter oftitutus nobis nup expotie curauit in fuis eitate 7 dioé {ti
and oliuay olei liquor quo eay incole 7 hitatorie ac in eifd mora trahei
p tempe cdmode vefei poflint aliquats non exerefeat nee ihidé n* aliide
ad citaté 7 diog eaftt afferat® 7 ef tie ci femp inibi in caro foro Ge ofuenit
comode haber non poflit 7 ppea butiri 7 alioy laéicinioy de quibs in
ipis citate 7 diot ac ef partib; circiuicinis vbertas habetur largiflua et


--- Dunfermline_page372.png ---
320 REGISTRUM DE [sEc. xv.

admod copiofa vfus 7 efus incot hitatoriby 7 alijs Bdéis fore nofeant® - q*
ptrimii oportuni / p pte ipi? epi qui vt accepimus clare méorie Jacobi
Seotoy Regt vitimo viam vnitlfe carnis ingrefli nepos extetit / quig, cariffTo
in x° filio iro Jacobo modno Scotoy Regi illuftri {edo confanguite gradu
gii&us exiftit nob fait hail? fupplicati: vt puidere fup hijs patna deli-
Gncia euraremus | Nos igit* ad ea / que incolay 7 alioy Bdéoy, omoditaté
fap hijs refpite dinofeat? . vt eo potiffie fedi memorate deuodbres - fe
exhibeant q’ fe amplius nowint illius vbertate foueri fauorabiliter intendeh
huidi ipius epi fupplicacdibs inclinati incot hitatoribs 7 cdmorantibs pdi&e
vnius 7 finglis vtrinfy, fexus fntib; pit 7 futuris q ipi 7 coy fingli qua-
dragefia 7 alijs dieb3 quibufcumq, quib3 efus carniii p ecctam feu ats
phibitus exiftit de confuctudine vel de jure butiro 7 alijs lacticinijs e&
aby, cuiufeiiq, oftie feruplo ita et q id eis ad culpa nequiat Iputari et
cuiuteiig, licen® fup hoe minime requifita p fue libito voluntate vefci
libere 7 licite valeant quibufluis aplic€ necnd forsan in puicialibs 7 fyno-
dalibs edi&e oftituédibs 7 ordinacdih; cetisq, contrarijs nequag* obftaii
auto" - aplica tenore fin

de fPali gia licenciam elargimur fntib3 ppe”
duratur€ + Nulli g oMino hoim liceat hane pagina fire gceffidis infringere
vel ei aufu temerario otraire Siquis auté hoe attemptare Pfumpterit
indig* Gem oiipotentt dei 7 btoy petri 7 pauli aploy eius fe nouit ineur-
furti - Dat Rome ap’ Sém petri Anno inearnagdis dice m™ - cccc™ -
quiq*gefio nono kt marcij / Pontificat? ri Anno quarto - 7@t -

Confirmacio regis Jacobi feeundi omnium terrarum de Dunfermlyn in
{ali et maiori forma -

. Jacobus dei gracia Rex Scottorum Omnibus probis hominib3 tocius terre

tue clericis 7 laicis falutem Licet eni cun&oy in Regno firo fub Rreglari
habitu degentiii quicti 7 tranquillitati folerter inten@e teneamur cum
illud exigat regalis excellencie denota fublimitas 7 exemie caritatis
depotcat affectus potiffime ftabilitati 7 paci monafterij firi de Dunfermlyn
folita puidencia {pecialius 7 vigilancius puidere debeamus eo q aditimus


--- Dunfermline_page373.png ---
REG. Jac. tt.) DUNPFERMELYN. 321

q‘ntus fit locus ille precipna vencrace a nobis non iity colendus in quo
¢ gloriofiffie fire pgenitrict’

non tant facratiffima pignora clariffime 4

beate margarite Regine venerabiliter requicfeunt verti ccia q* plurima

corpa pgenitorii firey regum Seotori inibi decentiffime fant fepulta Et
ideireo non imito exeitamnr cirea ea profecucde folicita p que ditto
mo“fterio ferene pacis tranquillitas 7 amplectende pueniat quietis liber-

i turbaé

tas ne qnariiuis tluctuan e aliquais in poftri: vexetur quod

plenis defideramus affeétibs ate folida letari Vnde
vt affectus tir huidi_pdeat in publicum Seiatis nos approbaffe ratificafle 7

rifice fiatus profp

hac Pnti carta fira confirmafle oiies 7 finglas conceffiones donaédes incor-

pacbes annexiones exoneragdnes declaraciones ; Renouaciones contraétus

ae dia 7 fingla infrafferipta diéto mo“fterio de Danfermlyne ac Abbati 7

ouentui eiufdé et cort fuceetioribus fact> 7 gceli! jn p'mis videlicet Dona
Regis Malcolmi primi ct Regine eiufle beate Margarite dona fubfequetia
Pponendo hee feilies Parey Blaklaw Petbachly . Petcorthy Petlyt
Bolg} Schira de Nirealdy Tnfletk minoré Dona Duneani Regt’ duos
villas noie lufkit Dona Ndgari Reg@ fehira de Gellalde / Dona Ethelvedi
Halis Dona AleX Reg@ ptmi Prumroffe Schiram de Gaytmilk cum
ptinci, Dona Sibille Regine Beth Dona excellentiffimi Rege Dauid
p'mi Dunfermlyn eit” aqua in: qua mo‘ftium fituatur Kingorii que
propinquior é Dunf: - cum fuis appendicijs  ffode Intiefk maioré 7 molen-

dint ac pifcina 7 Carbarrin ac ecctiam de Invefk 7 Wemoth cum fais

rectis diuifis ac fothr€ inx* Sém and ecia eum fui
Sehiram de Nethbrin cum fais appendicijs Balbard 7 Baleriftin ct tu

reais diuifis  vni manfura in Berwik . aliam in Roxburgh . tercia in

diuifis Petyhochir 7

tam in Streue-
+ in eadé villa duas eetias 7 vna carueata terre que adjacet ecctie

Hadingtoi Quarta in Edinburgh quinta in lithgw 5

lin
de Strencling que nie voeatur Southfelde 7 Gem decima dominioy troy

7

in fruéibs 7 alalibs ac in pifeibus 7 ecia in denarijs 7 manfiones rog

prefbiti vnii rete 7 dimidii + v n burgo de Perth 7 ec
eintd ac capella de Cattello et vna manfioné que ptinet di&e ectie
odauad pte de omnib; placitt et lucris de fytfe 7 de fothrik 7 vt heant
Abbas 7 mo“chi didi mo“fterij in forefta de Clakmanane omia neceflaria
28

a mantion

a



--- Dunfermline_page374.png ---
599 REGISTRUM DE

ad igné 7 ad edificia fua 7 hoim fuoy ae ecia de Selchis que ad King
rene poftg® decimati ‘fuerint oimes feptios heant 7 in Berwico tractatii
de Aldftell 7 oie q@ infte ci ptinet nec aliquod nami eapiatur fup terra
vel fop bomines di&ti mo*fterij pro foriff@o alicuius nifi pro pp'o foriffacto
ilori 7 q iufte reddantur diéo mo*fterio ofes fai Cumirlauch cum tota
peettiia fua vbicumq, inueniantur 7 vt heant omes homies fuos ci omi
peciia eori in cuiufeumg, terra fuerint qui fuertt in terris fuis die qua
fucrint oblati 7 vt di&i Abbas 7 conuentus Deant p toti Regn Scocie
tholoneum quietii de cunéis Rebus quas mareati fuerint ad pp'a eort
neceflaria 7 vt heant paflagiti 7 naut de Intkethin 7 quad pifeatura apud
Perth libere et quiete Dona Regis Maleolmi {@di Mattirtone cum tuis
re dinifis 7 vigint tria inga terre 7 quod a

pratum prope Dunfermlyn
Et quodeumq, eete ex pte Seocie applicttit vel capti fuit tott capud
preter linguam eid@ mo*“fterio remancat et dimidietatd tocius fanguinis
oim cetud que eapiuntur inter forth et Tay ad Iuiaria cora altaribus ecctie
de Dunfermlyn 7 q omes homines eoradé fint liberi ab citi opacoe pontii
+ eattellori: 7 oim aliori opum Et ecctiam Sde t'nitatis de Dunkeldeii ci
terris ad illam ptinétibus 7 cum alijs rectis ptinencijs fuis Et vnii toftum
in Edinburgh quod Robertus de lundonijs huit | Et vnii plenariii tofti et
crofta in villa de Clakmanaii Ex dono vero Regf Wittmi redditti centii
folidoy de firma burgi de Edinburgh quos dedit in die exequiari fratris
fui Regt malcolmi ac viginti acras Tre Dona vero Regt Alex f&di feiram
de Dola¥ p fuas reas dinifas in liberam foreftam ac terras de Gatk » 7

7
terras de Smetot iux* mufkilburgh ac terras de Bethwaldefe 7 de Beth
oeciden" | de dono vero Regt Roberti primi le feryfelde iux* Infikethin
ei pt Coketam ci noua mag" cuftia ta de burgt de Dunfmlyn, Kir-

caldy Mufkilburgh 7 Paflagio Regie q*

de omibus tr€ fuis alijs infra
Reena feocie quibufetiq, . neenon quiq, mareas ftlingora Anuatiin peipi-
endas de firmis burgi de Indkethin p manus ballioy déi burgi Et oitia
auté ficut Buoiata fant que a bonis pgenitoribus firis Rege malcolmo 7
Regina tta margareta Duncano Rege Edgaro Rege Ethelredo fie cius
Alex’ Rege Sibilla Regina Dauid Rege Malcolmo Rege / Wittmo Rege
et Roberto Rege ecctie 7 mo*“fierio f%e t'nitat? ac beatiffime margarite


--- Dunfermline_page375.png ---
1] ~  DUNPFERMELYN.

Regine de Dunfily data concefla unt 7 ofirmata fieut in autentict cori
fe'ptt otinetur ch omi illa plonitudine 7 integritate pdiét cectic ac
mo“tterio Abbati - fiibus ibid® deo feruientibs 7 in poftri: feruituris
ocedimus “7 ippetuai integra 7 illibata oferuanda confirmamus Et vt in

vélis Tre maiettat€ noue gre fructii fe gaudeat inuenifle terras de Ardlory
et effemus minor anis Venabli

cunt pt* jacent> infra vid de Winrofl) qua
in x" Pri Ricardo Abbati prefati_ mo"fterij ad fundanda,
diga cectia liberaliter coneeffimus 7 donauinms ac ccii de nouo p putes

geedimus eid 7 donamus illasq, incorpauim? 7 anexuimus prout tenore

@ capellania in

putinn incorpamus 7 dneétimus Regalitati didi mo*tterij p ppetuo ac
exonagne compiddis + teéte faciende 7 gerende in cur
fivortii de fyfle 7 Clakmanaii racione ferrari: tuarii de Luferenyoth 7 de
Dola¥ neend declaragoem qua p déis Abbte 7 mo"fterio fup percep
ottaui denarij lucroy jiroy de fyi’ 7 de ffothrik ac e% renouagdein tup
inhitantit’ déas tc

vicecditatuh

nanter ras de

replegiaébe holm regalitate fue 7 fi

e oO
urioy cantariori: viecc?

Lutereuioth 7 de Dolat a eurijs iuftic’ i Ppditorii

ballior® 7 officiarioy qucriiciiq, puide fecim? quas quid oceffioné donacdei

incorpacdem Anexioné exonagdem declaragdem ac renouacm prout in

tris fvis antentie? figillo firo figillatt in Sibs 7 finGlis punéis 7 artic
fuis de {Pali munificencia ferenitat¢ tire 7 ex fra certa feiencia p nobis 7
fuccefloribus Airis p ppetuo renouam? approbainus ratificamus ac liberalite
confirmam? ae eeii ditto mo‘Rerio in forma 7 effeétu in quibs cas ats

oceflimus ac dedimus fimitr de novo dito mo“fterio p Pntes geedimus >

io

donamus neenon puide eas ac tras fuper donacione earid dicto monatt
confeetas valere volum? ac fi in die date pntium concefle date fen fate p
nos fuiffent non obftantibus reuocagdibs quibufcumq, p nos in antea fret
- prefatas Tras donacbes ae concefliones ppetuis futuris tempibs in forma
+ effectu: quibus eas oceflim? dito mo“fterio illibatas confernari volume?
= peipins p putes Infup contractii init’ inter d@os Abbtem 7 puentii ac
ppditum battios + pitaté burgi fri de Pth fup ppetuis reedificacde futten-
tade repatde 7 inuée ornamétor ie burgi
piicti neend obligagm déoy Ppditoy eordq, fucceffori imppetud ofeta

et veftimentoy chori e

figillata refignagomq, teu reniiciagom féam_ p

fiillog, ci dei bu


--- Dunfermline_page376.png ---
B24 REGISTRUM DE [see. xv.

Georgei dim le lefly de terris de Balbarde in maihg di&i Abbatt cartd

nde confect

dni fupioy put in tris refig*ébis feu reniiciacdis huidi ex
pleni? otinetur p nots hedibus et fuecefforibs iris approbam? ratifieam® 7
pro ppetuo pfirmamus Tenend 7 hnd oia 7 fingla fupradé:
ae Abbati et conuétui einfd 7 eoy fucceffor

dto mo“ftio

3 pro ppetuo adeo libere

quicte plenarie integre honorifiee bene 7 in pace cum omnibs 7 fing
libertatibg pmoditatibs afiamét? ac jufte ptinécijs fuis quibufeumg, fieut
carte tre muniméta 7 euidencie fup pmifi! confec~ pleni? pportat 7 teftant-

ur Tn cui? rei teftidm pnti carte fire magni Si
F 9 _—-
mus Teftibus Retcado in xpo 7

li ném apponi peepi-
re Witmo Efto glafgueii Wittmo dno
‘vat ~ A " Oye ag ca

Creichtoune firo eancellario 7 confaug*neo pdiléo venabli in x° pre Andrea

abbate de melros firo confeflore 7 thefaurario dile&€ confang'neis iris
Withno dno foftvile » Patricio Dno Glamyjs Mag
diacono glafguefi 7 Georgeo de fehorifwode reéore de Cultre apud Edin-
burgh vieefimo f@do die menfis mareij Anno dni millefio qnadringentefimo

Johanne arous archi-
quiquagefimo Et Regni firi decimo quinto -

Carta Johannis thane et Alexandri thane filij diéti Johis de annuo redditu
quing, marearum de ferihill -

Omnib3 hane ecartam vifuris vel audituris Johannes thane de ffordalle 7

AleX thane filins didi Johannis falutem in domino fempiternam Noucritis
nos non vi aut metu duétos nee errore lapfos ant dolo cireumuétos fet fira

mera pura 7 fpontanea voluntate vtilitateq, tira vidiq, preuifa 7 penfata
dediffe coneeffifle vendidifle 7 titulo vendi@dis alienafle 7 hac pnti carta
fira confirmafle Neenon dare concede vendere alienare 7 hae pnti carta
iira confirmare Venerabili in x° pri Ricardo Adbti de Dunfermlyn ac fuis
affig’t€ quédam annnii reddit ném qniq, marcarti bene 7 vfualis monete
Scocie cxefitium annuati Jenandari ad duos anni termiuos vfuales, Pen-
theeoftes videlicet 7 fi firtini in hyeme p equales porédes de terris de
ffervhill cum ptinécijs iacentib; in Regalitate de Dunfl¥ infra vid - de

fofF pcerta fima pecunie nobis in fra cognita 7 vrgente neceffitate p



--- Dunfermline_page377.png ---
JAC TL] DUNFERMELYN.

di@i venerabilem in x’ prem P manibs gratanter 7 intigre ploluta 7 in
vfum nim totaliter ouerfa de qua fiumma peciie tenemus nos bene con-
tentos pacatos 7 ple*rie ptolutos 7 di¢tos ABbtem fuosq, aflig'tos quietos
inde clamamns imppetuii tenore pntis earte Tenend 7 hind dictum annui
redditum quing, mareart et ptt dito Abbti 7 fiis affigtt€ de duo fro
rege fuisq, heredibus 7 fuecefforibus in feodo 7 hereditate imppetud cum
ommibs 7 finglis libertatibs cOmoditatih; 7 afiament€ ac jul ptinceij
fuis qnibufeumq, ta uon nominate q* nominatf ad di&um anui redditi
quing, marearii efi pt f{pectantibus feu quouifmodo jufte {pectare valentibs
in futuraii Et adeo libere quicte plenarie intigre houorifice bene et in pace

ficut aliquis annuus redditus infra regnii Seocie cuieumq, p quéeuma,
liberius datur eoneeditur venditur ant alienatur feu dari coneedi vendi
aut alienari potit in futuri qualiteng, - Et nos vero dicti Johannes thane
7 AleX thane 7 heredes iiri di&tum annuii redditum quiq, mareart ei pt
adeo libere in omibs 7 p omiia vt Pdi eft dio Abbati eiufy, affigtt
contra offies mortales warandizabimus acquietabimus 7 pntis earte tenore
p ppetuo defendemus In cui? rei teftidm pnti carte fre Sigilla fra funt
appenfa apud Dunfiml¥ vieefimo quite die menfis maij Anno ‘dni millefine
quadringentefimo quinquagefimo pino Teftibs diferett viris Jacobo hacate
de Ochtirty# WiHtino de Kirealdy. Johanne Wricht 7 Dauid Wey ppotite
7 battis de Dunfinlyn Johanne de cup? + 7 Thoma de bra burgentibs de
Dunfermlyn -

ProcuratoriumJohannis thane de fordale et Alexandri thane filij di@ti Johanis
ad refignand annuwn redditum quing, marearnm de terris de flerihill -

JExcellentiffimo principi ae domino jiro metuendiffime domino Jacobo
regi Scottori jlluftriffimo fui humiles fubditi Johannes thane de ffordalle
+ AleX thane fili? di&i Johannis feipos eum oii fubiecCoe 7 famulatu
Sereniffime ac netuendiffie princeps ad refignand furfum reddend Ae
pro nobis 7 heredibus jiris pure 7 fimplieit quietumelamand jn manus
tre pelariflime magnificencie quéda annui redditum quiq, marearii: bone


--- Dunfermline_page378.png ---
137.

326 REGISTRUM DE (sec. XV

; viualis monete regni Scocie exetitium annuatim 7 lenand ad duos ai

i
terminos vinales Penthecott> videlicet 7 fancti martini in hveme p equales
porédes de terris de fferihill cum ptineneijs jacentib; in Regalitate de
Iyne infra vieecomitatum de fyi; qué annuii redditum de tra

Dunter

celfitudine tenemus in capite Nos di&i Johannes 7 AleX non vi aut metu
duéti nee errore lapfi aut dolo cireumuéti {3 fira mera pura 7 fpontanea
voluntate vtilitateq, ira vndiq, prenifa 7 penfata Honorabiles viros Alex-
andram nap de Philde ¥rorum compotori rotulatorem Jotiem de ffentoii
de codé» Magim Withm forma Jacobum fchaw 7 Johem qwhitioi 7 eori
quélibet oiunctim 7 diuifim jiros peuratores aétores 7 deputatos {pales
abtq, reuoeadbe quacumg, facimus con{tituimus 7 ordinamus tenore pntimn
trari Qué ecii annuti redditum quing, 1

rearti cum ptinencijs cum omni

jure 7 clameo que nobis aut nim alteri Hrisq, heredibz quoenmq, jure fen

titulo ptinet feu ptinere potit in futuri p nobis 7 heredibus firis in manus
Fre pelariffime excellencie furfum reddimus ac pare 7 fimpliciter refig-
namus irreuocabiliter p ppetuo p putes Ita q vob liceat de diéto amuo
redditu difpone ad tre libitum voluntatis Rati grath firmi 7 ftable tintes
7 hituri irreuceabiliter p ppetuo totum 7 quieq'd prediéti tri peuratores
oiunétim feu diuifim in refig"Ge Pmifla duxerint feu cori aliquis duit
faciend - In ecni? rei teftiom putib3 Sigilla fira appendi fecimus apud
Dunfmlyne aiidict fexto die menfis Junij Anno dni millefimo quadrin-
gentefimo quig*getTo pmo

lnfirumentum refignaédis annui redditus quing, mareart de frerihill -

In dei nomine Amen p hoe fns publicum jnftrumétum cunctis pateat
manifette q Anno ab jncarnaéde cinfdé millefimo quadringentefimo qui-
quagefimo pmo jndicée

<iiij’ 7 me’ Junij die x* - pont? {iffimi in
xpo Pris ae dni fri dni Nicholaj dina puiden* pape qniti anno quito In
fereniflimi principis 7 dni iiri metuendiffimi dni Jacobi regt Scottoy
jlluttriffimi 7 dnoy fubferiptora fntia ac cora me 7 fubferiptt teftibs
pfonaliter oftitut? lonorabilis vir Alexander nap de Philde peurator



--- Dunfermline_page379.png ---
RE

Jac. 1.) DUNFERMELYN. 327

legittim? Johannis thane 7 Alexandri thane vt p tras procuratorij 7

refig“Gdis iporii figillis figillatas pgameno feriptas

¢ rite 7 fufficienter
faétas cora diéto fuppremo dno fro rege alta 7 intelligibli voce plectas
quay tenor,inferius deferibitur clare apparuit pu® - Pntauit  p refig*eoe
facienda in manib3 dni fri reg euinft dnui redditus quiq, marcara viualis
moncte Scocie annuati didis Johanni 7 Alexandro thane de terris de fery-
hill ewm ptinGcijs iacentib; infra viecedi" de fyi debit virtute quart
trarii diétus AleX Nap procurator 7 procuratorio nomine dictort Jobis 7
Alexandri thane prefatum annuii reddit quiq, marearh ei ptinéeijs in
maibus didi fuppmi dni fri rege pure 7 fimpliciter vt moris eft refignanit
quibs padtis fuppmus diis fir rex dit Anut redditi quiq, marcay annuati
de prefatf terris vt Pmwnittitur debitara Vemabli in xpo patriac dno dno
Ricardo Abbati de Dunterml¢ne fedm tenoré 7 effectum earte dei dni fri
Regt diéto dno Ricardo defup conficiende dedit tradidit 7 deliberauit  trari
vero peuratorij ct relig” Gis puidart tenor de verbo in verbum fequitur
z eft talis Excellentiffimo principi 7@é + put in tra imediate Pecdente
[riz. V. 486.] Sup quibs omnibs y finglis dicus veniablis in xPo pater a me
no“rio publico infrate’pto fibi public petijt fieri inftrumétii - Act fuerit
hee in eaftro de Edinburgh hora quafi decia ante mercediem anno die mete
jndicGe 7 pontificatu fupius annotatt pntibs; Rettendis in x° Pribus ac
dnis dnis Wittmo 7 Johe glafguei 7 moranief ectiay epis magnifico +
potent dno dno Wito dno Creichtofi Regni Scocie eancellario venabli in
xpo fre ae dno dno Andrea Abbte de Melroffe fippmi dni fri Regt
confeflore 7 thefaurario magro Jacobo lindefay ppdito ectie collegiate
de L¥eloudane Patricio de Hepburne dno de Halis Bno W°- de
Cranttons de coriby milite Johe fotiuile filio 7 herede apparente Wittmi
ani fohluile. Roberto de ledale Wittmo de Achinlek magris georgio de
fehorifwode reétore de cultre Ricardo clapehame candieo abdone +
tno Johe ma notarijs publict cum multé alijs teftib; ad pmifla vocatt
{paliter 7 rogate -

Et Ego Thomas broii clerieus {Gi and¥ dyoé publieus autoritate

ap - notari? diari trari peuratorij 7 refig'Gbis Pntacdi Snfioni

et ple@ure ac pfati annui redditus quing, marcari de terris de


--- Dunfermline_page380.png ---
138.

328 REGISTRUM DE [see. Xv.

flerihill refig*@bi ac einfdé annui reddit? vt pfertur donagdi omibsq,
alijs 7 finglis dum vt fupra fierent dicerentur 7 agerentur vna cum
Pnominatis teftibus pns pfonaliter interfui cag fie dict 7 fiert vidi
zy audiui 7 in hae pubea formam manu ppria feriptam redegi
fignoq, meo folito 7 ofueto fignani rogatus et requifitus in fidem
7 teftimonium oim 7 finflori: Bmifforum -

Carta Regis Jacobi feeundi de digo annuo redditu quing, marearum de
fterihill -

Jacobus Dei gracia Rex Seottorum Omnibus probis hominibus tocius
terre fue clericis 7 laicis falutem Sciat? nos dediffe conceffiffe 7 hae pnti
carta Bra confirmaffe Veuerabili in xpo fri Ricardo Abbati de Dunferm-
Ivne viii annuti redditum quing, mareari: bone 7 vfualis monete Scocie
exeticil: annuatim 7 leuandarii ad duos ani terminos vinales Penthecott
videlicet 7 {Ci martini in hyeme per equales porédes de totis 7 integris
terris de feryhill cum ptineneijs jaceutibus in Regalitate de Dunfermlyne
infra vicecomitati de fyff © qui quid dnuus redditus quing, mareay cit
pertinécijs fuit Johannis thane 7 Alexandri thane hereditarie Et qué
Anut redditum dicti Johes 7 Alexander non vi aut metu ducti nee crrore
lapfi fet fua mera 7 fpontanea voluntate in manus firas p fiios peuratores
ad hoe legitie conftitutos per fufté 7 baculum cora fubteriptis teftibus
furfum reddiderunt —pureq, fimpliciter refignatt Ae totii jus 7 elamei
que in eodé Anuo vedditu et pt habueriit vel fre potueFt pro fe 7 here-
dibus tuis oMino quiet clamart ippetuum Tenéd 7 hnd di&i annui
redditum quing, marearii cum ptinécijs dicto Ricardo Abbati de Dunferm-
Kkne 7 fuis affigtt® de nobis heredibus 7 fuecefforibus tris in feodo 7
hereditate imppetu cum omnib3 7 finStis libertatibus coModitatibus +
afiamentt ac juftt ptindecijs fuis quibufeamq, tam non nominatt q" nomi-
natis ad diéi Gnui redditum ci ptiné fpe&antibs fen quouifmode
jutte {pectare valentibs in futuri Et adeo libere quiete plenarie intigre
honorifice bene 7 in pace fict Digi Johes 7 AleX aut fui Pdeceffores



--- Dunfermline_page381.png ---
439.

REG. JAC. 1] DUNFERMELYN. 320

dium anuii redditi quig, mareari et pt? de nobis aut predecefloribs tris
ante didta retig*bem nobis inde facta liberius tenueFt feu potfederant tn
eni? rei teftism pnti carte Tire magni Sigillum nim apponi preeipinns

Teftibus Retlendo in xPo fre Witme eo glafgueii Wittmo dno Crichtoi
is Alex? dno

firo Caneellario 7 ofang'neo Pailéo dil confang'’neis fi
montgomery Patricio duo glimys magris Johanne arous arehidiacono
glafgueii 7 Georgeo de fehorifwode rectore de Cultre apud Edinburgh
deejo die menfis Junij Anno dni millefimo quadringentefimo quinquage-

fimo primo - Et Regni firi decio quinto -
Inftruméti fafine date Ricardo Abbati de Dunfermlyn de diéto annuo
redditu quing, marearum de fferihil -

In dei nomine Amen p hoe pus put - inftru™ . vniuertis 7 tinglis fit
manifeftum q Anno dni millefimo quadringentefimo quiquagefimo p'me

die vero mentis Junij xij" IndieGde decia q‘rta Pontiticatus {Giffimi in
xpo Pris ae dni fri dni Nyeholaij dina puideneia ppe quiti anno qnito In

j put. 7 teftia fubte'ptoy pneia pfonaliter oftitut? Venabilis in
yy 7 ! } §

met no
x° Pr 7 dfis Rieardus pmiflise dina Abbas mo"ftij de Dunf> ordis @i
hiid@i Si andF dyoe* quada tram fine quodd breue fafine cuiufda anui
reddit? quiq, meari de tris de feryhill iacentihs in Regalitate de Da?
infra vit de fy ats Johj thane 7 AleX thane ae fais hedibs debitard

Sy Brn a ee se
forma 7 tenoré huidi breuis in fe otinete moreq, ofueto cancellarice fupini
eto viro Tho® meldrtii burgeti de Inukethin in

Regt vicecditi debito modo pntauit petens

dni Bri Regt figillat’ dife
hac pte d@i fupmi dni i

inftant + req'rés Plata vieecdité vigore déi breuis vt fibi ftatir 7 fafina
heditaria d@i anui reddit? quiq, mareari: de dé hill efi pt
fedm vim forma 7 tenoré carte donacdis 7 ofirmacdis fib magno figillo
dai dui fri Regt fibi fap hoe pleni? inde ofeé&e modo 7 for". debite 7
ofuete tdet 7 deliberaret Die? vero Tho*s in hae pte vid vt pin'tit®
iuflis 7 mfdat€ prefati fupmi dni tri Regt volens libenter fatiffaée 7
obedire di&ii breve fatine p me no‘rit, pu’ - infrafe’pti p ipm p'mit? ci

27

Pris de flery’



--- Dunfermline_page382.png ---
330 REGISTRUM DE (SEC. xv.

yetencia debita recepti apiri legi 7 publicari Peepit 7 madauit / cui?
brenis tenor fequit® in hee verba Jacobus dei gia Rex Scottori diléis firis
Jacobo hacate de Petfurane 7 Tho* meldrit ac eort alti pitas 7 difim
firis de fyff in hae pte flim Q'a oceffim? hheditarie Vertabli in
x° pri Ricardo Abbti de Dif 7 fuis affig"te vni amit reddit quiq,
marcara: vfualis monete Regni jiri_ad ios Penthecofte 7 ft i
hyeme p eq‘les porédes anuati de Pris de ferihill lenaday 7 peipienday
q' qidé anv? reddit? fuit Johis thane 7 AleX thane heditarie 7 qué anutt
redditii ijd@ Joties 7 AleX in man? firas apt Ediburgh furfa reddideft
pureq, siptr refig*Ft put in e*rta tira dZo Ricardo Abbti de Difwly inde
ofeéta pleni? ptinet? - Vols peipim? 7 mada? q“ts déo Ricardo Abbi vel
fuo certo attor*to latori pntii fafina déi Anui reddit? ei pt jufte hre
faciat€ 7 fine dilacde et hoe nullo modo om'tate Ad q°d faciend vob 7
vim alti in hac pte fram ple‘ria om'tim? ftaté Dat fub teftio magni
Sigilli fri apud Edinburgh decio die més Junij Anno Regni firi decio
quito » Poft cui? v° breuis apGdem le&ura 7 publicacoem pfat? Thots in
hae pte vieecdes ad mafioné 7 mefluagid: déart rari de fferyhill pfonalit
accedés Plato dno Abbti poffeffioné 7 fafina ieditaria p denarij tradigom
& déi anui reddit? quiq, feay de tre de ferihill et pt fedm vi
forma 7 tenoré trte donaddis 7 pf'macdis Pfati fupmi dni firi Regt eidé
fee 7 oceffe vt Pm'tit® tdidit 7 dcliBauit / ac ipm i corpalé 7 realé poffet:
fion’ d@i anui reddit? fneiatr fafiu' indux' 7 jueftin / De 7 fup q'b3 dibs
7 finglis Pfat? Abbas a me no*rio pu® - infrafe'pto petijt fibi fieri vnii vel
plura pu feu pu - inftru® aut iftru - A&a erat hee ifra folii déari
vray de frerihill loco Pfe'pto hora qi nona ante Mediz fub Anno die méfe
jndic@de 7 ponti™ - Ple'ptee / fntib; Me puide 7 cCeifp'te viris Johe cok-
burii Dauid de bla¥ Roberto de orok / Ricardo de orok / 7 Johe flemyg
cii alijs plurib teftibs ad pmitfa vocate {Palit 7 rogate in fide 7 teftiim
oim 7 tm@lorum premifforum -
Et ego hugo ker de dene cleric? Sci and¥ dyoc* . pute? au‘te
jmpiali jurat? noi? pdi&» faifine Theditarie ftat? 7 poffefhdis
daGni ac ipi? Ricardi Abbis I realé corpalé 7 aétualé poffeffioné
jnducédi ifeodaédi 7 iueftiture ac dibs 7 figlis alijs PmifP di fic vt

vt mo



--- Dunfermline_page383.png ---
+40,

REG. JAC. 1] DUNFERMELYN. 331

Pm'tit? - agent? divent® - 7 fiertt vna ct Pnoiate teftibs Pns int fui
eaq, fie fieri vidi 7 audiui 7 7 notd recepi pusq, pu - iftrut’ . manu
aliena me alijs occupato negocijs fe'pt? hie me manu pp'a fhfe'b-
endo efi figno 7 noie meis folite 7 ofuete fignat> rogat? 7 req'fit?
- . Qos: e . Os ~, - Qos
cora teftibs pudis p fideli teftio vitate oim 7 figtoy Pmifloy vna
ci appéfide Sigilli déi tho® de meldri 7 hac pte vid Piuitl) appofite
7 cOmunit€ de teflimonio quo fup* 7ét -

Carta dni pat'eij Ivo 7 yfabelle fue {ponte -

Omnibus hane cartam Vifuris vel audituris Ricardus pmiffione dina
Abbas mo*fterij de Dunf> et eiufdé loci puentus flim in duo fempitna
Nott vniuerfitas ¢ra nos vnanimi olentu 7 aff. tocins capitli iri dediffe
coneefliffe et hae fnti carta iira ofirmatfe nobli viro dno patricio lyoi dno
de Glamis militi et jfabelle de Ogiluy fue tponte 7 eoy diucius vinéti
oinies et finglas tras firas de ffothre 7 de
riari 7 cuni@larioy dari tervarii cii pt» iaceii in Regalitate ira de Dunt
7 infra vié de fyff. p fuis homagijs 7 feruicijs nots et mo“fterio iro Tpentis
7 ipendende Que quidé Pre 7 dietates d@arii pifcariarii 7 cuni@larioy
fueriit di&i dni patricij hereditarie Et quas diétus dis Patrici? non vi aut
metu dué? nec errore lapfus {3 mera et fpontanea voluntate fua in manus
firas p fufté et bactm in capitlo firo cord teftibs furfum reddidit pureq, +
fimplici? refig“uit ac totii jus 7 clameti que in didis terris ac dietatib;
déari pifeariari 7 cuni@larioy cit pt? huit feu hre potit p fe et heredib;
fis Sino quietii clamauit ippetua Tenédas et hnd Ges et finglas Pnoiatas
tras et dietates déarii pifcariarii et cuniélarioy ci pt’ de flothre 7 de
Schanvale Pfatis dno Patricio 7 yfabelle fue {ponte 7 cori alti diuei?
viuenti et heredib; d@i dni Pat'cij de nots mofterio iro et fuecefforih;

hanvale ac dietates oim pifea-

Bris in feodo 7 hereditate ippetuti in warda et releuio p oities re&as metas
fuas antiquas 7 difax in bofet planis moris marefijs pratis pafcuis et pafturis
vijs femit@ 7 aquis ftangnis riuolis laenb3 petarijs turbarijs columbarijs
carbonarijs lapide 7 calee citi molendis multuris et eoy fequelis aucupa-


--- Dunfermline_page384.png ---
REGISTRUM DE {SEc. Xv.

venaédib; et cuni@larijs ci curijs 7 curiarii exitibs heryheld¢ Achett
rai chi edi pattura et libero introitu et exitu ac cum omiib; alijs et
finglis omo" - libertatibs 7 ayfiaméte ac jufte fuis pe q Pbufetg, ta no nojat(’
q* noiat? ta fubt? terra q* fup* t i

ri peul ct ppe ad Pnoiatas tras 7 dictates
déari pifeariarh 7 cuni@larior’ ci pt> {pectantibus feu iufte fpectare valen”

quolibet in futurti adeo libere 7 quiete ple*rie integre 7 q honorifice bene 7
in pace in dib3 7 p dia ficut Pfatus Diis patric? Pnofatas Pras 7 dietates
d@ari. pifeariart: 7 cunt!

rior eit pt de nob aut Pdecefforibs ‘pris ante
ditam refig'cem nob inde féam liberi? tenuit feu poffedit Reddendo
inde anuati dé diis pat'ei? 7 ¢tabella fua fponta ac eorti diuci? vinés 7
hhedes d@i dni pat'eij xI* - folidos vfualis monete Regni Scocie nob
mo'ftie Bro 7 fuceetlorihs firis ad duos ani tios viz ad feft- pentheeoRt> 7 7
{Gi marti in hy eme p eq‘les poréScs ci warda 7 releuio vt pm'tit? - Ec
faci@do inde forinfeet fuicii ct ths fede eurie ad jiras tres curias eapitales
ap’ Dif: cf alijs fuicijs inde debite 7 ofuete - In cui? rei teftidm Sigil
cde capitli iri jntibs € appenfum xv? die méS Oéobre Anno dni «’ -
cece’ - quiq*gefimo p'mo +

Carta Wilni de preftoi dni de Gourtoh » De loganraw ei aliis tre -

Omnibus hane cartam vifuris vel audituris Ricardus pmiffione dina
Abbas mo‘tterii de Dunfermlyn et eiufdé loci conuentus Slim in dno
fempitna Novite nos vnanimi pfenfu et affenfu capituli iri conceffifle
affedaffe 7 ad feodi firma dimififfe nobili viro Witlo de preftoii dno de
Gourtoi oimes ct finglas tras ras tocius Peie pt€ de Loganraw ci pe ac
Yeiam ptem toci? terre fire wlge garit niicupate le Huehnis croft + te
ptem altius pticate fre que vocat? Thomas akiF ci pt’ @ olim fueriit
Symonis de Pttoii filij quod hone méorie +

rmois de pftos milite dui de
Gourtoii neend ofiia loca p patellis falijs fituande in rupibs fris ouéiencia

jacen’® in territorio fro de Mufkilburgh inf* vit de Edinburgh inter tva

dnoy Abbis 7 oudtus de Newbotill ex pte orien". ex pte vna 7 c6em
pattura aialiai burgi de Mufkilburgh ex pte occiden" - ex pte alt” Tenédas


--- Dunfermline_page385.png ---
442.

REG. JAC. IL} DUNFERMELYN. 333

ct hndas oifes et finglas Plid&as Tras cit Pli&e locis ac pt> eidé Witmo
Aforihs iiris ac moftio iro de Dun? in

et hedibus fais de nobis 7 tu
teodi firma heditarie p ppetuo p offies reétas metas fuas antiq"s et difas
ct omibs libertatib; omoditatih; afiaméte et fuis jufte ptingeljs quibufeiiq,
keddendo inde nob 7 fuecefloribs tris ac digo fro moftio pfat? Wilts et

x" § vfualis monete regni Scocie

heredes fui Anuati firma burgi vna
noie dinuat reddit? feodif'mi digari trari et locoy ad duos Ani Pmios
fefta viz Penthecoft> et {Ti firti in hyeme p eq‘les medias porédes p Oi
alio fuicio exacéde feu demada 4 de ditt Tris et locis p nos et fucceffores
firos jufte exigi potunt qudlibet vel requiri Volum? tamé q liberi fit
nob ac fuccefloribs firis diétii Anut redditi xx" folidoy nobis ac mo*fterio
iro vt Pmittit® debitori de q‘libet pte didari frari et locora fedm q nob
placuit leuare et p code fi neceffe flit eeia diftringe i in omi tepe In cui?
rei tefti6m Sigilli cde capitli fri Pntib; € appenfi ap* mo’ {tid ntm de
Dif aiiditm decio feptio die méf Decébre Anno do* millefimo q“dringé-

tefio quiq*gefio fGdo -

Coiniffio ad recipiend pfefliones \ mo*choy in p*oratu de Plufeardyn -

Ricardus pmiffione dina Abbas mo“ftij de DuP ordis {ti biidiati Sti
and? dyoé - Venabli ct religiofo viro Johanni de benaly ptori p'orat? de
plufeardy celle fire et eiuflé loci puétui nite didi ordinis morauiciiq,
dyoé « et omibs alijs quoy indeft fen itse potit quolibet i in futuri flim et
oim inereméta virtutti Cum eni incibencia nob ofa quib3 afidue Bmim*
intenta confidagoe _penfam? et inheeillitat€ hiane pf{picim? ipfecdi viden-

nonniieq*

tes q neq'm? exfoltte eirea fingla p nos debitit pattoralis offi
aliquos in pt@ fire folicitudinis iux“ q"‘litaté agendoy aflumim? quoy
laudabilia thita p opi cuidencia in confpéu firo fub pu’ noticia Pfen-
tant’ et quoy folerti Miitterio {perati fruét? de cdmill fibi laboribs et
negocijs valeant verefimilit pudire / Hine @ q licg de finglis locis nob 7
cure fire fubiccte q"nti nob ex alto pmittit® cura vigilem heam? tame
ea ftatii dicti p'orat? mo" “tio fire nup autoritate aplica fubie&i 7 cirea


--- Dunfermline_page386.png ---
334 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xv.

eiufdé conftrutura vt in dino fuicio 7 inftitute reglarib; digi iri ordinis
debita [aceipiat] refor*Cdem co maiori redim? attenée foliciti quo de nouo
di&o fro mo“ftio tang* mébrii dependens ab eodé ad inf? quéda fir poratus
de Vrehard dia autoritate conftat ée annexii / Et q7 corde gerim? vt in
eodé p'oratu 7 fira cella dint fuiciii honefte et debite fedm pfuetudiné
didi Fri ordis in omib; celebret? religionis puritas deuote obfuet* / et vt
not tang* filia mat* legitie ac reglariter fubiciat® pfond ad hoe pficient
vtilem 7 vt {peram? ydonea dec*uim? ad diéii p'orati firamq, cella de
gremio firo q*toci? deftinada cui? induftria vt credim? fit falubr¢ 7 fedula
ad iire religionis 7 d@i ordis inftituédem 7 inftruccdem auida plantat'x
feienciay et virtutii 7 conflans ac puida expug*trix abufioni 7 vicioy
Cum auté cirea Pmifla ad fins pfonali?’ intende neq'am? vt Pmittit® pluriit
dd mo"f?ij firi negocioy varietate occupati , Veriablem et religiofii virit
Wittm de boyis dé mot bij firi faeriftam in decret€ licéciati de cui?
ecumfp'se 7 induft'a in fibi omiff plurima in dno fiducia optinem? ac
de off" / et afl toci? capitli fri oMib3; meliorib; modo jure 7 for* q*bs
poffum? 7 debemus ifm nim omiffarit: peuratoré deputatii 7 nici {Palem
ferie Pntid fecim? ofiituim? 7 ordinam? firam ple*ria Ptaté eidé om'tentes
et vt in eodé p'oratu 7 cella enellat 7 deftruat diffipet 7 difpdat edificet
7 platet fieut p inftituGdem diGoy iri ordis 7 religidis 7 eorfidé pfuacoe
vidit expedire jnfup eidé ecia tenore fntiti dam? et concedim? firam vera
legitiam 7 ple‘rid Ptat® ac madati {fale ad int*nd noie fro ac p nob 7
recipiend poffeffioné diée anexionis 7 juris fubiecédis diéti porat? 7 celle
ire p'oris 7 pffm eijufdé eoriidéq, offm reglarem pfeffioné #" ofuetudiné
dé Bri ordis ac poy 7 coridé ofratri 7 mo“choy manualé 7 reglarem
obediencia nots de jure debita 7 eifdé oftih3 7 mo*chis habit mo*chalem
in firo mo“ftio a mo*ehis eiufde geftari foliti ac inftituta reglaria t'buent
7 exhibend ipmgq, habitii ae mo*chos fedm pfuetudiné ecia déi ortis
as fufpenfidis 7 excdicacdis in rebelles 7 o‘diétores fi
qui flint in Bmitl feu aliquo Pmiffoy ferent et pmulgand ac p refor“ce
di&i loci 7 inftituéSe ditti ordis 7 religionis falubrit ftatuend 7 ordinand

Ae Gia alia et fingla facient gerend 7 7 eScend q ad officitt veri omniffirij
peuratort deputati ac niicij fpalis cirea pmifla aut eoy aliq’d fhint

hidicend tente



--- Dunfermline_page387.png ---
£43.

REG, JAC. 1] DUNFERMELYN. 335

neeeflaria fen ecid optuna et qj nofinetipi fabem? fen fate poffem? fi in
Pit? fntes ac plonalit intoflem? Nos vero rat 7 gt firm atq, ftabile
pm'tim? here quicg’d 7 totii p ditt nf3 omiflariii: peuratoré deputati 7
nicid f{palé rite faci “rit in Pmil! aut aliquo pPmiffoy ae fenteneias fi
quas in huidi rebelles 7 cont‘dicores ptulerit feu fulminaflit fuabim? ct
a firis fubdite obfnare inniolabilit) faciem? vfy, ad fatfaccdem odigna

Infup vob ptori 7 mo*chis diéti p‘orat? 7 celle Beipim? et madam? quats
di&i nim omiffariti peuratoré deputatii 7 nici {Palem imo pocius nos
in xpo benigne recipiétes 7 honorifice ptractites eidé tang* nob in omibs
intendat¢ hiiliter 7 deuote ebedine 7 mdita ac Peepta q vot ex pte fira
midaflit efficacit adiplendo q pp? hee nd foli dine rettbuddis Pmiii veri
eeia fram Dituolencia 7 m pleni? in poftri: valeat€ pmereri Dat ap*
mo*ftia ntm de Daf aiidi&a fub figillo cdi capitli firi o@ano die inftante
mif Noudbre Anno dni’ ccce™’. quiq*gefimo q*rto -

Carta Thome de ecaiila -

Omibs hane carti vifuris vel audituris Ricard? pmiffice dina Abbas
mo'ftij de Dun 7 eiuldé loci oust? flim in dno fepitna / Nowite nos
ynai off" et afl" eapitli Tri pceffiffe affedaffe 7 ad feodi firma dimififfe
dile&to fuitori 7 familiari iiro Tho* de cama croft bti lauréeij ppe porta
firam inferior’ iacété in villa inferiore burgi de Dif in vico q' extéd' a
da porta ad aqua de ferm wlgarit) niieupata tourburii ex pte oeci" ei9%dé
viei in? orti bti laurécij ex pte boreali ex pte vna/ 7 d&am aqua ex pte
autirali ex alt® vna cii pticata tre { iacet ex pte occiden - eiufdé orti int
di&t orti 7 digam aqua in qua mete ad fagittand niie fituat® » Tenéda 7
tind di&a erofta et di&a pticata Pre efi pt? eidé Tho 7 hedibs fuis de nob
et fuccefforibs firis ac mo'{tio fire 7 altari 1@i lauréeij infra eeciam fram
mo"{tialé fituato in feoda firma heditarie p ppetuo  p des reétas metas 7
difas fuas antiquas » 7 cit omib; libertatibs pmoditatib afiamctt 7 fuis
iuft€ pt? q'butetiq, Reddédo inde di&? Tho*s et hedes fui digo altari bti
laurécij ae peuratori eiufdé p tépe exiftenti anuati viij - folidos vfuat



--- Dunfermline_page388.png ---
t44,

336 REGISTRUM DE [sEc. xv.

monete Regni Seacie noie feodi fmi ad duos anni Tios viz penthecoft> 7
8 mrti in hyeme p eq‘les medias porédes 7 foluédo inde f'ma burgi
debita et confueta p Gi alio fuiG exacéde feu demada 4 de di&e erofta
et pticata Pre Pp hos et faceeffores firos feu peuratoré didi altar p tépe
exiftent® iufte exigi pov’ unt quilihet vel req'ri / Volum? infup fi dié&?
Tho*s aut aliq's fuoy hedit defevit in foludde didi Anui reddit? vt Pm'tit?

p tres Pmios ptinuos q liciti fit peuratori diéi altart p tepe exiftenti
regreflt fre ad pofleffioné 7 pp retat® déay crofte 7 pticate tre 7 de ipis
&" q ei videbit® expedit difpone fine q’ciiq, alio peeffu 7 ftrepitu judicij
fine q‘ctiq, reclamaée aut retineméto didi Thome aut alicui? hered¢ fui
ac fi ei minime peefle aut affedate fuiffent In c9 rei teftidm Sigillii cde
capitli firi Pntiby ¢ appéti ap" mo"ftii ném de Da? aiidém p'mo die met
Maij Anno dni ™ - cece” quig'gefimo quito -

Carta Witmi mafofi de clakmaa -

Omi; hane carta vifuris vel andituris Ricardus pmiffione dina Abbas
mo“ftij de Daf fltm in eo qni & oim falas Notlitt nos ex vnanimi ofl”

et afl" toci? car Biri oceffifle et ad feodifirma dimififle Wittmo mafon
fuitori Hiro tota crofta jiram q vocat’ Ditchecroft jaceii ppe villa de Clak-
mana int le Wynde ex pte ocei"- ex pte vna et crofta 4 wlgari? ar
pettifkene ex pte ori" - ex pte alt" ac ecii Smediland ex pte auftrali et
le Northwynde de Clakmana ex pte boreali Tenéd et nd diéa crofta
ct pt pdiado Wito et Redihs fuis de not et fuccefforibs firis ae mo" {Pio

iiro de Dunf: in feodo et heditate imppetuii p des reétas metas 7 diuifas
fuas et dib3 libertatihs pmoditatib; afiamétt 7 fuis juftt pt- q*butciig,

Reddendo inde anuati dis? W2 et hedes fui nob et fuccefloribs firis
mo’ “fteriog, iiro aiidi@o quiq, folidos vfualis monete Regni Seocie ad duos
Ani ios medietat® viz ad fefty penthecoft” 7 alia. medictaté ad fett? 13i
“iti in h¥eme p eq‘les porédes / Et fi ptingat nos aut mo‘ftia nim feu
Pras firas de DolaF onari eft feéta gerenda in euria vicecdite de Clakmana
in aliquo tempe q’d nd Piumim? di&? Wits et fui Redes y'ciiq, p tépe


--- Dunfermline_page389.png ---
JAC. HJ DUNFERMELYN. 337

oxiftentes facite fou dist fectatord p nob et dice tre Bris in déta curia
et offieid fectatoy fidelit pimplebit nulla alia mieedé fen ret'bucbem p
hoe habendo nifi foliim® . diéti Anni redditi quiq, tolidoy q"din dicta
feta p nob faciét teu inndient . jntup fi dig? We fen ci? hedes: détariy
if ay defetit fou defobint in filndde ditt Anui reddit? quig, folidoy p tres
c mo“ftio fire aiidide / erofta
etad jus pp'etate

tmifos licith fit nob fiecetld
atidéam ef ptt fine peel aut ftrepitu indiciali recu

idi@i ila rediteg*ve 7 de ila put nob videbit’ expedire
difpone ac fi déta fra afledacio di& Wito et hedib3 fais minime facta
fuilfet ccid fine licttia cuienq, indict ecGiatticl feu flaris nd obftautib;,
qbuteiqg, excepeoibs iurt eandici ct ciuilis ac ftatute 7 contuetudinibs
regni feocie in cdtrarii facientibs In cui? rei teftidm Sigillii cSe capitli
itibs Fappentum apnd moTtid nim de Dif adic xij die mat

mote iy fri

fei
Juli) Anno dni? cece’ quig*getimo texto

Comiffio ad vititand p'oratii de Plufcardyu -

Ricardus pmiffione dina Abbas mo“{tij de Daf 7 ciufilé loci pute? ordtis

fe MAA {TH and? dfos - Vetiabli z religiolo viro Johi de benaly pori
prorat? de plufcardy 7 ei8dé loci onétui didi ordis morauieiiq, dyed - {lfm
yz oim ine*méta virtutit Co ent ietbencia nob ona q'b3 affidue pmimé
intéta confidagde penta? z ibecillitate ire ptpicim? Ipfectir videntes q
neq'm? exfoltle e'ea fingla p nos debitii paftoralis officij nGnieq* in pté
hire follicitudis aliquos iux" qualitat® agendoy affamim? qnoy laudabilia
Mita p opi enidencia fab pu’ noticia fit deducta 7 quoy follerti Aiiftio
{perati fruc&? de omill! fibi laborihs valeat verelilit puéire . Hine  q lieet
ide finglis loc€ cure fire fubiecte q*nti nob ex alte pm'tit’ cura vi
heam? tamé e'ea flatii dicti p'orat? vt in dino fuicd 7 inftitute reg
debita accipiat refor*Goem co maiori reddim® attendde foliciti q de nouo
mo“ftio fire tang” mébra dependés ab eodé antoritate aplica oftat &e
anexit $5 q7. clea Pmiffa ad fins plonalit intende neq'am? vt pmittit®
pluribs dici mo ftij firi negocijs eccupati V. efablem et religiof i virti
2



--- Dunfermline_page390.png ---
338 REGISTRUM DE [SEc. Xv.

Wittm de bovis didi mo"ftij firi facta in deeret licenciatii de cui?
cenfp'e 7 induft'a in fibi omit? plurima in dno fiducia optinem? ex vniai
ofl" 7 aff firo oitiib; meliorib; modo jure 7 for quibs poflum? 7 debem?

ad eScend 7 piplend vifitacdis officii ijm nim pmiffariti deputati 7
nicid ffalem ferie Pntii fecim? oftituim? 7 ordinam? ad euellend
deftrued diffipand 7 difpgend edificand 7 7 plantand i in digo p‘oratu ficut
p refor’éde firi ordis 7 religidis 7 corads ofuace fagacius vidit expedire
Dai 7 peedeh dito fro omiffario deputato 7 nicio {Pali fram vera liber’
+ plerid ptaté ac madati {Pale ad vifitand dicti poratii 7 cella fram ta
in eapite q* in mébr 7 ad inibi ing'rend piient reformad et mo*chos et

offes Hos inibi degentes et quélibet eoridé qit fibi vifum fuit expediens
ad nos et claufiri

ii nF rem'tend 7 deftinaid corrigend p'oy 7 mo*choy
Rroy ihide degétid et cuintlibet eoy excell? 7 cimia put delictoy q‘litas
et exceflus y“ntitas et enormitas exigint ac peepta 7 madata oftituedé et
ftatuta p confuacdc 7 refor' ee ¢

ordis cOdend flatuéd et ordinad put
<pedire Et dia alia 7 fingla faciéd geréd 7 eXeend q ad
ifitatoris omiflarij deputati feu niicij {pecialis inenbit et ipi?
autoritas pottulat et vequirit inuocado ad hoe fi neve fuit auxiliti brac

Ss

ry
f@laris Quocirea vob dno p'ori et cdfFib3 firis in dito p'oratu cOmoratihs
tenore pntiit precipim? et madam? in virtute {Ee ohediencie 7 fb exedi-
eaGois pena qna in des 7 figlos rehelles et cont‘dictores exnie put extiic
ferim? in hijs fe'pte quats ditt nfm omiffarid pmpto et benigno affeétu
recipientes cundé tang" cdmiflarii et deputati: nim ad pmifla fufeipiate
et adim'tat¢ ac eidé in hijs 4 q fedm det ad nos 7 iurifdieébe3 firam q“liter-
ciig, fp*tant vel fp*tare potunt peat) efticacit et obediat¢ put nobis ohedire
+ parere tendi Alioqui peels quos legitie fevit et fentencias quas rite
tulerit in eont“diGores et rebelles Rat et g"t hebim? 7 eos ac eas faciem?
auore dno inuiolabilit obfuari Dat apud moti de Dif atditi tid
figillo edi eapitli Bri feptio die mé} Nouébr€ Anno dni millefimo q“drin-
gétefimo quiqgefimo fexto


--- Dunfermline_page391.png ---
£46.

FERMELYN. 339

REG. JAC. 11.]

Lia jintacdis taeriftie de Dunfnilyn -

Retendo in x° pri ac duo Jacobo dei et aplice fede gta Epo 1% andi
Ricard? pmiflide dina Abbas mo"ftij de Daf 7 eiufld Toei putt? ordis

{i henediti Freq, dyo® tui hiiles et denoti oratores feijos ct omiod¢

retencia obedieneia et honore Quia venabit et religiotus vir Willifis de

hoyis facia mo"LPij Tri ex Ste ct Fouabilibus fe moustihs dict offieiit
fii pponit put infor*mur in maihs prnitate tre pure et fimpliciter refig*re
cui? yd officij Fintacd ad nos et moTtid nfm collacd vero ad Fram
Prnitaté de jure ct ofuetudine ptine dinoteit® Ci igit® dict officit thetic
ex huidi refig’Ge vel ex pmoéde dci Wit de boyis ad quodetiq, alind
biificidi et dicto officio incSpatibile vel ats qrnifm”’ vacare otigit Veriabilé
et veligiofi vird Johem de benaly nfm olFem et eGmo"ehit ad officiti
faetie di

~ Ry) By aa Tea) an Poe e
eandé hiilit et deuote depeantés q‘ts huidi niin pntati fen eins penratoré

jiri mo‘ftij eid@ prnitati tre vetiende tenore Putia Pntam?

ad didi officit facittic adm'te et cide de eodé g'ciofe puide ae ipm in
codé induée 7 iftittle ae cnra 7 regimé aiay prochianoy de Daf fibi
om'te induai ct inftituti candice defende et fibi de fmaihs; puétibs
redditibs iurib; et oluecoibs ipius ofieij pacifice refponderi fave dignéi

o'ditores 7 rebelles p cttura cetiattica arei? ppaceti - In ¢? iire pntacdis
fidé - teftiém Si ce eay ri pntibs & appéetii ap" moftii nfm de
Dif atid@m  vij? die me’ Nouébre Anno do! a"

ceec qnig* gefimo fexto

Copia enied tre mifliue Abbati de Kynlofi -

Ricardus pmiflione dina Albas mot tif de Dunf 7 einti
venabli 7 x° fri ac dno Johi eadé pmiffione Abbati de IK ynloll! ordis
citteet moraniei dfo® ac honabli viro magro Jacobo flewart decano
morauiedi fineere caritatt affect 7 flim Quia venabit in x° pat’ Johes de
benaly p'or de plufeardy diti £@i bidi@i ordis ac Plate moranich dyoe

loci puet?

didi poratit pure et fimplieit refig"re feu cidé libere reniiciare ex ete


--- Dunfermline_page392.png ---
448,

340 REGISTRUM DE

7 Fonabilibs caus fe mouétibs put pcepim? pponit S35 qr ad eleeédem
futuri pore ef ex caufa pmiffa vacauit cert® et arduis ipediti negocijs
pfonalit) vt pliumim? intetle neq'm? et $” ftatuta candiea null? religiofus
eleegdi de fe fete fine fui fupiore licencia valeat confentire » et ideo fi
ptingat aliqué ex ffib3 et cdmo"chis firis 7 moftio iro de Daf fiue in
dito p'oratu eSmoratib; efi ex huidi Za vaeare ptigit candice eligi - ad ipm
avindlo mofti firi abfoluéd et eleeddi de fe fete libere confenciend vobis
et vin cuilibet in folid firam vera libera 7 ple‘ria Ptatem pm'tim? p putes
Dat ap" moftii nfm de Da? aidiaa tub figillo officij fri o&auo die
méf Noutbe Anno dni o™ - cece? quiq*gefimo fexto -

Copia trari de petbachly -

Be it kend till all men be p Stent lettis me James Robertfoit cofing and
avF nerreft to vmquhile Mariori of Petbachly of pat ilk . to have drawin
and fullely made concordance with a Venable fadir in crift Richard
throu pe pmiflios of god Abbot of Duntmly and pe pvent of pe fam¥ of
all and hale my pt of pe lande of pethachly forfaid with pare ptinés
lyand in pe Regalite of Dunfmly and in pe fraflom of fyf’ in man and
fourme as eftir folouis pat is to fay» pat pe faid venable fadir and his
ovent fortaid fall haue frely and foretimare in fee and Tetage to pai and
all pare fucceffouris and eftiretiar€ withoutin ony Reuocaddn all and hale
iny half of pe land¢ of Pethachly forfaid with pare ptinés with fre chart
and refig’@on and all my richt pat Thad haf@ or may haue in ony t¥ to
cii in or to pe faid lande with pare ptinés The quhilke to fulfill be my
felf or my peuratouris or attdrnais be ) piis made pat is to fay John of
cokburii Rob¥ of orok » Richard of orok | Jotin flemig and Dauid Wey?
oiactli or feliali, T oblif me m¥ ayr¢ and affig’is and all my gud mouable
and yvnmouable / land@ rent€ / and poffeflionis had and to be had and
namly my faid land? of Petbaehly p forfaide not beand fulfillit in pt or in
all as forfaid is to gife and to pay lelly and treuly but fraude oF gille a
hundreth pund¢ of vfwale money of Scotland within fourti dayis eftir pe



--- Dunfermline_page393.png ---
REG. JAC. 1] DUNFERMELY SH

making of p pfente to pe faid venable fadir and his oudt forlaid or pare
fneceflouris for feathis futtenit and colt made vpoii me befoF pe making
ony ramede of law of canon or Ciuille or ony flatute
of law aganis p piis for ctl to be pponit in t¥ to ch Pe quhilke be p pis
I will all vtrali be exeludit and net to be herd in jugement na vtouth

And for pe mare fotlte in plons of Huchoun ker of pe dei nota¥ to me in
pis ecaufe and fubferinit heF with hi
in his hand I haue gevin gude faith and bodely oblifing pe gret aith
fworii p forfaide all and findry to do and fulfill without¥ ony renoeacdn
hefo® p witnes vndwrit® and at pe bidding of pe faid venable fad oF his
ouét forfaid In witnating hefol my Selle togidd with pe fubfe'peou of

of p piis without?

awin hand and figne of my bidding

is ar affixit and to put at Duantmly pe

id Huchoun ket notat to p
xiiij day of pe moneth of Janua¥ pe zere of god j™- cece fyvety and
befor p witnes John of bothuclle and maft’ Ale& of bothuill his fom
of mufkilburgh Dauid Wey Andro gudfuaii Maleolme tifchale and
Job of loktoii burgs of pe faid burgh of Dif and vthiF dit and findry -
Et ego Hugo ker de Dei clericus Sti and¥ dyot putie? aue“te
jmpiali iurat? no‘ri? Quia pmiffoy oim et finglori fup"te'ptord in
ibs fie fieri et dici vidi feini et audiui et in nota fipfi manuq
mea pp'a fup* et fabt? fe'pli 7 publicaui de midato Pfati jacobi
robtfoii 7 de ipi? {Pali Peepto reeepto p'us ab code iura corpali 7
cord teftibs ple'pte de obfudde dibs 7 finglis pmifl 7 piplende p fe
vel attoftii feu attor'tos pie'ptii vel pie'ptos hie me fubfe'bendo
ci figno ct noie meis folite 7 ofuct p fideli teftio Vitate oim 7
1iSloy Pmifloy Rogat? et req'fit?. Anno die loco 7 mete fup*di&e
Indice quita potificat? £Ciffimi in x° pris 7 dni Dri dni Califti

10

dina puiden* pipe teij Amo £”

Instramentum fuper refignacione de Petbaehly -

149, In nomine dni Amé Per hoe pns put’. inflkm eiitte pateat euident q
Anno ab inear*éde dni w cece’. quiq"gefio feptio / die vero méf Ap'lis


--- Dunfermline_page394.png ---
342 REGISTRUM DE [sEc. xv.

nono Indiecoe quita pontifieat? {Ciffimi in x° pris ac Ani iri dni Califti
dia puiden® bpe Peij Anno cio jn mei no*rij

pu + et teftii fubte'ptorai
pneia pfonalit oftitnt? honett? vir Jacobus roBti pfag'ne? 7 heres quod
mariorie de petbachly - recognofeés 7 pu ¢ pfitens feifm veftiti et faifita
legitie p Gti tépis fpacifi vt de feodo medictate fraru de pethaehly ca pt
jaeeiy in Rega de Dunf intra vid de fyff et e& q diga dimedia ps Pravi
fup"dictarii de petbaehly ci pt tenct® in capite de dno Abbte de Dit 5
oustu cinfdé tiie Pnte et audiente 7 p Cto fnicd annati Vade ifle Jacobus
pfat? ett racbibs ct cant AUG ibid in pubcd often’ et p feifim Jacobi
ibid® recitate et maxie Za neceflitat( ct pauptatt put jdé Jacobus afluit

nnd paliq'’h; peciiari famis ad fue vite fuftentaéoem a dzis dno Abbe
= ondtn obtinede dittas Tras medietate ville furpdite de pethachly et pt
p fuft et bactm fap genua fedendo eit re uencia vt mor¢ Fin ma
pwiffione dia Abbate pro tempe diéi mo’ “tt

ibs Rieardi
de Dif turtii reddiat
pureq, et fimplicit refig"nit fine pacto vel ouééde mediante vt mi! no“rio

fubte'pto ae teltihs ibid® pntibs verilie appuit ac totit jus ct jure elamet
qin di&e tris et pt? het huit vel hre potuit p te et hedibs this tine
retfione vel reuoeaéde ipi? hedii fiecefiord aut affig"tori q’riiciiq, tacte
faeris ewangelijs dei fup libri: jura'* iponte piitit corpale Sup quib;
pmitl oiibs et finglis platus yenabilis pac Rieardus Abbas quofup* noie
ipi? et fri oust? a me no“rie pu’ fubfe'pto fibi fieri petijt hoe pns pu
infttm Atta erat hee in orto pomerij didi venabit } pris ADbat€ quoiap"
inf? mottid puis de Dun hora qi q'rta poft Mediem fith Ano die
mite jndic@de et pétifieatn quib; fup*  pntibs dé honorabilibus viris
Johe de bothuille ffe diéi venablis pris Roberto de orok | Wittmo
Sacto» Tho* de cupro Dauid Wey¥ Andrea gndefwan Johe Diieantoii

Tho" Wanfle et Roberto mai vna ci alijs dit® burgen" - burgi fup*dicti
de Daf ad pmiffa vocate 7@— Ac ad maioré hui? rei declaracbem ~

= Feeney ERAT Fey ER ce rare om
phacdes dignioré Sigilli autentich diéti Jacobi robti Pmill eft appenta
apnd ditt locum Anno die 7 mae fup*diéte et in Pucia quorid ditori
teftii ad futura rei m@orid imppetni remafurd ret -

Et ego Ilugo Ker de Defi cleric? SG andé dyot pute? auc*te
jmpiali juratusq, no“ri? Quia Pit reniiciagdi Refig*Cbi caniarh


--- Dunfermline_page395.png ---
150,

Sb.

REG. JAC. IL] DUNPERMELYN.

bite

allegacbi > jura® - cetisq, alijs 7 finglis diimodo fice vt pfe
dicerent® agerent® . et fierent vna ci teftibs fapius fe'ptt pns
pfonality, inttui ed
audiui et in nota fipfi manuq, mea pp'a tup" et fubt? te'pli et
publieani ci figno et fubfe'pede meis folite et olvet( vna ct
appentione Sigilli futibs pfati refignant( p
maiori 7 fidedigniori teftimonio vitat€ oim + tinglori pPmiffori p
Rogatus et

fp omia et fingla fic fieri et dici vidi feiui et

cohi princiy

Ee
Pfatum venablem patré Rieard Abbem quo fap’
Requifitus -

Carta de petbauehly -

Omnibus hoe foriptum vifuris vel audituris Jacobus Roberti plang'’ne? et
heres mariorie de petbachly ae diis medictat? ville fup"didéte de petbachly
flim in dno fepitna Nowlit@ me n6 vi aut metu duéia nee errore laplum
15 mea mera 7 {pontanca voluntate meliorib; via modo et forma quibs
poffam redde pureq, fimplieit p fait et bactm refig*re  necnd tenore
pntit pure ct fimplicit? refigno et furfi reddo jn manibus venabit in x"
pris ac dni dni Rieardi pmiflione dina Abbate mo“tti ij de Dunt et puet?
eiutde dnoy meoy fupiort digarti terrari totas et integras tras Ineas
antediaas medietat¢ ville fup*diéte de petbachly ei pt: jaceii in Rega"
de Dat infra vié de tyff et quas q'd Tras eo pt de dno Abbte et
puctu fup*diét€ teneo in ecapite ac totum Jus et juris clameti que in dictt
tris ei pt? habeo tui vel hre porto pme hedibus meis et fuccefforibus

quibufeumd, oimino quiti clamo imppetui p pntes fie q diéte tre ea pt
cit pfat€ dno Abbe = puétu fap"di&e p ifort bene mite m' pacte et
aliquib3 peciiart fimis alijsq, g*tuite donis fuortgq, faccefloribus in feodo
ct heditate libere 7 fine retifione imppetut remaneat 7 confiflant [ta q
nee ego dit? Jacobus Thedes mei aut fucectlores aliq’d jus vel clameii in
dite terris de petbachly ci pt- q°’uifin’ vendicare pot'o vel potunt in
futurii fic q ab omi jure clameo 7 juris acébe fim? inetnii p putes exeluti
ae abfoluti imppetui ‘penit? 7 omio fic q vos dne Abbas 7 ouét? libere et



--- Dunfermline_page396.png ---
451.

B44 REGISTRUM DE [sEc. xv.

fine otradicée de di&e terris ci pt’ difpone valeate et ad tre libiti
voluntat¢ p ppetuo - In cui? rei teftiOm Sigillum mei pp'um putibus é
appentum ap" Dunf nono die menfis Apis Anno dnj millefimo q"drin-
gétefime quiq’gefimo feptimo hijs tettibs viz Johe bothuell Roherto de
orok Witmo jactoii Tho* de eupro Danid Weyt Andrea gudfwaii Jotie
diieatoi Tho’ de Wan’ + Roberto ma burgen”’ de Dunf ei mult? alijs -

Tt

Appoyntment anent the tendfe

ue of Sanét Rynnanis -

Pis appoyntmet made at Donfinl¥ pe xxv day of Julii Anno 72 lvii -
hetwix a vellabill tad in crift rechart he godde tholyng Abbote of
~ pe ontt of pi ilke on pe ta pt And a Vorthipfull clerk mat?
patrik fandilande pfout of Caldore comite on pe top pt pt is to fay p' pe
faid venabill fad ont haff fet to pe faid matt patrik pare tend{chate of
pe croft of Sanét rfnanis chapel] lyand vin pe pfonage of pare kyrk of
Stine for all p° dais of his lyfe pe faid mat’? patrik payand paretore
7 + boll of bere and a boll of at@ at pe feft of Sanét mart¥ in vyntyr
to pe fnide abbote 7 puét or pare affigneis in Stuel¥g entand in

Dont

inet
at p* martimef in vyntyr next folowand pe dat@ of pis pnt vryt 7 fwa furth
sherly for all po dais of his lyfe And for his ofall help 7 fapple in pe
matis ptenyng to pe faid vetiabill fad 7 out pai haf grantyt 7 gev¥ to
him gerly pat boll of beF auebt to pai of pe forfaid tendfehaf for all pe
dais of his lyfle And be pis pfent veyt pe abill fad y oust difehargt’
¥ All thingf otnyng pe faid mat’ o tyme
hygane fireky by 7 fullely remyttyt forcuma? langand pe taid maft patrik

aid ve

him pareof for his faid Lytle

i.
cus Sancti andree dio® pube? autte

~ he mod fine ealiipnia Dei vt hi

Et ego hugo ker de Dene cle
jmpiali jurat? no“ri? - Quia pte'pta peordia int ptes pno*tas in
omibs put fupius fe'bitur fie dict vecitari 7 ocordari iueni et vidi
tein) > audini 7 i nota fapfi_ac pp'a manu fap" 7 fabt? fe'pti 7
publicaui et figno 7 noie meis folite 7 otuet? p fideli teftio titate
oim 7 fingloy pmitlori p pfatos abbem ae ouentii 7 pat'ci’i fandi-


--- Dunfermline_page397.png ---
REG. Jac. 11] DUNFERMELYN. B45

land Rrogat? 7 req'tit? cora hijs teftihs vis Robto graunt cap” -
Thoma Jopfon BBP matonii 7 BD veyr burgeli de Difmly ci
Anno die 7 loco fupius Anotatis Indieéde teia pontificat?

is ac dni fri dni Califti dia puidencia p*pe Peij

al
fanciffi 7

anno tered 7é -
Hueco Ker pe Dene -

Copia tre pambulaédis in? Kyngorn WeftiF ct E(tiF -

2. Anno dni o® - ecce® ’ quiq*gefimo feptio die Jouis yj - vis maf Oéobre

Apnd Kingorit Wet? Comubientib; Tho® dno le Erfk¥ milite et Georgio
dno le lefly fuper levyne fubftitut€ judicihs et loca tené Nobit et
potent€ dni Johis dnj le lyndefay de byre milite jufticiarij principat 7
capit ex parte boreali aque de florth confti® - put ex madatt dni Siri Regt
Jacobi {edi 7 di&i jutticiarij p'ncipat tris patuit cuiden? / Ac cord prate
dnis judicibs fubftitute ad jura ptibs inf*fe"ptt reddenda judiciali? feden-
tibs opuit fubftitut? vicecditt de fyi, pducés in media quodd breue regiti
pambnlagois exequéed ad didend 7 pticipand in? Religiofos viros ADbem
et pudtii de Dif terras fuas pdigas de Kyngorii Wel? / ct Pras de
Craggjncat / 7 le Wodfelde » Neend Pras burgéfii ballioy 7 editat€ burgi
de Kyngorfi Vande judices pfe'pti p ditm vicecdit? fubftituti de legitia
digart partiti apud loea capitalia diay Pray viz Kyngornis Wet? 7 Eftir
Craggineat et le Wodfelde cita@se 7 Pmunidve fatticiont facte et cord
ipis p teftes tdoneos ibi in judicio phatf ad pleni certificati. ditas ptes fic
citatas eduoeari feeeft p'mo {@do / et Peio / put mort é in huidi aétibs 7
placitis faciendf - Tandé cdparentes Religiofus pat Ricard? pmiffide dina
Abbas mo* ttij de Daf ci {uo ptore Sacttta Prario / et alijs mo*chis plena
7 fufficient® cdmiflioné oust? 7 capitli fui in hae parte habefi 7 oftendeii
m pambulaGbem debite pimpleri et exequi cit eff%u inftanci? poftu-
lariitt Quare Pmitl ofidate et ptibs Pai&e jtum vt p'us vocat¢ ac allega-
Gdibz racdibs excepedib; 7 dilaé audite et ad plenit confidate de
confilio libere tenétii et dnoy ad digam pambulaéBem facienda 7 pim-
2x



--- Dunfermline_page398.png ---
346 REGISTRUM DE [sec. xv.

pléda fubfe’pti dni fit ele&i / Viz Henric? de Douglas de Lochtevin
miles / Johes de Difchintoh de Ardroffe ; Thomas Wemys de Reraffe /
Johes Wemis de eodé / Robertus malvyne de Carnbee / Johes Lundy de
eodé / Dauid berklay de Culerny / Johes gourlay de Kynerag Johes de
KyneF de eodé/ Alex fetot de Phroth Henrie? ramfay de Culuthy / Dauid
lamyfdeii de Condolane / Dauid lyndefay de Logy / Henrie? malvyne de
Carnbee » Willis {trang de Baleatky / Wérice? de Dempftartofi de eodé
AleX de Lothrefk de codé Wits de Strathanry de eodé » AleX malvyne
de Kemnochy / Archibald? meldri: de Cleffe ) AleX allirdas de Seagochy /
AV? {petell de Lochalde / AleX thane de Thanifland ; 4¥9 broui de
Couftolt 7 We? echling de Pettadro; Qui q'd in" - in virtute fuoy iuramé-
toy jux madati Reg et breuis afididi dictas Pras de Kygornis weft 7
Ef? / Craggineat / ct le Wodfelde ad inftacia ptitt poftwlatia pedeftres
Ceuibat pabulabat et in hie modi q* fequit® dinidebat / viz q ex pte
boreali ravi de Kygorii Wel? ptinetia ditis ADbti 7 onétui magni
Mrefiai extendendo ab oecidente verfus orient® vfq, ad vadii anglice di@i
Je furde tang* ede int ptes put p'us fuit dimifeft / Et a le furde ex pte
ori" didi Mrefii exteiido verfus autt™ ad tres lapides 7 fie difeendendo
vfq, ad le modiffyke Et fie! / le modfyke verfus auft™ 7 occidenté decurrit
7 extend* viq, ad mar / Terras wv’ fiecas ex occi" - pte et auftrali_ ex di pte
digay metay ei ditis dno Abbte 7 ouétu Ac Kyngorii Wel? fup“dict
decreucit 7 ordiauct ippetuii remanc¥ - Terras vero ficcas ex ori" pte
vig, ad le vadii qd dr anglice le furde ci le wodfelde 7 dnis eiufdé fili
wy’ ippetui remane dec‘ueft / Q* pabuladbe fic feta Paid judices 7 loca
tenet ex pte dni iiri Rege Paidi 7 jufticiarij p'neipat 7 eapit / Beipiendo
madaveFt q q'libs pti Pdizay fuo folo pp'o fiido vt pabulati & adhereat
et in pace ippetuai gaudeat / fine pturbacbe vel vexacbe p pte adiifa
futuris téporibs q°m*libg facienda / In e? rei teftid; Sigilla autética di&oy
jufticiarioy 7 dnoy vna cii figitt q’rid eoy q' dige pabuladdi interat pntibs
fit appenfa Anno méfe die et loco fup"didtis -



--- Dunfermline_page399.png ---
REG. Jac. 1] DUNFERMELYN. BAT

Carta de Orok -

Omnis haue carta vifuris vel auditure Rieardus pmniffide dina Abbas
mot tij de Daf 7 eiufdé loci puét? tlim in dno fopitna / Nowit vnitifitas
tra nos vii ofentia 7 allenti toci? capitli fri dediffe cdcefliffe 7 hae puti
earta ira ofmaffe dile&to not 7 fideli Dauid de Orok p'mogéito 7 hedi
Wiki de Orok de codé p tuo homagio 7 fuicio nob ipento 7 ipendendo
Ses 7 finglas Pras duay ptiti rari fray de Orok de Slebalbe et Dun-
herii cf fuis pt? jaceii in Rega’ jira de Daf et infra vie de fy que qt
tre ef pt’ fuett déi Wiki leditarie et quas jdé We non vi aut metu
du&? nee errore lap{? {5 fua mera 7 fpontanea voli in man? iiras ap"
Di iP futt@ 7 bactm in pneia plurid tidedignoy furt'ti reddid' pureq, fim-
plicit? refig"uit ac totii jus 7 clameti 4 in eifd® huit Pp fe 7 hedib; fais
dino quitt clamau' ippetuii Tenst 7 hnd Sex 7 finglas tras ‘Suligtas duay
ptia trari de Orok de Slebalbe 7 Dunherii cit pt pdito Dauid et hedib;

fuis de nob 7 fro mo“ttio fup“diéo et fuceefforibs fivis in feodo 7 hedi-
tate Ippetui P pfenté jn Warda 7 releuio p des ree:
ot difas fab tra et fup* tra peull + 7 ppe ad Pdiétas Pras duay ptiti ei rauy
de Orok de Slebalbe 7 Dunherii ci pt fpeétantib; feu iufte tp*tare
valentibus quélibet in futurti adeo libere / q'ete . ple"rie integre et
honorifice bene ct in pace in Gihz et p offia fieut plat? A¥9 de Orok

pnoiatas Pras duard pti Frarti de Orok de Slebalbe 7 Dunherii et pt
is ante diGa refig*@oem ear’ ale nobis inde fa&a

metas fas antiq® S

de nob aut pdecefforibs ir
liberi? tenuit feu poffedit Reddendo inde anuati pdiét? Dauid de Orok
ct Hedes fui nob et mo*ftio fire ct fueceflorihs iris ippetua tres libras
fex folidos et viij? d-. vinalis monete Regni Seocie pporconali? ad duos
Ani tios vfuales 7 pfuetos videlic; Pethecofte 7 7 {ti m"rii in hyeme p
equales medias porGbes de dite duabs ptibs frara de le Orok | Slebalbe a
ard¢ 7 releuijs otingel: Et faciendo

Dunherit ei pt lenad 7 peipiend ci
forinteet fuiciti de dice tre cum pt pus debit¢ et confuet® vna efi t'hs
fete curiart ad t'a jira placita capitalia finuati tenéda apud Dunf> vel
alnbi vbi p'us ex jure vel ofuetndie ditta placita tépih; ret’act( infra dicta


--- Dunfermline_page400.png ---
348 REGISTRUM DE [SEc. Xv.

Regité tenebat®, neend ei Sib; alijs fuicijs debit? et oluet¢ - Saluo ecia et
retento di&o 4¥° de Orok p toto tépe vite fue libero tene® diétara trara
et pt et fponfe fue | p tempe tit ragonabli pte Peia earidé ct pt-- In
cuins Rei teftidm huic pnti carte fire Sigilli cde Hri capifli é appenfi
apud mo"ftiti nim fup "didi Peio die maf Junij Anno dnj millefio quadri-
gételio quiq*gefimo o&auo /

Preeeptum Regis de metis inter abbatem et Conuentum de Dunfermlyn
et communitatem burgi de Kyngorn debatabilibus -

Jacobus Dei gia Rex Scottoy Oimih; pbis hdib; fais ad quos fntes tre
puenint faluté - Sciat@ nos quodda aéti five decretum p cdfules fros
inferius deteriptos in fri Pneia dati 7 pmulgati vtiq, intellexiffe fub hac
for’ / Die péultio mz Decembre Arm dni «” - ecce’ / quiq*gefimo feptio
In capella eaftri de Edinburgh cora fuppmo dno iro Rege et fuo confilio
viz magnifico 7 potente dno Georgio cdite angufie venabilibsq, in e'fto
prib3 Arehibaldo 7 Andrea {Ge crue¢ de Edinburgh et de Melrotl! mo"fti-
orti Abbatibs » Nobilib3 et potentib; dnis Georgeo dno fetoi / Jacobo dno
hamiltoi Johe dno Dernlee Jacobo de Leuingtto magno eamario feocie

diis Dauid Hume WiHmo de Cranftoune 7 Johe de cokburi militibs
dno Niniano Spot edputori rotulatore Renn de Lunde Roberto Ledale
et Wilmo de Cranfton de Arrus - Venabit in x° pat / Rieardus Abbas
mo'ftij de Dunfermlyne p fe 7 ouétu dai mo“ftij aétor ab vna/ et Dauid
de Kingorii 7 Willitis de Kircaldy peuratores 7 comiflarij editat€ burgi de
Kingorii Rej ptibs ab alt fad inftancia Didord i Abbatf 7 ouentus penes
limites bondas 7 Mehias rari de Weftir kingorne p tras Regias fimoniti
Q' quid veliabil in x° pater pu‘ pduxit 7 plegi fee’. quaft a) cottas
de 7 fuper pambulage facta de ine trara debatabi int? di&os
Abbtem et oueti et dicta editaté didi burgi figillatas figillis nobilii dnoy
Tho* dnj Erfkin et Georgei dnj letly jufticiariey p diga_pambulacoe
facienda ats p dim nfm Regé {Paliter deputatori et Sigitt didford: baronit
et alioy q' dige pambuladbi vt affitur intfueFt ccia figillat / quibs plecte



--- Dunfermline_page401.png ---
JAC. 11] DUNFERMELYN. 340

REC

conqueft? fuit di&us Venabit in xpo pat q nd obftait dita pambulacoe
rite 7 legitie vt Pm'tit® feta burgentes dzi burgi figna Mehiard audtoritate
diet pambulaébis fact iMlé p perabulatores ad ppetuad rej m@oria pdita
Remoueit in c6téptu dnj iri Regt + jufticie 7 in piudicitt dizi moti et
q didi burgtfes 7 editas déi burgi in nag" iltitudie 7 armata manu tépe
die e parmbulacdis fp folo ditari Prari cduenc#t animo jnuadend vt
vetilit appuit jufticiarios Abbaté et barones Pdictos 7 evi cOquett? fuit
de dil jniurijs et cOminagdibs p dictos burgeii 7 editaté dictis Abbatj ct
ouetui ac coy tenétib; 7 firmarijs illate et ppet vate di&e vero Dauid de
Kingorii et Wito de Kirealdy pmitla negatib; affentibs burgéfes 7 editaté
didi burgi fuifle mi? iufte vexatos jniuriatos 7 dapnificatos p diétos Abbem
7 oucti et fnos-Tand vero anditis hincinde ambarii ptitt racbibs 7 allega-
ibs jpis remot 7 poftea reintrat€ per di&os duos confules decreti
comes de ftif accedat ad didas
fifa pditas et fig*tas vt pm tit?

extetit 7 deliberatti q Andreas Lundy v
tras 7 q figna fiue metas Mehiay p dia

Amotas / p Amotores eorid put p'us poita fueFt repdi faciat a metas repditas
vid fae i ipo plonalit

ofuct 7 jta orcten? iiiéti eft p ditos dnos ptules di
pnte tépe deliBacdis pute decreti Et q legitie fimoneat xij" pfonas
admin? de phioribs 7 fidedig'oribs dizi burgi de Kingorii ad opend cora
dno firo Rege 7 fuis ofulibs in eraftio Epiphie dni fri Jhu x* p% futur
ucde diey ad Fndend dno firo Regi fup infraceide pact regie 7

jniurijs fup“déis. yuas duodeci pfonas diis Eps brechineii
bs

ci otin’
alijs g“uaminib; 7
Cacellari? Seocie viue vocis oracnlo cora deis peurato
vt pm'tit? eSparend ci plenaria fitate cditat€ di@i burgi et juiundi eft
di partis intimare cBitati dizi burgi dia fentencia et ofiia Ptéta x q
diéa pambulacio facta fuet? in futuri p ambas partes pdidtas jux" detmi-
nacoem et deliberagoem pabulatori modo et for™ / quibs deliberarunt

Qd quid Aci fine decreti ac omia et fingla in eodé otéta in omib; fuis
pune et artitlis Approbam? 7 ratificam? et vt Bmifta ¢ p ppetuo cof"-
mani? p pntes Quare déo vieecditi dito de fyf cctisq, Tits ligijs et

fubfide firis quoy inteft vel intetle potit trite Beipicndo madamy quais
didi AG fiue deeretii fedm forma 7 tenoré eciufd@ exeenGBi debitis
demadet 7 demadent Et q in cétrarii eiufdé nullaten? tépib3 pfuturt

de Kingorii citant


--- Dunfermline_page402.png ---
350 REGISTRUM DE (sEc. xv.

deuéire Pfumat tub omi pena 4 copete potit in hae parte / Dat? fub teftio
magni Sigilli iri apud Daf vndecio die méf julij Anno dni @’ / cece? /
quiq*gefio odtauo Et regni iri xx°iij’ -

Carta Walt} de Ogiluy ci ofmade eintde -

. Vniti6 fe itiris ecetie filijs ad quoy noticias pntes tre puertint / Ricard?

pmiflide dina Abbas mo'ftij de DaF et ouét? eiufdé flém in oim faluatore /
NoWit vnitifitas tra nos vnii ofentu 7 affentix carta nobilis dne Jonete de
Dunbar comitifle moranie infpexifle ct vidifle fa&a et conceffi honabli
viro Walto Ogiluy de beufort fup donage 7 oceffide vni? anni reddit?
t'ginta t'l folidoy et q“tuor denarioy vfualis monete Regni Scocie lenadoy
finglis anis de tre de ffordochy 7 Kethik ci pt? jaceh in Rega’ tira de
Dik infra vié de pth ad duos ani mins vis Penthecoft et {ti m‘rti in
hyeme p eq*les medias por@des n6 rafam n6 abolitam nd cancellata nec
in aliqua fui pte viciatam {3 omi prfus vicio et fufpicde carente Cui?
quidé earte tenor fequitur 7 ¢ talis Oibns hanc carta vifuris vel audituris
Joneta de Dunbar coitifla murrauie ac dna de ffrendracht et de Crichtoit
flim in dno fepitna Sciat¢ nos ex ra Gta feiencia nd vi ant metn du&a
nee errore lap! [nee] dolo 7 fraude decepta vtilitate fira in omib; penfata
dedifie oceffiffe et hae Pnti carta iira ofirmafle dile&o pfang'neo iro ,
Waltero Ogiluy de Beufort ) p fuis fuicio cdfilio et auxilio nob tempihs
ret’ade “tant ipenf quéda Anu redditi t'ginta t't folidoy 7 q*tuor
denarioy vfuat monete Reg" feocie leuad 7 peipiend finglis anis de tris
firis de flordochy et pt* ad duos ani mios vfuales feft Penthecoft et 14
m'rfi in hyeme p equales porédes ’ Neend ct fupioritaté déara Prarti de
Hordochy 7 de Kethie | jaceii in Rega de Dif infra vie de pth Tenet
~hnd piati anud reddita nnd fupioritaté diéari Trai ei pt Pato
Walto hedibs fuis fuecefforib; 7 affig"te a nob he firis 7 fuecefloribs
de dno Abbte de Dif 7 fuis fuccefforihs in feodo 7 Rieditate Ippetui ci
bibs et finglis LiBtatibs pmoditatibs 7 7 ayfiamét€ ac jufte pt> q'bufcumg, ad
PAT Anu redditd 7 fupiorité diara tray chi pt? fp°tantib; feu jufte



--- Dunfermline_page403.png ---
REG. JAC. 11.) DUNFERMELYN. 351

ip‘tare valentib3 quélib; in futurii libere q'ete ple‘ric integre et honoritice
bene et in pace fine aliquo obftatlo aut reuocacde imppetuii Et adeo
libere 7 quiete in dibus 7 p dia ficut nos dié&a Joneta comitiffa ant pde-
ceflores firi dict anuii redditii ac fupioritaté diay Pray ei pt tenuim?
fen poffedimus tenucitt feu poffedert / flaciendo jnde dict? Walt? hedes
fuj fucceffores 7 aflig*ti Prato dno Abbatj 7 7 fuis fucceffe
anuo redditu 7 fupioritate ditay Prari. cit pt» debita 7 ofueta / Kt nos
vero diéta Joneta cdmitifla 7 hedes fri Pdi@ii Anni redditii xxx" iij 6 7
a. de tre de ffordochy nnd fupioritaté didarit Pray / 7 trarit de
Kethie ei pt? ac corti donaébem 7 gceffioné in Sib; et p dia vt pmiflii
eft pfato Walto hedibs fuis {uccefforibs et affig"t€ warandizabim? acquie-
tabim? 7 ippetua defendem? Tn cui? rei teftio™ figilli n¥m pnti earte fire
apponi fecim? apud Ochthouf? ogauo die me’ Noutbre Anno dnj w’-
ecco quig*gefio q*rto Qua q'd carta donaééem 7 oceflioné in dibs fuis
pak 7 artitlis mod¢ et eciftancijs in eifdé ptentt for pit et effeétu T
dibs 7 p dia appham? ratifieam? 7 tenore Pneiti p ppetuo of'mam? Refuatt
tamé nob 7 fueeefloribs fris Anuali redditu quiq, Mearit peipiendarii de
dice tre ett pt dnuati vna ci Warde Releuijs 7 coi feéta/ ac ei omibs
alijs 7 finGlis fuicijs nobis de dite ere cf pt debit@ et ofuet® ante dia
of'magem / Saluo ecia q otinet® in dita carta q dic? Walt? aut hedes tui
pt aut poffunt fae affig"ti vel aflig“tos de dicto Anuo redditu in diete Prt
ci pt? hoe tollera¥ nolim? q faciat aut faciat in poftri affig*tii feu affig*tos
nifi de firo ofentu et affenfu {Pali - In cui? rei teftiom Sigilli cde eapitli
fri é appenfum ap" mo‘ftium nfm de Daf atiditit decioquito die meh
Septébr€ Anno dnj w’ - cccc™ ’ quiquagefimo oéauo

Carta relaxadbis ’ de reftrieéde pgeniei de Makearouii -

Jacobus dei gia Rex Seottori vnilé et finglis ad quoy noticias putes
tre puenint flim / Quia ats p ieceffores firos fereniffios principes feottoy
Reges jn laudé et honoré beatiffie Hgarite Regine pgenitric€ fire Abbas
7 conuétus mo*fterij fri de Dunfmly Indotati 7 jnfeodati fueriit de


--- Dunfermline_page404.png ---
352 REGISTRUM DE [s

xv.

certis priuilegijs 7 libertatib3 ecctiaftie 7 fignant replegiand hoies de
pgenie 7 confang'nitate makearouii vulgarit niicupat Kynm‘carouh a
firis jufticiarie / Quib3 liBeatib; et puilegijs nd obftantibs
et ppt Rumoré ligiort iroy 7 murmur dri ppli euitand ac in effrenat&
multitudiné t‘ntgreffoy affencit 7 pretendenciii fe de dé@a pgenie Et pp
melioré et arcioré execuddem jufticie t*nfgreffoy » Ex delibadoe fri ofilij
et dittfoy Platoy ac plurimoy baronii et peerii Regni jiri ats reftrixim? 7
ceffauim? ac reftringi et ceffari fecimus déa p'uilegia 7 libertates 7 reple-
giacdé déay pfonay de Kynm‘caronti / Nre tamé intenédis pretextn dée
reftrieddis nd eft déis ADbti ct oustui aut coy fuccefforib jn cor ptuilegijs
aliqd Pindicit facere {; pocius cord ptuilegia augmitare / Conceffimus ac
tenore fineiii concedimus dis Abbi 7 puttui eortiq, fuccefforibs vt ipi et
coy batti libere valedt replegiare tporib; affuturis hoies indi&atos arefta-
tos de déa pgenie de Kynm‘earouii de dit curijs 7 jtinibs jufticiarie

eurijs 7 jtineri

juxta antiqua et p'meua infeodacdem déis Abbatj et conuétui de p'uilegijs
7 libertatibs afidi&e facta « Kt ficut antiquitus hoies dée pgeniei Replegiare
folebant / quos Abbem et cduentii fuosq, fucceffores eifdé fuis libertatibs
priuilegiis reftaurauim? 7 repofuim? in cori poffeffide ac Reftauram? 7
reponim? p pntes / Adeo libere fieut ipi aut cori predeceffore:
pPuilegia huerunt 7 poffederunt aii n¥m reftrieébem antediétam - Quare
ynitfis et fingulis iris Jufticiarijs vicecomitibs eoriq, deputate alijsq,
officiarijs miniftris ligijs et fubdite quoy inteft vel inkeffe potit ftrite
Peipiendo madam? ne quis in cont*riii jnfeodaddis déoy p*uilegiora et
liBtati dizos Abbtem 7 guétum jninfte jniuriare vexare aut inq'etare
Plimat . 6 q dai officiarij tri quoy jntett hoies d@i pgeniei juxta antiqua
contnetudiné 7 p'uilegia déj mo ftij ficut eifdem ante diéa reftrieGoem
gaudere folebant / in futurii quociens opus fuerit ad plegiii dim'tant 7 q
Adis Abbatj et cSuétuj 7 cori Miftr€ 7 jntromifforibus jn oiiib; 7 finglis
d@a p'uelegia tangeti pmpte Fndeant pareant 7 jntendant fub omi pena
que edpetere potit in hae parte - Dati fub magno figillo firo ap* Pth nono
Die méf Oétobr€ Anno dni w™ - cccc™ / quiquagefio nono / Et Regni
Tri vicefimo tercio

eadem



--- Dunfermline_page405.png ---
REG. JAC. IIT] DUNFERMELYN. 353

Carta confirmacdis de Kildone in Roffia

Vit f&e firis ecctie filiis ad quoy notieias fintes tre puenint Rieardus
pmiflice dina Abbas mo“ftij de Daf flém in oim faluatore » Nowit vnitt-
fitas Fra nos quada earti Religiofoy viroy p'oris 7 ouet? moftij de
Plufeardy infpexifle vidiffe 7 plegiffe fétamn 7 eoncefla e'eifp'to viro dno
Tho* de Dingvaille fib deeano de Roflei fup donacde 7 oceflide terray
de Kildoii ei pt* jaceii in Rega’ fra de DaP inf® vit de Infinyf / non
rafa 6 abolita nee in aliq” parte vieiaté 1, oMi prfus vieio 7 fafpiéoe
care Cui? q'd earte tenor feq't® et & talis. Omnibs hane carta vifuris vel
Vrebarde 7 ciufdé
Andreas Denone
olim diis dietat¢ ville de Kildone fua dimidia part pt einfdé Willilis
eryne burgefi de Abirdeii olim diis fexte pt eiufdé ville fua fexta pté ci
pt? Willitis elyne olim dits teie pte ville de Kildoit Pdéte faa Leia pte ei
pt p fe et fuos peuratores ad hoe legitie oftitutos de quoy peuratoy
ato nobis Iuculen? p legitia oftabat documéta in maib3 iris pure 7
fimplici? p fult® 7 bactm 7 q'libet coy in fanoré dileéi fri Tho® de Dig-
vaille junior€ furfii dedit 7 refig'u' Qua refig'ébe fic vt Pm'tit® p didos
Andrea Wittm et Wilm in maib iiris facta 7 recepta Venabliq, viro dno
Tho® de Dingvaille fub decano Roffeti nob hilt fupplicat et infrafe’pte

audituris Wits de boyis prior p’oratuii de Pluteardy 7
vi

loci ouét? flim in oim faluatore Quia ats honorabl

nove infeodacoi fui exprelli 7 7 idubitati: ofenfum Pheii ac toti jus 7
elamei q in et ad tras de Kildoti Ptéas ht feu hre potit quolibet
in futuy in mi is legitie refig*uit / Notlite nos ynai firo ofenfu
dediffe oeefliffe 7 hoe puti earta ira ofirmafle déto dilecto fire Tho® Ding-
vaile juniori Ses 7 finglas t Pras iiras ville de Kildoit pe
cditatn Roffie inf vit de Intnyt? Tenéd 7 tind totas
tras not in Rega’ fpectaii Pfato Thoe de Dingvaille juniori hedibs fuis
+ fais affig"te et qabfit defic
&mano aéti Tho® hedibs fuis 7 {nis affig"te Et

ei pt? jaceii in
Qe
itegras pnoiatas

ei diléo fro Johi de Dingvaille fii

ipis iby qd abfit deficici
pxio validiori 7 digtori: de cognicoe de Dingvaile fuecedei de nob 7 fue-
i ao F = o ; an y ae
cefforibs firis p'orib; p'oratuai pdigoy in feodo 7 heditate ippetui p des
Qy


--- Dunfermline_page406.png ---
354 REGISTRUM DE [sec. xv.

rectas metas fuas antiq’s 7 difas in bofe€ planis moris marrefijs p*tis
pafeuis 7 pafturis  petarijs turbarijs fabrilib; 7 brafinis vijs femit aquis
filuis riuolis stangnis 7 lacub3 aucupaddib3 venagdibs pil ea wrak
waeth waief ci molendis mult*is 7 eoy fequet cit curijs 7 euriay exitibs
hludwet€ hergeld€ muliey. Mehete ef edi paftura ac libert introitu 7 exitu
ac ci dibs alijs 7 finglis pmoditatibs libertatibs 7 afiamétt ac juftt fais
pt? q'bufeiq, ta noiat€ q® nd noiate ta fubt? tra q fup* tra ta ppe q"
peull ad Pdéas Tras ct pt fpeaaii feu iufte fp tare valet in futuy  libere
q'ete ple“rie integre honorifice bi et in pace fine reuoeaéde alig*li
Refuado nichilomin? le frankteuemét détay tray déto dno thot de Ding-
yaile mm? di in huais vikit Saluis nob ecii queret et efcaet? ad corona
Regia {peétai - Reddendo inde Annati pfati Tho*s de Dingvaile et hedes
fai feu fui aflig"ti Et ipis vt Pm'tit? yd ablit decedefi diet? Johes frat
&man? eiufl® Tho hedes fui feu fui aflig*ti. Et ipis qd abfit decedefi
pxim? validior vt pm'tit? de cog*Ge de Dingvaille fuecedendo hedes
fui 7 fui affig"ti nob 7 fuecefforils tris p'oribs 7 onétui détoy p'oratuii
duodeei denarios vfualis mouete Reg’ Scocie fup foli dee fre ad felt
penthecof? noie albe f'me fi petat® im p di alio one fuicio feculari
exacéde fen demada | de diet trt et pt> exigi potat feu requiri - In eui?
rei teftiOm Sigillfi cde capitli Gri pntib; é appenfa ap" mo'ftia nfm de
pluteardy aiidigm vitio die méf marcij Anuo dni w° » cccc™’ / fexagefio

Qua q't Gti donaddem 7 vcetlioné i eadé otétas ci Sibz pie 7 artitlis
modt 7 c'ciiftacijs in eifde otentt for* pit et efftu in dib3 7 p Sia ex vnii
off 7 afl capifli firi ex Gta jira feiencia appham? ratificam? 7 tenore
pntiti p nob 7 fuccefloribs Hris pftmam? In cui? rei teftibm Sigilli cde
capitli fri pntibs é appenfi ap* mo“ftia nim de Daf aiiditm xx™ die
méf julij Anno dni m™ cece” fexagefimo fédo -

Litta pambulaébis trart de Gaytmilk tehit de Admulty -

58. Anno dnj wm" -cccc™ | fexagefimo fexto die vero méf} Junij xxvij’ In

pneia duj Johis lyndefay de Byris Jufticiarij ex pte boreali aque de forth


--- Dunfermline_page407.png ---
REG. JAC. 11.] DUNFERMELYN. 355

oftitué cOpuerit Ricardus pmiffise dina Abbas mot tij de Dif noie
ipius et fui puétus ci pmiflide fafticient ex vna Et Dauid de Admulti
de eodé ex pte alt” ad pambulacoem facienda ct eminada p breue dnj
iiri Regt Jacobj Peij de capella Regia jnt tras de Gaytmilk fehiF {p*tati
+ ptinet Pate dno Abbat} ct oudtui fupTdié&e ex vna / Kt Pras de
Admulty {p‘taii 7 ptinei pfato Dauid de Admulti ex alt*. jaceit infra
Regalitat® de Daf et vit de Nyf De 7 ci pf” et afl" didara ptiti ad
dita pabulaéoem fmianda et finiend Ele&a fuit affifa nohilit viroy et
dnoy fubfe'ptora jn quibs fe cOpmiterit 7 tubmiferiat vis dnj Johis lundy
de codé et Johis K¥nimdt militii « Archibaldj meldra de Cletehe Jacobj
petblatho de eodé» Dauid Ramkelo de Nethi# ramkelo Witt laffalis de
Tnttdovat Dauid ramfay de brekmot ‘Tho* ftrang de Peteorthy Johis
forate de eodé Tho* Abireriby de eod@ Henrie} malvyne de Carnbee

AleX allirdas de Stajochy Georgij rifay de Clatty / Henrici Dépftartouii
de eodé Johis martyne de Cardwane WiHi ftrathanry de eodé Johis
limifdeii de Ardry Georgij petearne de eodé» Alani lochmalowny de
eodé Henrici pyot de pyotftoni / Witmi brouit de Colftouii » Wiki
monypeny de Petmuly / Dauid monypeny de Kynkell / Tho® limifded de
Condlane ; And¥ Dory de eodé , Witi ftrang de Baleatky 7 Johis gourlay
de K¥crag Qu) juratj in fncia ptifi poft multas aleagoes* tettes 7 alia
documéta nob extentfa pabulacoem aiidita cdcernétia peefleriit 7 marchias
dictay Pray deerene¥t et detminariit jn hie quj fequit? modi viz jncipied
ad orieflé pté tari de Admulty verfus auftrii ad loci wlgalit diétit le
3ochry den / Et fic afeendeii ficut lapides fit fit} et locatj ppe tra arabilé
et foueas de Admulty viq, ad tres magnos lapides locatos p marchia
earidé tray in oceided Et de hine vergendo verfus borea et defeendendo
tient lapides fit fiti ci fonea viq, ad fine et loci antiquj ponte fiper aqua
P
ppetuo terras ext* auftrali parte et oceidentali dite marehie Abbatj et
eduttui fup“di& et coy fuceeflorib; imppetua habend et in ppctate
poflidend Et eodé modo infra pias Wehias diéto Danid de Admulty 7
heredib fuis poffidend p declaraGoem et deliberacdem di&oy dnoy affife
in fine pambulacdis fup*diéte - 7 incdtinéte p di&i dim Johem lyndefay

de levin et vig, ad medietaté eiufd@ aque Relinquédo feu relinguét


--- Dunfermline_page408.png ---
459.

356 REGISTRUM DE [SEc. xv.

jutticiarii q’? fup* » Mandata fuit ptibs paiae di&as marchias obfuari
metasq, et difas earidé et vitius ne quis eoy fuceeffores vel hedes
clameii queftioné aut demada vitius fub penis jur€ contrid: pponent » aut
in poftri p ppetuo alligarét / {3 ab offij clameo fint exclufi 7 ippetui
abfolutj p pntes péit? et omino - Dat et fact fup fol ditay rari: fub
Sigillo officij fri jufticiarie vna eit Sigitt qrrada coy quj ad dicta pambu-
lagdem et affifam fintes et juratj erant ac interant sub ano die méfe ct
loco fup*di&e / Ac in miffoy teftimonio pmif? appent* -

Litta obligagdis Johis de Crichtouii de burniftout ta Abbti et mo"ttio
de Da? -

Be it kend till all mé be p prent lettis be mane¥ of charti? me John of
Crichtouii of Burniftoud to be haldin and oblift » And be p fnts oblié me
till A venable fadif in crift Richard be godd¢ tholing Abbot of Da?

And to pe pvent of pat ilk foF certane gude dedf and pfitt doi to me
and my frend¢ and kyn of befor. Pat I fall nocht thole / grannt no¥ gyi!
leiffe / na tollerance to na ma no? geit woma / na creatut vndiF god to
draw na drancht@ of watis throu my land¢ of Gilbertftouii with pe ptinei
fo¥ ony mylnis to be made / lyand on pe weft fyde of pe magdalene burii
and within pe frafdom of Edinburgh And giff of eaffe pe fayde Abbot 7
gvent of pare fucceffort wyll byg ony mylii vpoi pare land¢ fornét pe
forfaid land¢ of Gilbertftouti I giff and grannt¢ fof me and mf ayr€ and
my affig"is full leifie and tholing and gude will to pe faid€ Abbot and
event’ And pare fuceeffor€ to mak land ftell and Dame forganis my faid
land¢ of Gilbertftoui in ony place pfitatle and effull to pe fayde Abbot
and pvent and to pare fucceffor and foF etlmaif to endu¥ without ony
Revocacon of me pe faid John my ayré of affig*is ppetualle tymis to ei
Excep p‘ it fall be leiffi to me and

taid grunde of Gilbertftouii till oure awit wile giff it be fene fpedfull till
ws / And giff of caffe I or my ayr¢ of affig*is lard¢ of Gilbertftouii granntt
or gevis ony leiffe to ony e‘atu® to mak ony draucht¢ of pe faid magdelaii

ayrf to mak a myli within my


--- Dunfermline_page409.png ---
REG. JAC. IIL] DUNFERMELY

BOF

burit throu my faid land€ of Gilbertilouii to mak ony mylnis oF myli
dam; | will and be } fints granntt and gevys full leitfe and charge for
me and mf ayrt and affig‘is to pe faid Abbot and ovent and to pai¥ fuc-
ceflor€ balgeis and officiar€ to calf) adnulle and caft donii pe taid damis
and drauchtf and pai to deftroye for ctlma¥ / Hafand full leiffe and power
pat to of me pe faid John my ayrf and efti¥ ciort Na law na ftatut
maie or to be made beand in pe contrar of p fnts of vale / of in ony law
to be herde for eWmar to eit bot to tland and remane be {pecialle onégon
pe qubilk all and find to keip oferve and fulfill L pe faid Jotn of crichtoii
obli® me and mj ayrf and my affig*is to pe faid Abbot and ovent and
par fucceffor€ ppetuale tymis to ei» In witnes of pe quhilk thing [ hati’
put my selle to p pntz at mufkilburgh pe xix day of pe moneth of Julij
pe gef of ou¥ lord @ ccce fexti and fex -

Afledacio burgi de Mufkilburgh ad feodiftma -

Hee Indentura apud Dunf pfecta xviij’ die mé6 Augufti Anno dnj
w? + cece? | Ixvj In? venablem in x° prem Ricard Abbat® mo‘ftij de
Daf eiufq, ouétii ex pte vna/ et ballios ac cditat® burgi de Mufk ex
alt" plene teftat® , q digi (nj Abbas 7 puétus locauerit 7 ad fia dimi-
feriit ippetud prat€ battis 7 editati oMes reddit? digi burgi ad coy feacearia
ptinehi ef puis cuftiis ftallagijs 7 exitibs curiay ac toti burg

in plena
libertate ci omibg fuis pmo" - rectitudinibs jurib; et atiamétf ybuteig,
ad etidé burgit {p*tantibs fen fp‘tare valentib; quoq'modo in tuturit adeo
libere in omnibs et p omiia fieut aliq' burg dni Regt aliqué burgii in
Regno de dicto dno Rege ad feodiftma tenét habent aut poflident Saluis
digis dnis Abbati et onétui Bris in dicto burgo luc‘tf fine lue‘ndt jtine
cailarie anuis peidibs de iO Pre dita burgi mot tio debit Ae corree-
cde balliuoy q’ciens otigit cos aut eoy quélibet in jure fen jn jutticia
facienda fiue exequéda delingre p q'b3 q'd {npius peell! predi@i batti 7
cOitas foluét anuati ippetuii méoratt Religio® q*tuor Meas vinat monete
Reg" Seocie ad duos ani Pmios olvetos vis penthecoftt et fi Dit in hyeme


--- Dunfermline_page410.png ---
iO.

358 REGISTRUM DE [sEc. Xv.

p eq‘les porédes fine dilaGde cauillagde dolo feu malo ingenio Et fi
otingat eos in aliquo Pmioy Pnotatoy de Pfc'pta fima vt pm'tit® in pte
vel in toto defite q@ abfit / Obligarit fe omia bona eoy cdia q'b; p pte
vel pro toto no fufficientib; Sia bo" coy ffialia ac coy poffeffises ad
voliitaté pfatoy Religiofoy fore naamada eapienda 7 dift'ngenda donee fitit
eis de dita fiima dapnisq, 7 expnf fi que vel quas Blibati aj Religioli
{uftinueft vel fetint oceafide Ptacte foluddis in aliq’ Pmioy Pnotatoy vt
pm'tit? né facte ple*rie fatiffati «In quoy oim teftiom pti hui? jndenture
penes Religiofos dnos Abbem 7 ouétii remanéti Sigilla cSe burgi de
Mnitk- & appenfa Parti v’ remanéti paiae battis 7 cOitati
capitli Pfatoy Religiofoy & appenfit die 7 loco et Anno fup*dige -

gilli, ce

Ing'fiGo pifeacdis aque de tweda p mo‘ftio de Dak -

This ing¥iGin made at Berwik vpoii twede in pe tolbuth of pe fimy
tyfday in pe vigill of Saint Jotin pe baptift In pe ge¥ of God j - cece

fexti and fevin / In pns of pe balgeis of pe fimy . pat is to fay / John of
lamyfdeS and James kyng be piF piGis vnd vri pat is to fay Robt of
netbyt : James of Dowglas / Patoii of Hangaldefyde / James of aldincraw

John millat / Mor€ hawfoti. Lowry {mith / Henry millat / Joh Wilfoit

John Banarma / Wit grevefoii / Archibald of mandftouti Wat of mid-
ftoufi Jotin fialea¥ | James of nefbyt / James Kyng and W) isa of feugall
hurg3 and jnduellarf of pe faid burgh and vtouth langand pe hichis dyvifis
and richt€ betwix pe fifching? of pe ald ftell ptéing to be Abbot and ovent
of Daf Abbay on pe ta pt And pe fifehing of pe Calate ptéing to oure
Soitane lord pe kyng / and pe malorf and pe occupyor¢ of jt pat
mézeis and his falouis Henry of congiltoni and Evmond of nefbyt burg3
of pe faid burgh on pe top pt Of pe cémand and charge of oure Souane
Lord James be pe g*ce of god king of Scott¢ / pif faid pfonis beand {wort
in jugemét be pe gret athe on pe halid6me to decide / pe faid queftion

clamis | queftidis and demad¢ herd 7 yndftadig pvis herd and examit of
dit and mony / haf€ endit deliuit and gevin furth jn man fouriti and

Jauid



--- Dunfermline_page411.png ---
152,

REG. JAC. 11.) DUNFERMELYN. 359

effee , as folowis , In p'mo as for pe nett of pe calate fall fet pa¥ ttavis
and lend abowf pe thre flanis and lend on pa? awh land and tweng
quha¥ feho wyll If pe ald ftell ptenig to DaP fall ftand at pe thre ftanis

pe ma with pe land toll; and pail) vp and fet owF pa¥ nett with routh
with a tow of xxiiij fadofi and fehot at hb avauntage quhé and quhat ty
quha¥ pai lyk¢ and keip pa® bound¢ hafand nett¢ in pe ald ftell alflang as
be Inglifiné oyf fornét thal ay quhill pe king? wat balge mak revlis in
pe watif - In witnefling hefof pe Sel of ws balgeis John and James togidd
with pe Selis of foi of pai pt was on pe faid jnqueft to pis writ and RatouF
ar affixit at pe faid burgh pe day get and moneth aboit writiti in pfens of
yp mony witnes James Kyn& John Patonfoti George of Cogiltouti Ada
bakf? Alaii colthird Huchon ker notat Witt talgour Archibald of home

John forma and John of limyfdet and mony vp ret :

Seruicium vnius capellanie in le North ferry -

Vnit6 Ze mat's ecetie tiliis ad quoy noticias Pntes tre puenit Hérie?
pmiffide diuina Abbas mot tij de Difmlyis 7 eiuft loci puét? falut® in
oim faluatof - In {is fuis x" honorates ipi? dni fri Jhu x* tuttragi
facili? impetrat Cupiétes g g’ ac pie defidantes beatiffimi: Jacobi aptm
miniftroy obfequio veniari i Tre ut fie ci? pat’cinio nos apli? ditem* in
celis dam? pcedim? ae caritatt intuitu affignam? dileéto capellano 7
dno Danid Story fuiciii vni? capellanie p nos de nouo fiidati in capella
Beatiffimi Jacobi apli in le Northfery fituata extédés ad fiima decé ineay
vinalis monete feocie inuati Feipiéda p dém diim Dauid p toto tépe vite
fue a fceptor fro dé mo“ftij de theef ei%t mo*f'
meos déo Feeptori p ftipédiis d@i capellani anuati allocada vna ci 1
yz horto in le Northfery ppe diéam capella ac ecid ci dnabs acris tre

p nos 7 fuecetloves

how
eapettris de tr€ Bris de feryhyl jacétib; infra vice
pellano {palit affignadt nnd ch paftura vni? equi anuati intra digas
tras de feryhyl ac ci omibs oblacdibs ad alta dicte capelle ptinétibs feu
oblate eXtt tatime oblagoibs pis

de fyfe p nos deo

dé dée capelle 7 peuradibs Iiinis eiutt


--- Dunfermline_page412.png ---
360 REGISTRUM DE (sec. xv.

ad fuftétacd; liinis di&e eapelle Ffuat€ put in carta fira infeodaGdis dei
tuicii 7 capellanie defup faét- laci? otinet* Ac fimili? et xx # Anui reddit?
wfiualis monete fcocie anuati ad fuftétacd; ornamétoy 7 veftimétoy altart
dée capelle peipiéde 7 leudde de tenemét¢ infra fe'ptt jacétibs in burgo de
Diifmlyii viz xiiij f de teneméto Dauid matoi 7 yj f de teneméto walezei
hakat facitdo inde nob ppoti anuati de difpofigSe déi anui reddit? xx f
put in d@a carta infeodacois pleni? declarat* Tenéd 7 habéd dém fuicia
de capellanie Pfato dno Danid p toto tépe vite fue ei dibs 7 finglis
libertatibg juribs fructibg redditibus puétib; obuécoib3 oblacdibs 7 emolu-
met eXte oblacdibs 7 peuracdibs liinis d&e capelle fupi? expflatt ad dém
fuiciti fine eapellania {pe&atibs feu jufte {pecta¥ valentibs liBe qete
plenaric integre bit 7 in pace abfq, obftatlo quociiq, flaciédo inde Anuati
di? dis Dauid diuina fuicia ad dé alta® pdée capelle viz miffa quoti-
diana ct difpofit? rit Pp aiabs in déa carta infeodacdis otét€ put cord
fino indice in extremo examine volllit FndeF ac facitdo otinuad Fidencia
ad mifioné dée capelle fed tenoré carte infeodacdis fup*dée Et fi otingat
dam diim Dauid aliis euris feu fuiciis fe implica¥ aut {ua Ffidencia in aliis
locis fate q?’mi? dém fuiciti omit fuit volum? q eo caf fen cafibz dém
fuicit fiue capellania 7 manibs firis 7 fuccefloy froy p tépoF exiftent>
legittime vaeet abfq, impediméto quocig, Refuatt nobis 7 fuecefforihs
firis abbatibs 7 ouétu dd moftij imppetuii ju? patronat? 7 donacde dé
tuicii fiue capellanie ac correcde eiuft quociés 7 qualiteng, illud feu eam
vacat ptigit fine p“dicéde feu Fuocadse quaciiq, Et ad maioré euidécia
d&e fire donaddis 7 gceffionis Pdti fuicii fine capellanie p Anuli iri
tradiéd3 dém diim Dauid ad dém fuicii five capellania in realé aétualé 7
corpalem poifeflioné ei9d induxim? inveftim? 7 inftituim? fedm tenoré
dite carte fire infeodaédis pro toto tempe vite fue ut fupi? Pmittitur
duraturo - In ¢9 rei teftioniai Sigilli ede capitli fri fntib; apponi fecim?
apd dém nim moftid x die més Decembris Auno dni «° cece? feptua-
gefimo nono +


--- Dunfermline_page413.png ---
463.

REG. JAC. VY.) DUNFERMELYN. B61

Endentour€ of Symon Karwour wryeht and his prenty® -

Thir Endentoure maid at Dunfermlyfi pe xvi day of pe moneth of maij
pe gheiF¥ of God i vo and vij geir€ proport® and bert witnef i pe felf
p' it is app6ntit and finaly concordat betuix ane venerable fadir 7 eft
James be pe pmiffione of god abbot of Dunfermly and pe connét of pt ilk
oii pe ta pt and ane diferet ma Symoi KaruoF ofi pe top pt 7 forme maneF
and affek has ef? followis « pt is to fay p' pe faid fyma is bidyii and oblift
to pe faid vertable fad and pe faid ovent for all and hail pe dais of his
lyfe pt he fall remaue and wirk 7 pe faid abba t pe eraft of pe wry' craft
and repare all neidfull werkt of pe famy als far has he haf€ knawleg~ and
pe faid venable fad and event and pair fucceffor is bund and oblift to
pay pe faid Sym6 for his labor doing geirly xx! MC of vival monet of
Scotland ane chald of meil w' thre bollis of mault to be payt at four mes
1 be gheF pt is to fay at Witfonday limef Mtynmef and candilmef and
at ilk ane of p Pmes vy aike of fill wt be vidtail aficrand to and ane
quar? fme to begyfi w' and ay fa furth' tme he tme eft followand the
faid Sym fall haif till his prenty® four Tike of fill and ane chald of meil
till his met and his clath¢ ilk get fa lang as he is prenty( and pe faid
vetlable fad and ovent 7 p fuccefore fal wphald pe faid Symons werk
Jumys or ellis ane conte? ‘for till wphald pai and gif pe eaf be pt pe faid
WF. lénys pe faid Sym till ony outw' pe place pe faid Symdis fee fall
ftand hail till hi felf fik like as he had wrocht his werk 1 pe faid place
and till al and fyndry p pi&e arteles and condicions be fullilie and hailily
copletit obfuit and keipit for pe pt of p endentdre remanand w' pe faid
fymd karwo* pe cdmoiie feil of pe faid abbay fall be to hung? and to pe
ta pt remanand w' pe faid W. F + and conuct pe faid Symd has peurat
w' inftans pe feil of ane honorable ma Dauid cup aldirma of pe faid burgh
to be hungi befor p wittnet Maif? Thoiie tribill vieat of el

Jhotie gudfwayiie chaiplanis and Arehebald Stewart wy! opis ditt.


--- Dunfermline_page414.png ---
$04,

362 REGISTRUM DE [sEc. xv1.

Copia prin fre five Indentu# int dnos abbaté de diifermly et
Nevbotell 7é¢t -

This Indenturis maid at Edinburgh pe fift day of februar the geir of god
j® vo and xxxi geiris quhilk pportis contenis and beris leill witnefs in the
felif p' jt js appointit aggreit and finallye concordit hetuix ane maift
Reucrend fader in god James archibifchop of fantand? primat and legat
of feotland and viufructuar of pe abbay of diifermeling 7é and george be
pe pmifliouli of god abbot of pe faid abbay and convent of pe famyii oft
p' ane part and ane venerable fader in God James abbot of newhbotill
and convent of pe famyn oii p' vp part In maner forme and effect as efter
followis that is to fay the faid James abbot of newbotill and convent of
pe famy fall in gudelye haift fall cauf} drive pair coill of preftoun grange
to pe boundis of pinckin and Intetk in fielyk mati as thay have drevin
pair awin coill to this tyme and w' ficlyke lavell and fall cauf pe watter
to have paflage fra pe hak of the coill callit pe coill damys In fik maner
as pai haue drevin the lave of pair coill and mak twa fute dry at pe bak
of pe faid coill damys / And alf pai fall oppin the conduétis pairof anis in
fik maner as the lavell fuis to be drivin of pair awine coill to pe boundis
of pincking and Inuetk pat pe watter may haue anis paflage to pe fey
ynder erd And gif ony ftopyi Lappinis eftirwart in pe abbot of newbot-
tillis houndis jt falbe leifm to pe faid vfufru@tuar abbot and convent of
Diifermeling and pair fucceflor€ to cau} paf jn at ony of pe waift ey
quhair pai fall pleif} and oppin the famyn apoii pair expen Refundand to
the faid abbot of newbotill and his fuceflore all feaith p' happiis throw
brekin of pe faid abbot of newbottillis landis Alfwa It is appoyntit pat
my lord of fan& and¥ abbot and convent of Diifermeling and pair fuc-
ceffor€ grevis fall pa in at ony ftair pai fall pleif to thirll ane gall weft
through to Pair awne coill of pincking 7 Invetk apon imy lord of fan&
spenf} And at® pe faid abbot and convent of newbotill ar contentit
that pir fex ftairis fallowing be left appin pat is to fay the four weftmaft
ftairis ane ftair at pe gall ane litill fpace be eft pe mylne dam 7 pe ftair



--- Dunfermline_page415.png ---
REG. JAC. Ve] DUNFERMELYN. 368

of pe town leif} be eft pe faid ftair be fide pe mylne dam pat my lord of
fan&and¥ abbot and convent of Diitermling grevis may pat in for pe
weill of my lord of fanétand¥ abbot and convent of Difermling® coill
quhen pai fall plei® « Attour my lord of fanétandé abbot and cSvent of

Dafermeling 7 pair fnecetfore fall keip fkai‘lef alwayis pe abbot and con-

vent of newbottillis land¢ jn all thingt belangand the famy be driwin of
iny lord of fancéand¥ coill forfaid and paflage of pe watter throw the faidis
landis except pe mylnis alancrlie - And marattoure gill pe faid abbot of

newbotill or tenentis of preftoun defyris ony pan wod of my lord of fanét
and coill thay fall be fait hefor ony vpis of pe euntre except my lord of
Dafermling? tenttis for the payment - fYor the drivyn of Pe quhilk levell of
pe forfaid coill of preftoun grange 7 vpis caufis aboue expremit my lord
of fan@andé Viifrudtuar forfaid abbot and convent of Diifermling fall
incdtinent content and pay to pe faid James abbot of newhotill pe fovme
of auchtene {cors of Mke vfuale money of feotland - To the obfving keping
and fulfilling of all and findry pe premif# and enery poynt and pte pot in
forme 7 effe& as js abone writing athir pty bindis 7 oblifl! pame Ik ane
to ypis for pame and thair fueceflort faithfully be pe faithtis and treuthis
in pair bodyis the haly ewangelis tweichit In witne® of pe quhilk thing
to pe part of pir Indenturis to remane w' pe faid maift Reuerend fader
abbot and conyent of Difermeling 7 thair fucceffor€ the faid abbot and
edvent of newbotill has to hung pe omon feill of pair cheptour of pe abbay
w! pair fubtptionis manuale and to pe pte of famy to Remane w' pe faid
abbot and convent of newbotill and pair fucecflouris pe faid maitt Rene-
rend fader abbot and convent of Diifermeling hes to hang ) omon feill of
pe chepto® of pe faid abbay of Difermeling w' pe fubte'ptionii of pair
handis day geir and place foirfaid -

Hee eft vera et indubitata copia principalis litte fine endeii

ecopiat et collacionaé per me Diim thoma maleum notarium publi-

cum de verbo in verbum nil addendo vel minuefi Datum fub

ne

ma" mea fubferip’ et figno -

Tuomas Matcum -


--- Dunfermline_page416.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page417.png ---
405,

466.

CARTARUM PRECIPUE RECENTIORUM
ABBREVIATIO.

Lia Johis Lyoun -

Johes Abbas ad dnuam firma dimittit Johi lyovn catilario Seocie tra de
fothros 7 de Schéual iuxta portynerak inf vit de fyf p suo fideli fui

confilio 7 auxilio nob 7 @onatterio fro impenf 7 infuturi: impendendis
Tenendas p toto tempe vite sue - Reddendo quiq, wareaf fterligoy refiduii
auté tociu? ferme déay tray ac comoditates eaydé q“seiig, p sua pecoe
anua sibi applicando odicde edis guerre fibi 1 oMib3 allocando - Et eft
sciendum quod pdés Johes h'tautes das Pras ant legios ant natin
jiros de Pdéis Tris sine iro edtilio 7 edcefu nd remoueb' - Provifo quod
poft deceffum plibati Johis null? hereduim suoy iuf aliq’d sine in ppretate
siue in firmaéde déay Pray valeat vendica¥ - Recipiet etiam fumptus
notabiles factos in negociis monafterii - Datum apud Dunfermlyn penul-
timo die menf Junii Anno dni a"? ccc™ Ixx™ viii? -

hoies

Proceffus int AbBbem oustii de Duntmly et burgéfes de Pth -

Inftrumentum de confirmanda conventione inter Abbatem et Burgum de
Perth per Jacobum Epifeopum Dunkeldenfem et Jacobum Abbatem de
Lundoris » Pape mandatarios —ubi feribuntur Mandatum Engenii IV.
datum Florentie 15 - kal - August . 1442 - indentura typis edita V. 413.
et Obligatio que extat .V, 414 fupra» Datum apud burgum de Perth in
eapella San&e Marie prope pontem 1444 - 30 Martii -


--- Dunfermline_page418.png ---
407.

168.

366 REGISTRUM DE [earT. REC.

Carta dni thome bully fup cdceffione hofpicij feta Abbati mot tij de
Dunfmlyne in teneméto fuo infra burgi de Striueling

Thomas bully cectiari cathélii glatgueh ac Dunkeldefi candieus concedit
ut dominus Ricardus abbas de Dunfermlyne cum fua familia recipiatur
et hofpitetur in hofpitio jaceii if* burgi de St'ucling ex_pte boreali vie
Regie int? tra Roberti Haeat ex pte ocei ab vna et tra quod Johis
galway ex pte ori" ptib; ab alia p ppetuo quociés et qiietiq, placebit
dito dno Abbati cit fua familia pdicta hofpitii: ci hofpitandi accede -
Datum ap" Striueling feciido die mé Ap't. Anno dni m+ cccc™  tex-

agefio teto -

Copia fenteneie diffinitie late per magfm Johem grene Caneellariii mora-
uieii Judicem deligati a fede aplica deputati: fup ectia de Dingvale
iuribsq, eintde +

Sententia lata per magiftram Johannem grene Cancellarium Moranienfem
in eaufa mota de eeclefia de Dingvale per Willelmum priorem monatterij
yallis fancti Andree de Plufeardyne contra Henricum Electum confirma-
tum Roffenfem im hiis verbis. puotatd ecctiam de Dingvalle yna ei omib;
7 finglis fruétibs redditib; puttib; juribs ptinetiq, fais ynillé ad Ptatos
poratii ptoré 7 ouéti de Pluteardyne ptine 7 Ipectare iposq, p'ore et

puétir veri jus veraq, ra@oem ad eandé habere pdiai vero dim Henrict
Eleaii pfirmati Rofleii fuosq, fueceffores vnitifos a peepone detenéde

vecupacde et int*miffide di&ay ecetie 7 garbay decialii: eifde de ceto
penit? defifte et omino ceflare compelli debere et condempnari ad refti-
tuédem Pfatarii deciay garbalii diée ecctie p eundé indebite receptara -
Pronuneiata decio nono die méf O&obr€ Anno dni «® , cccc’/ fexagefimo
Yeio ‘Teftibus Dauid Epo Moranienfi ac Alex’ futhland dno eaft® de
Duffois ‘dmo Wito thano de Caldor milite de cod Neend vemtabilibus
et diferett viris dnis 7 magris Waltero de Spey in decret€ licenciato


--- Dunfermline_page419.png ---
1069.

ABBREVIAT. ] DUNFERMELYN, 367

Thoma graunt Tho* de fto claro Witmo de byrneth ecetie morauici
plibate candiee © WiHo Sutherland / Dauid And‘ / Pat'eio tHleg’ » Wittmo
de galbrath Pat'cio de flyfe Wito gjung / de Dik / Spyny flerenway
Warlaw Aberkerdor 7 lochalwy vica® ppetuis / Tho* portat Johe fgufij
et Johie de Caldo¥ eectiay de flores Croy 7 dutfois Curate ac Roberto
myF ecdie eathat fate capellano -

Procuratoriii Walteri ogiluy de oures de quoda anuo redditu xxx*iij 6

7 iin a -
Walteras Ogiluy de Oures conftituit procuratores ad yrefignandum in
manibus Abbatis de Dunfermlyne annuum redditum t'ginta t'd folidoy 7
tip’ d Jeuai de tre de ffordochy neend fupioritaté tray de flordochy et
Kethik infra vie de Perth - Datum apud Dunde péultio die més Nouébre
Anno dni eo - ecce™® fexagefimo Peio -

Carta de ffordochy -

Ricardus Abbas concedit Dauid de Blar anui redditi xxx"* ti folidoy
et iiij™ denarioy de terr€ de flordochy 7 fupioritaté earumdem 7 de Kethik
que Ny alterus Ogiluy de Oures refignauerat - Datum xx” dic ma Sep-

tebre Anno dni w°® cece? Ixiiij" -

Comiffio poris ct puétus vat virtute de Pth ad appuncuand 7 concordand
int ipos et Abbem 7 puétii de Dunfmlyne tup decis garbalib; 7 ett
oblacihs Ca capellay -

Commiflio prioris et ouétus vall€ virtutt de Perth ad eonucneionem que
fequitur incundam -» Data oétaua die Septembre Anno dnj m°» cccc?
fexagefimo fexto -


--- Dunfermline_page420.png ---
Pry

368 REGISTRUM DE [eart. REC.

Jonuencio feta inter Abbatem et ouenti de Dunfermlyne / Et p'oré et
puentum valt virtutis de Pth fup dedis et oblacdibs tritt eapellay -

Conuencio fta inter Ricardii Abbatem de Dunfermlyne et Andream
p'oré vat virtut€ ppe Pth fup dedis et oblagdibs capellay pte Marie
Magdalene ffoy leonardj 7 niniani hijs verbis viz + q di&j p'or 7 puétus
ac coy fucceffores ordis cartufiel ditaxat / omes 7 finglas decias garbales
7 Bdiales ditaxat de omibs 7 finglis ere tA cult? q® incult€ jacentib; in?
pauimé

ii fiue via Regia extendefi ad capella {ti leonardi ex pte occiden-
tali et auftralé infuli de perth ex orientali in latitndie et le Cragyburit
ex auftrali extendef in longitudie ad porti burgj de perth q dr le South-
bryg / vna ef oblagibs ecetie didi moftij ac di&ay tt eapellara: libere
cdceflerit [recipient ?] imppetui / Reddef et pfoluefi anuati di&j p'or
7 oust? pfate Abbatj 7 puétui feu corti penratorj ippe™ / quing, mareas -
Neen6 annati 7 imppetud c'ea fettii ftoy fymdis et Jude aploy pro
Abbatibs 7 mo“chis de Dunf? vigilia et officiti mortuoy et miffa in crattini
put jdé p'or et out? facitit p cluniacéfih; oustuali? facient celebrarj sient
7 iPi Abbas et outtus et facceflores fui p di&e eartufien’® recipee fave
tencbunt? / Et fie fe inuied in mutua fratnitaté et aflocietagem ppetua
fufcepeft - Apud Dunfermlyne vicefimo p'mo die méf O&tobr€ Anno dni
«® - ecce’ . fexagefimo fexto -

Carta de Pris Airis in Edinburgo ppe caft™ affedate Alex’ Ra 7 Tho* bordy -

. Ricardus Abbas conceffit Alex’ Ra tres pticatas Pre jacefi in burgo de

Edinburgh 7 q‘i ad occidentalé finé ciufdé burgi ex pte boreali vici regij
ducét€ a cruce vfq, eaftra int tra quodi Alanj de Cambutinathane / ex

A » se Thoe '
pte ori" ex pte vna. et tres pticatas tre geeflas Tho® de bordy ptigue

jaceli Pdi@C Chs pticate Pray ex pte oceiden" ptibs ab alia» Reddendo fex

folidos et o&o denarios - Datum ap* Dunfmlyne q*rto die me} Maij Anno
dnj millefimo  q"dringétefio fexagefio odauo +


--- Dunfermline_page421.png ---
: won . ») x ar
. Rieardus Abbas coneedit Thome bordy tres pticatas tre jaced in bu

ABBREVIAT. ] DUNFERMELYN. 309

De terris prope Caftrum in Edinburgh -

de Edinburgh quafi ad occidentalé fine ciulde burgi ex pte boreali
Regij ducét€ a cruce vig, ad eattri jue tra Alex Ra geeffa et tra quad
Alanj de Cambutinathane ex pte ori# ab vna | 7 Pras vattas verfus caftri:
de Edinburgh ex pte oceidentali ptih; ab alia. Reddendo fex
Datum apnd Dif q"rto die me Maij Anno dnj
fimo o&auo -

oto denarios
ecce™ fexa,

Obligacio Alex’ Ra p folucde dice fme -

Alexander Ra obligat fe p foluéde dice fme ap? Edinburgh - - ~~ inet
7 o"° fexagefimo octauo +

Maij Anno dni @” cc

Of the parfonage of the Kirk of Stirling -

Henry Abbot fettis and to ferm latt¢ till Mathon fortt burg; of Stling
all 7 hale pe pfonage of pe kirk of Stling with all 7 fundry tende
pfite 7 rytwifl) pt* belangand in pe forfaide plonage for pe tmes of xix
ger and fette to pe forfaid Mathow fourti aer@ of land eallit pe Southtelde
lyand within pe prochin of pe fortaid kirk for all pe emes 7 7 gert betor
w pe forfaid mathow gifland serli fyuety lit for pe tend€ 7 freyt¢ of
pe faid pfonage And viij lit for pe mai of be forfaid xl-aerf of land of
pe fouthtelde ¢ and payand ; seri for all pe mes of pe taid affedaédn iiij
celdar€ of mele in fie lyke 1 as pai did pt had pe faid kirk in tak of
befor - The abbot graunts him to hat? refauit be pe forfaid mathow forft
iiij® - fyueti lit of gude 7 viwalle paymét of Scotland pe quhilk {6m of
filuir refauit be him extendt to pe male of ix ger¢ to eit - given at Dif
pe ferde day of pe moneth of Nouthf pe ger of our Lord « - ecce - Ixx -

ct

and twa ger*

>


--- Dunfermline_page422.png ---
bso.

370 REGISTRUM DE (cart. REC.

Carta tray de Raith ci ptinentijs -

Hemricus abbas coneedit Willelmo Malvyne de Rath terras de Rath
quas dés Willelmus prius refignaverat - Reddendo quinque libras viualis
monete » Proviso ut nullum molendinum ibi edifieetur nifi in terra de
peteonmerk - Datum apud monaftia de dif vicefio yj’ die met -
Anno dnj o° ccce® xxii

‘iii? -

De terris de Spittalefeld -

Henrieus Abbas concedit Georgio de lotbreifk filio 7 heredi apparéti
2 ao Ay

Alex de lothreifk de eod tras de fpittalefeld jaceii ppe burgi de Intike-

thing - Reddendo duas marcas - Datum ap* Daf xviij? die més mareij Ane

Ani w+ ce

*. Ixxvij’ -

Dr eifdem terris -

Henrieus Abbas geedit Patrig> Barone burgei de Edinburgh 7 Marga-
rete fponfe fue Pras de {pitalefeld jaceii ppe burgit de Infkething quas
Georgius de llothreitk filius 7 heres apparens AleX de Hothreifk refigna-
erat - Reddendo duas marcas - Datum ap’ Dif decio nono die met
mareij Anno dni Mille® ccc" feptuage® feptimo -

De eifdem terris -

Henricus abbas concedit Patric baroii burgeii de Edinburgth 7 ingarete
fponfe fue in conitié&a feodagoem tras de {petelfeld jaceii_ prope burgum
de Inukethin quas idem Patricius refignanerat - Reddendo duas marcas -
Datum apud dif vj’ die métis Julij Anno dni «w® cece? Ixxviij’ -



--- Dunfermline_page423.png ---
ts.

ABBREVIAT. ] DUNFERMELYN. 371

Aflodadgd ecetic de (Cuelyii -

Henry Abbot tettt 7 to form latte tyl wathou forft burget of ttn
pe frute of pe pfonage of pe kyrk of ft'uclyii to gydd w' xl akyris of
lit pe Sowthfeld lyand wn pe prochin of pe foF fade kyrk of
ft*uelyi for pe fmis of xix ger Payand gefly for p* frut€ 7 tend¢ of pe
fade pfonage fyfty punde 7 viij lib for pe fade xl aeris of land of pe
Sowthteld - The faid Mathow payand alfua gefly for all pe tmis of pe
fade affedaddn iiij chalde* of mele aweht furth of pe fade kyrk in fic
lyke man as has bé vfit of be fo¥ - And grawnts him tyl haue Hanit be
for had¢ fra pe fade mathow fYorft Twa hidreth pide extéding tyl iti)
gert rent of pe fade pfonage - Given at Diifmlyii pe feeiid day of Nonthei

land ce:

the get of ow¥ lord aw + cece - Ixx - 7 ix ger -

Piitacio viearie de Perth -

Henriens abbas prefentat Archicpifeopo Johannem Andirfoii pretbiterum
ad vicariam penfionaria triginta quiq, mareay ecctie prot de perth - Datum
apnd Dunfermlyn xj die men# deeembre ano dni «’ cece" Lxxix" -
Conf'madd thome yhaF fup tras de Halys -

Henrieus abbas confirmat cartam Willelmi dni de ereehtouii factam
Thome Sha¥ 7 Agnetj {ponte tue de octo bouate trarum de Halys jaceii in
regate de mufkilburgh - Reddendo rofam rubram nomine albe firme -
Datum Anno dni mille? ccec® oéuage’ -

Alia earta thome yhar de aliis otto bonat€ tray de halis -

Idem Henricus contirmat thome yhar cto bouatas tray de halis


--- Dunfermline_page424.png ---
485.

372 REGISTRUM DE (carr. REC.

conceflas ab eodem Willelmo domino de Crechtoun - Datum Anno dni
mille? ccce® oétuagefime quito [primo ?] .

Carta de flebalbe +

Henrieus abbas concedit Dauid orok filio 7 edj Danid orok de flebalbe
Pras Ceie pt€ trara de Orok flebalbe 7 Dikerii jacefi i regali®® de Dafermlt
quas id Dauid refignanerat - Reddendo amnuatim duas Mehas fex tolid
viij- @ - Datum apud Dunfermlyn decio texto die méf maij ano dni
millefimo cece’ octuage’ {edo «

Carta thome tode de fefhaul -

Adam abbas conecdit thome tod burgeii de edinburgh tras de le fefhaul
jacei I vega’ jira de muffilburgh quas magifter Thomas giflard  peurator
noie Jacobj giflard de fefhaul refignauerat - Refuando oiies foriffad&uras
earidé ett omibs fuietis debit? - Reddendo annuatim duas lib‘s

pipis noie
athe firme - Datum Anno dni millefimo quadringe’ octuagefimo teio -

Confirm’ Carte Witti dnj de Creichtouii faé> gilberto fyfche burgei de
Ed* faper tertia pte trart de Ef? Halis vt jnfra -

. Adam abbas confirmat cartam domini Willelmi de crechtoui factam

wilberto fyfehe burgenfi de Edinburgh de teia pte tray de Eftir halys

jacei in Regalitate de Muffilburgh » Reddendo unum denarinm - carta
° die méf maij Anno dni mille’ cece’ Ixxxiij*
coram teftibus Roberto crechtouh , magro Dauid peblis, Dauid reidhuche
diio WiHo blakloche cap’ et Wito farnly n‘o pu® confirmacio autem
apud monafterium de Dunfermlyne +

data eft apud erechtoui xiiij


--- Dunfermline_page425.png ---
488,

489,

490,

491,

ABBREVIAT. ] DUNFERMELYN. 373

AffedaG - dni andree ftewart 7 Walterj Bertreiti de litel monkton -

Adam abbot of Dunfermlyne fett 7 to mail latte till fehir Ande ftewart
lord of awandale and till his fubtenadg pat is to fay Wate Bertram 7
elyfabeth his fpouf pe land of itil moktonii 7 Wikkyr lyand win ye
Regalite of mufkilburgh for all p* gher€ 7 dais of p* faid # And? lord¢ lif
and grant pat gif it happynis pe faid Walt 7 his forfaid {pouf or ony ane
of pai oily or feuly to leif 7 endu¥ attour p* faid lorde deceff pt pai
endur furth 7 bruyk 7 joif} pecieply pe faid tak for al pe times of fif shere
fra pe deceft! of pe faid lord - Payand gerly thre 7 twentj ke of male -
Given pe gher of our lord a thoufand ccce” awehtj 7 four gert -

Affedag georgij Blat de tre de Bendauchty -
georgij .

Adam abbot of Dunfermlyne fett( and to maylle lett¢ to Danid Blar
george Blar his fone and to Dauid Bla? georg fone and to pe langat
lewaF of pai be land@ of bendauchty lyand w'in pe fefdome of pth p* quhilk
p* faid Dauid inhabit¢ and has 6 tak at p* makyné of p tres for p° Pme3, of
nyntené ger - Payand pay for gerly ten mke - Given at Da? p° xx day of
p° moneth of Junij pe geF of God j® cece and nynte gert -

De Balwery -

Adam abbas confirmat cartam Willelmi feot de Balwery fagam Willelmo
{cot ejus filio de terris de Balwery jaccii infra vicecomitatii de fyf -

Obligatioun of D - Edmonftoune -

Maif? Dauid edmonftone grat€ him awand to pe p*or and pe conuent of


--- Dunfermline_page426.png ---
402,

404,

495.

374 REGISTRUM DE (cart. REC.

Dunfermllyng fyfe pund¢ pe quhilk he oblifl' him to pay wnd pe pane of
breykyng of his chartor and poyndyng of him felf or his guid¢ - Given at
Dunfermllyng pe xxvj day of Februa¥ pe ger of God I ii
nyne gert -

nyty and

Carta magri Danid Edmoijiftoni -

Georgius abbas ad feodifirmam dimittit magro Dauid edmonftoun Rec-

tori de fawlo filio Johanis Edmonftoun de cot Prax de le manys de

Edmonftoune et mafioné et domibs ort€ et pomeriis earfid jacefi 7 regali-
tate de mnflilburgh quas id Johanis refignauerat - Reddendo trefdect
folidos et quatuor denarios - Datum apud Difmlyng vicefimo q‘to dic
me februarij Anno dni milletimo quadritefimo nonogefimo nono -

Preeeptum tafine ejufdem - Datum eodem die -

Littera procuratorie et refignacionis terrarum de Kildun -

Thomas Dingwell of Kildun oftitut¢ Jhone bifehop of roff ad’ bifehop of
katne® wilja ftewart 7 galbert vrquhard his peuratour€ to refing in p*
hande of James abbot of Dunferml¥ his land¢ of Kildun in p* rega’ of
Dafinly in pe erldome of rofl! 7 pt fefdome of Intinef' Saiffand 7 tévand
pe franktenemét of pe faid lande@ for al pe dais of his lif. Given at p°
chanre of rofl? pe xx” iij day of Januar pe ger of god @/ and v gert -

Carta de Kyldone 7 Roffia data . W - Dingwel -

Jacobus abbas concedit Vilehno Dingwell filio > apparétj heredj. thoine
Dingwel de Kilduii tras de Kildun 7 Roffia quas ict Thomas refignauerat -


--- Dunfermline_page427.png ---
490,

107.

ABBREVIAT. ] DUNFERMELYN. 375

Reddendo annuatin tres fedtas enrie ad tria placita capitalia regatt qt
teneant® inf* boundas de rof® feu m*ray ae wardas reliuia et maritegia
didara tray ci cStigerit - Datum ap* Dunfermlyne «+++ die méf februari}

Amno do! «? ccece? y" -

Carta excambij cum epo 7 Ecctia Dikeld -

Jacobus abbas concedit Georgio Epo Dunkeld et fais fiecefforibus
- aa A » . a re ee es a
Dikeld epis jmppe™ tras de fordowy 7 litil Kethik Neend anii redditi
- A aon 5 + a en
quiq, Mearai de didis tris de fordowy annuati debita in exeambii_ pro
Ped - — 7 p = 9
fupioritate terrarti de logy prope Dunfermlin et inuo redditu duara meay
S = A A atc A
earid et anuo Redditu quatuor Mieari de tris de newtonn de abbirdour -
Datum apud Dunfermlyn Septimo die méfis Aprilis anno dni qillefimo
quigentefimo texto -

De clunys -

reat seal of a judgment by the
dinburgh the fift day of Decem-

Confirmation under the teftimony of the
Lords of Conneil in terms following - At E
ber the geir of god a thoufande five hundreth and yj gert The lordis of
Countell vnderwrittin that is to fay Reuerend faderis in god William
hifchop of abirdene Andro bifehop of murray Johne bifehop of Roll!
Andro hifchop of Caithnef} Dauid bifchop of Ergile Nobill 7 michty lordt
Patrik Erle bothuile Matho Erle of Levenax Venerabill faderis in god
Dauid abbot of Cambatkynneth Niniane Prior of Coldingham Maift
gawait Dunbar Archedaii of Sanétandrt 7 clerk of regiftre Maift Patrik
panteir feeretar Maift Dania abireriimy fubdene of our fouerane lordis
chapell and Maifter Richart lawfouit of the hieriggis Anent the fupplica-

cioufi maide and gevin in till our Souverane lorde be ane venerable fader
in god Jamis abbot of Dunfermling and the eduent of the fimy abbay
anent the clame of the fupiorite of the land@ of Clany alleguit be the faid


--- Dunfermline_page428.png ---
kYd.

376 REGISTRUM DE (carr. REC.

venerabill fader to ptene to him 7 the faid abbay and defirand the kingis
hienes inftantlie to refer the cognicioi thareof till his lordis of Counfell
And ats anent the cdmand 7 charge gevin in write be the king? hienes
clamand the faid fupiorite to ptene to his grace 7 h€ crovn to his faid
lordis of counfele to take the faid mater 7 to decide thaFupoutl edformand
to the lawis 7 tha¥ cOfiens without delay of the quhilk charge the teno' is
infert 7 regiftrate in the buikis of counfall - Oure fouerane lord cSperand
be maift’ James henderfon his aduoeate and the faid Venerabill fader
being pertonaly fint for him felff 7 as procurato’ for his faid cOuent Our
fouerane lord¢ richtis refoutis 7 allegacionis producit allegat be the faide
maif? James his aduocate And clikevife the faid verabill fad 7 cSuentis
richtis refouiis and allegaciouiis producit be him The lord¢ of countell
pw! being ripely advifit deerete deliueris 7 decernis pt the fupiorite of the
faid land¢ of Clunijs liand win gatmilkfehire ptenit 7 ptenis to the abbay
abbot 7 cOuent of Dunfermling as fupiour€ of the famy And counfalis
the Kingis hienes to thole the faid abbay abbot 7 cOuent to browk the
fam¥ in all tymes to ci w‘out jmpedimét for fuffrage 7 prayere done 7 to
be dene be thame for his nobill progenitourf of gude mynd 7 his
fuccefloure ppetually in tyme toeum - Extraéi de libro actor; per me
magtm gawini Dufbar Archidiacont Sanéi andree clericd Rotulori
regiftri ac Concilij fup'mj dnj fri Regt fub meis figno et fubfe'p
manualib; - Datum ap* Edinburgh nono die méf Decembre Anno dnj
millefimo quigentefimo fexto 7 Regni iiri decimo nono -

race 7

De Clunijs -

Confirmation of the preceding extract under the teftimony of the great
and the privy seal - Datum ap* Edinb’gh Decimo die méf Decembrt
Anno do! millefio v° vj’ -


--- Dunfermline_page429.png ---
200,

501,

ABBREVIAT. ] DUNFERMELYN. 37

st

De elunys +

Inquifitio retormata Patricii Creichtoun de Cranttoun Riddell militis
heredis patris fui Danid Creichtoune de Cranftounriddell » in terris de
Clunys infra vit de Fif et regalitatem de Duufermlyng et in Gaytmilk-
fehir que nune valent 50 marcas et temp pacis 5 lib. et tenentur in
eapite de Abbate per wardam ct relevium et folvendo 20 folidos annuatim -

nune in manibus Abbatis per deceflum Margarete Schaw matris di@i
Patricii que eafdem habuit in conjunca infeodatione - faéa Edinburgi 7
Dee, 1506 - coram Andrea Lindy de Balgony milite vie de Fif et Hérico
Ramsay ejus deputato » Nomina Aflite - Johines tcheues de Kilquhouf
Thomas butler de ramgally Johines Balfour de Dovin Jehanes olipha¥ de
kelle miles georgeus ftrang de Balkafky Jo’
{pens de Wohhiftoufi ale

nes Tila de ardre Dauid

fider martyfie de gybleftouti Wits Kirealdy de
grangt Dauid allerdes flrathoquhy Johanes Wardlaw in Burntoyn Petrus
Blatho de cod Dauid Lyndefay de mont | Johines multra? de markineh
7 Danid tullow de Kilkarnay -

Preceptum Regium fuper inquifitionem precedentem -
Rex precepit Abbati fuperiori dictarum terrarum ut fafinam earundem

di&um Patricium habere faciat 17 Dee - Regni decimo nono -

Lia faifine fuper mandato Regio - trarit de Cluny

Pet? Creicht6ne de fandfurde militi
Par) Tho Ic

Danid Berelay de Toweh Henrico mtyn de cardvane Tho" Kyneade de

Jonfone et Roberto Veddale ut dent faifinam eidem - 22 Dee «1506 -

Jacobus Abbas precepit Balliv’

3B


--- Dunfermline_page430.png ---
502.

503.

504,

378 REGISTRUM DE (cart, REC.

Putacio pro patricio ereichtoie de cranftone riddale milite -

Rex falutem Abbati ete - Qnia qnéd murdac? dux Albanic comes de
fyff ct menteth libere tenens monaftij et poffeffor Prarti de clunys jaceii
infra vicecditatt de fyi et jn regalitate de Dunfermlyng jn gaitmylkfehir
tune tent» de Abbate et conuétu de Difermly | fuas vita terras 7 bona
quond fereuiffimo principi ct proauo firo Jacobo p'mo tune feotorii Regi
pro certis proditoriis ciiibus p et contra {ni maieftaté cdmift foriffecit
fueeeflores diétas Pras de
Clunys certo tempoF fuis vfib? tenuerat nd exhibendo fanée ecetic

et licet jdem nofter proanus et hacéenns fy

tenttem earumd put fate debnerat - Rex tamé confeittia motns ex affnete
pietat€ officio ac ofiiltus quodam deereto dnori fui ofilij decernet tup-
ioritat® déarti Prarit abbat] 7 cOuétnj ptine® — prefentavit cifdem diletm
familiar® milité Patricia: Creichtote de eranftotic Riddale i tendtem Prari
pd@ari exhortaii qtus dés Abbas ct conventus pdém fintatii jn tenent
hereditarid déari trart de clunys ci fuis pendiculis 7 ptinefi Recipiant
atqne p carta 7 faifina 7 eiftt heditaric Tfeodent - 19 Dec. 1506 -

Carta data dno patricio ereichtowi terrari de clunyf -
Jacobus abbas concedit dicto Patricio diétas terras reddendo wardas re-

levia homagia 7 maritagia unacum tribus fettis eurie capitalis et vis
folidos annnatim -

Preceptum fafine ejufdem » 4 Jannarii 1506 -

Attort p pat'cio creichtoti de eranttone riddall milite -

Rex fateepit et conftituit quofdam attornatos diéi Patricii in omni-
bus loquelis et ceteris negociis - 12 Jan, Regni anno 19 -


--- Dunfermline_page431.png ---
507.

508.

509.

ABBREVIAT. ] DUNFERMELY 379

Carta data thome foreftare de efthalis -

. Jacobus Abbas coneeflit Thome Foreftare de Strathenry filio dicanj

forettare de torwoude militt bina partem Prarii de eftirhalis ch bina pte
niolendinj jaceii in regalitate de Diifermlyne in dominio de Muffilburgh
quas Archibaldus beton refignanerat - Reddendo wardas releuia maritagia
eft aliis feruiciis debitis - Datum apud Dunfermlyne vicefimo feeundo die
méf} Mareij Anno dnj Millefio quigentefio fexto -

Preeeptum faitine eiufdem - Datu die tubfequente -

De carucata terre in Coldinghame -

Alexander Sanéti Andree archicpifcopus regni Primas apottolice tedis
legatns ct commendatarius de Duntermling loco fiperiore prioratus de
Coldinghame confirmavit Criftine Lumifdayi filie Johannis Luminitiane
in Coldinghame ac {ponte Alexandri Ellem tres partes unius carneate
terre jaceii in villa et territorio de Coldinghame infra vicecomitatum de
Barwik vocat le bichhil - quas dius Johannes refignauerat - Reddendo
duos folidos vna cum feruicio forinfeeo ac omnibus aliis feruiciis con-

fuetis - Datum apud Dunfermling - x° . Aug. 1512 -

Dr Waring3efland -

Ldem conceit Johanni Trott filio et heredj quond Niniani Trott’ et
Alifone Lummiideyii carucatam terre vocat Waring3es land jacefi in villa et
territorio de Coldinghame infra vieecomitatum de Barwyk quam Johannes
Lummifdeyii refignaucrat - Reddendo feruicia debita prout in regiftro de
Coldinghame continetur - Datum apud Dunfermling x°. Ang - 1512 -


--- Dunfermline_page432.png ---
r
5

10,

ll.

2

380 REGISTRUM DE (cart. REC.

De terris hufband in Weftreftoune -

Idem conceffit Elene Lummytieyi filie Johannis Lummyfdeyii in Cold-
inghame ac fponte Rieardi Wardlaw quatuor terras hufband jaceii in villa
et territorio de Weftreftonne in baronia de Coldingham et vicecomitatu
de Barwik quas Elezabet nefbit eum contentin Johannis Lummyfdeyn tui
fponfi refignaverat - Reddendo feruicia debita et confueta - Datum apnd
Dunfermling x°- Aug. 1512 -

Sequitur tubferiptio Andree Pacock notarij publici -

Carta fa@ta mariorie orrok fuper tertia pte trarii de orrok Sillebalbe et
Dinerii p retignationem AleXri Orrok de Syllebalbe -

Laem Jacobus commendatarius ac regni cancellarius concetlit: marioric
orrok filie Alexandri orrok de felybalbe tertiam partem terrarum de

orrok felyballhe et Dunheri jaceii in regalitate de Dunfermling infra
yicecomitatum de fiffe quam di&us Alexander refignaverat - Reddendo
duas mareas tex folidos et octo denarios cum wardis et veleviis et faciendo

forinfecum fervicium eum omnibus aliis ferviciis debitis refervato tamen

didi Alexandri libero tenemento pro vita + Datum apud Dunfermling
xx’ Jan - 1523 + Teftibus Johanne Moneu* de Balluny Vito fki
Georgio Dury ct Andrea fibbald de Lathame -

Carta de Cluniis -

. Jacobus fanéti Andree arehiepifeopus regni Primas apoftolice fedis

legatus natns ac commendatarins de Abirbrothok et Dunfermling con-
firmavit Jacobo Crechtonti de Cranftoneriddale eapitaneo caftri de Edin-
burgh ct Margarite Hume {ponte tue terras de Clunys jaceii jutra
vicecomitatum de fiffe in gaitmylk fchire quas idem Jacobus Crechtoun


--- Dunfermline_page433.png ---
DUNFERMELYN. 381

refignauerat - Reddendo debita et confueta feruicia teeundum tenorem
antiquj infeofamentj - Datum apud Dunfermling vi? Jun - 1524 -

Preceptum fafine ejufdem datum ecodem die -

Carta Jacohj M@ray de tre de pdew et ptinei -

. Jacobus arehicpifeopus Primas regni conceflit Jacobo Murray terras de
T s y

pdew alias Brihill vna eum certis acris viz ly flan aikir  fehort aikir
7 le buyt aikir tamquam pertinet huinfmodi terrarum de pdew jaceit
infra regalitatem de Diifermlyn ex auftrali parte interioris ville eiufdem
ex vtraque parte torrentis voeat wlgariter ly lyn bovndatas vt fequitur
jncipicndo ad ortos fancti euthberti detvendendo per certos lapides pro
divilis infis

os et proeedendo per terram David Bothwell voeat ly hauch
ad auftrum vfque ad ly gudlylandis pertineii altari beate marie infra
eeclefiam parrochialem de Dunfermlyn vfque ad viam regiam que ducit
ad grangiam de Dunfermlyn et demum procedendo per diéam viam
verfus aquilonem vfque ad diétnm torrentem de lyn 7 deteendendo per
torrentem vfque ad ly buyt aikir jaceti in parte vecidentali ty lymkilhill 7

defeendendo ad pratum terra
didj prati vique ad terras domini de petinereifi vocat fimiliter Ly buyt et
afeendendo ad dictum torrentem vocat ly lyn ulyue ad ly fehort aikir ex
parte boreali diéte aque que quidem akra habet viam re.

t procedendo per traclum feu fehetum

am ad occiden-

talem et ditto torrente ex aliis fme circumdatur » Reddendo oo folidos
nomine annui redditus - Datum apud Dunfermlyn Junij 1526 -

Villelm? Durye -

Georgius abbas conftitnit valteri Ryngane et Villelmi Durye cortq,
alter diucius vineii jn janitoré 7 porta

it porte fire anterior? et portarit


--- Dunfermline_page434.png ---
516,

38Q REGISTRUM DE (carr. REC.

mot tij ea pfieuis et emolumétt eiuft - Percipiendo anuati fima q*tuor
librarii neenon tres celdras aue“rii- Datum apud Dunfermling vigefimo
die men® Mareij Anno dnj millefimo quigentefimo trigefimo -

Carta dui de Baluerye -

Jacobus archiepifeopus fanétiandrce viufruétuarius mofterij de dun-
fermly  Georgius abbas de Dunfermlyne conventufque cjnfdem loci

Jacobus comes de Mortoune diis de Dalketht ct baronie de abirdour

georgius de Dundas miles jerofolomitan? diisq, fan&j Johanis in feotia
ac Peeptor de torphichin — AleXer abbas de Cambufkenetht et ejufdem
loei conventus Alexander diis feodi comitatus craufurdie baro de
milginche Willelmns comes de errole diis de argath Jacobus pat-
fone minifter fanéte crucis de peiblis  Johdnes wardlaw de torry baro
de Inchegall et magifter Johanes forbes de bernis domini fupcriores
terrarun: refpe&ive © confirmaverunt cartam Willelmi feot de Baluery
factam Willelmo Seot de Tnnertele militi filio Juo de terris de Baluery

terris iv quartcriorum de Balbertane eftir. terris de cavill terris tertie
partis de lochheid iy - tenementis et petia terre in venella ecclefie

in burgo de Kirkealdy cum odo folidis annui redditus de tenemento
quond AleX coupar cum duobns tenementis in platea auftrali diti
Iurgi aliisque duobus tenementis jacefi fupra montem . de tribus libris
piperis ct una libra terre annui redditus unoque tenemento in burgo de
Dunfermlyne | de terris templariis de Balquharge ‘ duabus terris templariis
in villa de ftrethmeglo  terris voeat berclais landis in territorio de Kin-
tulle terris de Joppis land prope glendovok — viii mercis annui redditus

terrarum de melginche infra vicecomitatum de Perthte . terris medietatis
de rudruftouii ei pifcaria earumdem in aqua de dee jacefi infra voi de
abirdeii / terris medietatis de nepir carlowry jacefi in baronia de liftout
infra vei de linly'q™ - Que quidem carta data eft apud Edinburgh
xxix" Mareii 1531 - Teftibus David Murray de Balwaird milite / Valtero
Lundy de eodem Johanne Rofl’ de Cragy / Andrea Fairy de eodem



--- Dunfermline_page435.png ---
518.

51M,

520,

ABBREVIAT. | DUNFERMELYN. 383

de Corftoumn Domino Jacobo feot eapellano — alex-
cio Revit

Johanne Ramfay
andro Ballie Johane mitcreif | Johine latherif} et pat

nfonne +

Confirmatio autem mente Februario 1531 -

Prefenta’ altar Ste cruet de Kyrkealdy -

Georgius abbas prefentavit dominum Valterum eapellanum Jacobo fanéti
Andree Archiepifeopo ad altaragium teu altare fancte crucis infra burgum
de Kirkealdy in ecclefia parrochiali ciufdem - Datum apud Dunfermling -
xviii? - Aprilis 1532 - Teftibus Valtero ryngane Dauid Duneane et

valtero fehorthouf -

Pretentatio ad vieariam eceletie de Cleifehe -

Georgius abbas pretentavit Jacobo archiepifcopo fancti Andree magiftrum
Dauid joung prefbiterum ad vicariam perpetuam ecclefie parrochialis de
Cleifche - Menfe mareij j - v° -

Carta refigna’nis trari de Kildwyne -

Georgius abbas conceflit Thome Dingwall de kildwii et Jonete Hay the
{ponte et cord alterj diucius viuéti Pras de Kildwit jaceti infra vicecditati
de Intnys quas idem Thomas refignauerat in manus dicti abbatis earun-
dem fupioris - Faciendo jura 7 feruitia debita . Datum apud Dunfermlyne
A dnj w” vo xxxiij’ -

xxij més mm

Preeeptum fatine eiufem datum eodem die +


--- Dunfermline_page436.png ---
:

384 REGISTRUM DE (cart. REC.

Preceptum Archiepifcopi de terris de fehirrefhall -

Jacobus archiepifcopus dedit preceptum fafine terrarum de fehirrefhall
in fauorem Georgij Gyflard de fehirrefhall retornati heredis Jacobi ejus
fratris apud fanétum Andream - i? - feptembris 153-4 -

Confirmatio terrarum ac molendini de eftir haillis -

Jacobus archiepifcopus fanci andree ac Georgius abbas de Dunfermling
confirmayerunt cartam tactam Magiftris Ade Ottirburn de Aldham et
Johanni Ottirburn eius filio per Georgium foreftar de ftrathenry de binis
partibus terrarum de eftir haillis cam bina parte molendinj fullonum
jaceii in baronia de Muflilburgh et infra vieecomitatum de Edinburgh
in excambium pro dimidia parte terrarum de Balquhenry ct terris de
Armottis croft jaceti infra dominium de leflye et vieecomitatum de fyff -
Datum apud Dunfermling vi? Novembris Anno falutis 1534 -

Quarta pars de ly manis de orrok -

. Jacobus Aichiepiteopus adminiftrator generalis monafterii de Dun-

fermling coneeflit Alexandro Kynmere de Straburn quartam partem
terrarum de ly manis de Orrok extendei ad xxi - mercatas terrarum
jaceti infra Regalitatem de Dunfermling et vieecomitatum de fyffe » que
prius Roberto Orrok de codem hereditarie pertinebant et appreciate fue-
runt pro 400 marcis debitis ditto Alexandro ab codem Roberto cum 20
mareis debitis Alexandro Narn de Sandfurd vicecomiti de fyffe in hac
parte pro fuo falario ct executione officii , Reddendo fervicia debita et
contueta + Sub reverfione - Datum apud Sanétum Andream xxvi - Aprilis
1535+ Teftibus Archibaldo betoun de capildra camerario de Dunfermling
magris hérico Liitdane rectore de tanadat’ catlario Sanétiand® . Johane



--- Dunfermline_page437.png ---
524. Preceptum tafine fuper diéa parte terrarum datum

5g

7

ABBREVIAT. } DUNFERMELYN. 385

Spens officiali San@iandree - [Henrico Banawis jurifeonfulto Andrea
Oliphant et Georgio Cok notarijs -

néti Andree eodem

die coram iifdem teftibus -

Collatio vicarie péfionarie de perth -

. Jacobus Arehiepifcopus adminiftrator generalis monafterii de Dunfermling

mandavit Decano de Gowry ut indueat Georginm Cok elerienm in vieariam
penfionariam eeclefie parochialis Beati Johannis Baptifte de Perth pri
illi collatam per annuli Archiepifeopi digito illius TpGnem - Acta in palatio
fanéi Andree vitimo die méfis Junij ano dnj mittmo quigen™ trige™

quinto - Notarij fubf{criptio fequitur -

Comiflio derigeh loco plufcardei T morauea -

. Jacobus archicpus Sanétand? Regni primas legatus natus monatterij de
Difermling adiitiftrator generalis Neend georgius pfatj monatterij om"da-
tarius ppetuns conftituerunt Robertum Dunbar de Durris Alexandrum
Innes filit_ et hedem appareii Ale&rj Innes de eod Walteri: Innes de
touchis Wittm Hay de mayne ballinos et jufticiarios giiales ad tenendas
curias jtinerum jufticiarie regalitatis de Dunf: infra dominium de Vrquhart
in morania p'oratuj de plufeardyn ex monatterio de difermling filiat et
dependent - Datum apud Dunfermlyn ---- + die... ++ 1535 +

Prefentacio ad re@oriam ecclefic de Mailuille -

_ [dem dedit Decano de linlytq™ preceptum ad inducendum ad reéoriain
3c


--- Dunfermline_page438.png ---
Ra
79
2

386 REGISTRUM DE (carr. REC.

ecelefie parrochialis de Mailuit dominum Archibaldum Haye clerieum
Parifijs fludentem - Datum fanéti Andree vii"? - Novembris 1536 -
Prefenta’ de Molefi -

Idem prefentavit Georgio epifeopo Dunkeldenfi dominum Dauid Hervy

prefbyterum ad vicariam eeclefie parochialis de Mulen - Datum Santi
Andree viii’ Januarij 1536 -

Preceptum Jacobi ereichtoun terray de clunijs -

. Idem vfufrutuarius et adminiftrator generalis fru&tuum monatterii et

Georgius Abbas et conventus de Dunfermlyn dederunt preceptum fafine
terrarum de Clunys super inquifitione ad capellam Abbacie retornata
qua deferuitus eft Jacobus Creichtoun heres patris Jacobi Creichtoun in
dictis terris - 8° Maii 1537 -

Reverfio dui de Raith -

Jacobus archiepifeopus adminiftrator monafterii conceffit Johanni Mailuill
de Raitht militi ac domino terrarum de Turbane quod quamvis per cartam
venditionis alienaverat dimidietatem terrarnm de Torbane jaceii infra
Regalitatem de Dunfermling — nichilominus quo tempore perfolverit
Archiepifeopo fummam - XL - librarum habuerit liberum regreffum ad
eafdem - Datum apud Dunfermling ii O&obris 1537 - Teftibus Archi-
baldo Betoun de Capildra Thoma Crag feeretario Archiepifeopi Henrico
Bannavis et Georgio Cok -


--- Dunfermline_page439.png ---
HBL

ABBREVIAT. } DUNFERMELYN, 337

Carta de fehanvell et fothr

Tidem Archicpiteopns Abbas conventusquc pott Regis litteras  prefen-
tationis receptas conceflerunt Jacobo Kyrkealdy de Grange terras de

fchanvell terras de fotheris efter et wefter pifeationes et cunicularios

earundem - que devenerunt in manibus Re; ratione efchacte ob forif-
1

faduram Johannis domini Glammis - Reddendo ferw

ia warde et relevij

¢ lye Kain extendeti ad x1 - folidus » Datum

necnon unam devoriam voc
apud Dunfermling i

Preceptum fafine ejufilem datum eodem die -

Collacio viearie de Nevbirne -

. Jacobus archiepus Sanétiand? preeepit Decano de Fyffe quatenus inducat

Dim Robertum Melwyn in poffeffionem viearie eeclefie parochialis de
Nevbirfic - Datum in palatio finéti Andree ano dnj mitmo qr
trigelimo o&ano méf Julij dic dnodecio -

btefime

Carta Jo" rob de terris de ftermound -

Georgins Commédatari? et conventus ad feodofirmam concetlerunt Joi
ro de Cragy et matilde miiereif ejus {ponte tras de Jakftonii logybride
Rothilie Balmacolie Blalak et Inchetrewie cum pifeatione in aqua de Tay
ad digtas tras ptinei jacei in vetitarmonth in rega™ de Dafermly Red-
dendo quadraginta o¢to mareas cum + ly - folidis pro undeeim bollis auenay
diet lye cayne aitis neenon -
diétarum auenaram ct - xxv - folid pro - Ixx- pultreis» Apud Dunfermlyne
trigefimo o&auo -

iii - folid et - iv - denariis pro ttraminibus

xviij die mé6 Martii dno dni millefimo qui


--- Dunfermline_page440.png ---
536.

530.

388 REGISTRUM DE (cart. REC.

Preceptum fafine carumdem terrarum + Datum apud Dunfermlyne - - - -
die menfis Mereii Anno dni millefimo quigentefimo trigefimo oauo -

Carta thome Scott de abbotifhall -

Georgius Archidiaconus fanéi Andree ac commendatarius de Dunferm-
lyne coneeflit Thome feott de Petgorno terras de Abbotithall ac terras de
Myltoun illis contiguas excepto molendino de Myltoun nunc oecupat per
Dauid Bofwell jaceti in Baronia de Kyrkealdy - Reddendo xxxv - libras
et in augmentationem ¥ ° Aprilis
1539 - Teftibus W > Manderftoun in medicinis doéore Roberto Dury de
eodem Archibaldo Beton de Capildra -

i libras - Datum apud Dunfermlyne

Preceptum fafine carumdem terrarum datum eodem die coramn iifdem
teflibus -

De tertia parte terrarum de Cultirmakeulte -

Georgius abbas conceflit Johi Cwmyng de Cultirmakeulte et Jonete
Creichtoufi cius {ponte terciam ptem rari de Cultirmakculte jacefi_ in
Rega de Dunfermling et infra vieecditata de Perth quam Johannes refigna-
ucrat - Reddendo varda et Releuitt dive Pcie ptis quoe
fu
mille’

otigerit vnacit
inde debitis - Datum apud Dunfermlyne xxix’ die m@f maij ano dni

qui™ trigefimo nono -

Preeeptum tafine eiufdem datum eodem die -


--- Dunfermline_page441.png ---
ABBREVIAT. DUNFERMELYN. 389

nnont +

Carta Jacobj Kyrkealdj de grange fup tras de fy
340. Greorgius arehidiaconus {andi andrce ac Commendatarins de Dunfernilyne
afledavit Jacobo Kirkcaldy de Grange tras de fynmonth jaceii in Regalitate
de Dun? infra vit de fyff Reddendo dnodecim libras trefdecim folidos et

quatuor denarios eum tribus libris fex folidis et o&o denariis pro fepte

bollis et duabus firlotis farine anene et viginti quatnor pultreis » Et in

augmenta né rentalis anuatt fiima quiquaginta trid folidori et q“tuor

denariora - ynacum duplica’ne feodifirme 7 jntroitu enilibs heredf ad pdéas
».

necnd tres feétas ad placita eapitalia de Dunfermling vna cum alii
debiti

- Datum apud Dunfermling primo die méfis Junij Anno
dni mittmo qui™ trigefimo nouo -

5Al, Preceptum faitine ciufdem - Datum eodem die -

Carta Ja” Kyrkealdy de terris de fehanwell 7 fotheris -

542

Georgius commendatarius conceffit Jacobo Kirkealdy de Grange thefaur-
ario Regis terras de fehanwell terras de Fotheris eftir et wettir cnm
pifear'
ufque ad rupem de Drumlaw ac cum arena voeat lve Drumlaw jaceii intr
vicecomitatum de fyff quas idem Jaeobus refignaverat - Reddendo fervi-
cium warde et relevij neenon unam devoriam voeat lye Kayne extendei
ad xu folidos - Datum apud Dunfermling ---.-.- +6. -+.++-

infra limites di&arum terrarum ufque ad mare et infra mare

Carta eduardi Broun de crofta ppe clakmanaii -

Georgius abbas ad feoditirmam dimifit Eawardo Browne croftam que vul-
gariter uuneupatur le difeheroft jaceii prope villam de Clakmana int terram



--- Dunfermline_page442.png ---
390 REGISTRUM DE (cart. REC.

que vulgariter appellatur le pettinfkene ex parte oriefi Et terra de le fmedi-
land ex parte auftrali Et ly wyndf predi&e ville ex occidentali et boriali
partibus - Reddendo annuatim quique folidos - Datum apud Dunfermlyne
tertio die méf Junij Anno dni millefimo quigentefimo trigefimo nono -

Carta Helene ftewart et fpati -

dH. Georgius archidiaconus fanéti andree omédatarius de Dunfermling con-
ceflit Helene ttewart filie ct apparétj heredj Ade Stewart de brerehill et
Dauidj Liidy fponfo dicte Helene terras de brer
de Dunfermlyn ex parte orientali ejufdem it tra de inylhillis ex pte
orié" et croft de le Newraw et croft wulgit) niicupat newraw croftis ex
pte ocei" ac eciam terras de Pénelad jaceii it tervas de breryhill ex pte
Dorealj et Pras de mylhillis ex pte orié’ Pras de fpittell ex pte auftralj et
eliotthill ex pte oecidétalj tum etiam unam petiam terre wnlgat nicupat
Cluttis croft jaccii infra regalitat’ de Dun? et i croftos de le newraw
hgi de Dun? ex pte ocei" et Tras de le Halbank ex pte borealj et tras
de brerehill ex oritlj et auftralj ptibus ct Pras de Halbank jaceit 1° rega'
de Dif quas quidem terras diétus Adam ct Elizabeth Carkettill
fponfa refignauerant in manibus Abbatis fuperioris - Reddendo annuatim
pro terris de Peneland triginta folidos . pro terris de Breryhill tres trutas
aut noué denarios . pro Pris de Cluttis croft via libra pipis et pro terris
de Halbank firmam burgalem folitam - Datum apud Dunfermlyne die

hill jaceti prope burgum

feptimo méé Junij anno falutis mille"? qui’ trigefimo nono -

Preceptum fafine ejufdem . Datum codem die -

Precept: Jacobi cre'tonit de cranftounriddall de tris de eluny -

346, Preeeptum fatine fuper terris de Cluny per Georgium abbatem de Dun-


--- Dunfermline_page443.png ---
a

548.

5AM

ABBREVIAT. ] FERMELYN. 3O1

fermling et conucntum ejufdem loci in fauorem Jacobi Crechtoun de
Cranftounriddall ct Jonete betoun eins conjugis - Datum apud Dunfermling

Carta infeoda’nis Jo” Betoue de tris de cluny -

Georgius commendatarius conceflit in vitali redditu Jonete Betoun terres
de Clune quas quondam Jacobus Crectoun de Cranftoun riddell {pontus
diéte Jonete retignaverat in favorem fui et dice Jonete - Reddendo xx
folidos nomine Kane - Datum apud Dunfermling - -- +--+ die mentis +--+. + «
1539 +

Preeeptum fatine terrarum de Chinie in vitali redditu per Georgium
commendatarium in favorem Jonete Betonii relicte quondam Jacobi
Creichtoun de cranftounriddale - Datum... - +. +. 1539 -

De terris de Jackftoun Logybride Rothilic Balmacolie Blalak et Inche-
trewie cum pifcatione in aqua de Tay -

y et matilde
miiercif ei? oiugi t volie Blalak
et Inchetrewie cum pifecatione in aqua de tay jacei in veftitarmonth in
regalitate de Dunfermling infra vieeccomitatum de perth - Datum apud

Georgius abbas coneeflit ad feoditirmam Johauni Roff' de erag
de Jakftouti Logybride Rothilie Balma

Dunfermling xij? februarij - 1539 -

Carta Hngonis rige de terris carberry -

Georgius commendatarius de Dunfermling ad feudifirmam conceffit
Magiftro Hugoni Rige et Jonete Hoppar {ponte fue terras de Carbarrye


--- Dunfermline_page444.png ---
or

51.

553.

392 REGISTRUM DE Lear. REC.

cum earbonibus et carbonariis - quas prius in affedatione tenuerant -
Reddendo annuatim fummam xlij librarum ’ xii bollas frumenti / xviii
eapones ae etiam decimum onus carbonum necnon tres fectas ad tria placita
eapitalia cum aliis feruiciis dehitis - Datnm apud Dunfermling - xxii - die
menfis maij Anno Domini 1543 - Coram biis teftibus Henrico forfyth
rectore de Monymufk Jacobo fehorifwode vieario de lyntone dno Adamo
Kyngorne vicario de fogo camerario Thoma Wemis de Wnthank Andrea
anurray de Blakbarony Johane Multray de fefeild juniori et Johanne
goung Notario publico -

Preeeptum fafine earandem - Datum codem die «

Difcharge by the commendatour of Dunfermling -

. George commendatour of Dunfermling difchargit pe faid Hew and Jonet

of v lit - viii sh - quhilk fuld be paid in augmentatioun of the rentale of
the faid lands of Carberry indurand the xvij geris quhilkis pai hade to ryne
of pair auld tak -

Carta Johis ogylwy de tris de Bannathy -

Georgius commendatarius de Dunfermling conceflit in  feodifirmam
Johanni Ogylvy filio et heredj apparenti Jacobi Ogilvy de Cukifton terras
de Bennathy jacefi in Weft ftermonth quas Georgius Blair de Pethy
yefignauerat in manibus diéti commendatarii tanquam fuperioris . Red-
dendo annuatim - x - libras ct ix - folidos - neenon duplicando feudifirmam
primi anni introitus - Datwn apud Dunfermling i? die menfis Julij 1543 -


--- Dunfermline_page445.png ---
555

ABBREVIAT. ] DUNFERMELYN. 398

Carta Robertj durye de eod -

Georgius commendatarius conceffit. in feodifirmam Roberto Dury de
eodem et Katharine Lundy ejus fponfe terras de Nethir G
Kingorne Wetter vocat lye Manis eii euftodia locj feu fortalicij eiufd pro
cuius eonfervatione Commendatarius affignavit terras de Grefland et

ange de

Suiyngayrland nie voeat Briiteland jaceii in fehira de Kingorne - Red-
dendo- celdras et - viii - bollas ordei - Datum apud Dunfermling vii? die

menfis februarij 1543 - Coram hiis teftibus magiftris Hugone Rig Thoma
Wemis Henrico forfy' rectore de Monymufk Adam Kyngorn Camerario
de Dunfermlyne Johane Hacheid de Petferrane Jobe Multray de fefeild
Jotie levingftouii archibaldo bofluel et BB fetouii -

Preceptum fafine eiufilem - Datum die fubfequente -

Carta roberti dury de Pris de Kynned@ Kinnerny et Dolo® bege -

Georgius commendatarius ad feodifirmam coneceffit Roberto Dury de
eodem et Katharine Lundy fponte fue terras de Kynerny neddir Kynnedir
infra vieecomitatum de fife ' et terras de Dolorbeg jaceti infra vieecomi-
lib - vi. fot - et

atum de Clakmannan - Reddendo annuatim - xx

viii defi - una eum duplicatione fendifirme in introitu euiuflibet heredis -
necnon tres feétas ad tria placita - Datum apud Dunfermlyne i? dic

mereij 1544 -

Preceptum fafine eiufdem datum iii die Mereij eodem anno eoram hiis
teftibus Johanne Hacheid de pitferran Johanne Multray dno junioF de
fefeild - magio Henrico forfytht rectore de Monymufk Andrea Lundy
Andrea redoehe Andrea’ Dury et Thoma Go‘law -

3D


--- Dunfermline_page446.png ---
560,

394 REGISTRUM DE [cart. REC.

Donatio fiue refigna’ feole gramaticalis de perth -

Georgins abbas conceffit Domino Thome Burell prefbytero pro toto tem-
pore vite fue feolam grammaticalem principalem burgi de Perth vacantem
per refignationem Symonis Jong ofticialis Dulkeldenfis ultimi preceptoris -
Prouifo qnod di&us Thomas Burell huidi p‘ceptoria et {coli gramaticalé
pict debite moderet® iibiq, difeiplind ofueti gramaticalé more aliori
locori filiti: doceat dilige? iftruatq, et exercitiii fui p'eipud defup adhibeF
ftudeat put deo fndere voluerit - Datum die quarto méfiichii aio dni
mitimo quigétefimo quadrage™’ quarto -

Precept magri Jacobj ogilwy -
Preceptum Commendatarii de clare conftat pro fafina Magiftri Jacobi

Ogilwy fratris et heredis quondam Johannis Ogilwy qui fuit filius ct heres
apparens quondam Jacobi Ogilwy de Cukftown in terris de Bennathy

jaceii in Wetter flormonth infra vicecomitatum de Perth - apud Dunferm-

ling xv - Augufti 1545 -

De terris ecelefie de Veftir Mailuile -

Mazgifter Archibaldns Hay rector ecclefie parochialis de Mailuile cum
confenfu Georgij commendatarij conceffit ad feodifirmam Johanni joung
et Helene ftratoun fue fponfe ct heredibus terras ecelefiafticas et totam
glebam reétorie dite ecelefie infra territorinm ville de veftir Mailnile
cum decimis garbalibus earundem que a dittis terris et gleba nunquam
feparari folebant / cum paftura 12 fiimorti aialiii et catellorum / refernata
petia terre que jacet ind? ftripam que defcendit a paruulo prato cx parte
aufirali et follam terrarum aratarum de Coittunflat ex parte occidentalj
et aquam de Efk ex parte orientalj et paruum lie bog ex parte borealj



--- Dunfermline_page447.png ---
ABBREVIAT. ] DUNFERMELYN. 395

extendei ad duodecim pticatas terre — pro conftruétione manfionis et
horrei_ et deduétione decimarum - Reddendo quatuordecem libras aug-
mentand ad xiv li. x - fot - et duplicand in introitu euiuflibet heredis -
Apud San&um Andream xi- die menfis Junij 1546 -

561. Preceptum fafine ejnfilem - Datum eodem die -

Carta de tentif muir -

562, Greorgius commendatarius conceffit Valtero Lundye de eodem in vitalj
redditu et magiftro Vitino Lundye eius filio fecundo natu in feodo terras
de fehanvell cum eunieulario et cunienlis earnmdem ac cum ecuniculario et
cuniculis terrarum de fothert - necnon - v - mercatas et - v - folidatas decem
mereatarum terrarum de fotheris - Reddendo feruicium warde 7 releuij
necnon x1 - folidos una cum feruicio forinfeco et tres fectas ad tria placita
eapitalia - Datum apud Dumfermling xx - Augufti 1546 -

Preceptum fatine ejufdem datum eodem die -

Carta magri Jacobi Ogilvy de terris de Bennathy -

54 Georgius commendatarius ad feodifirmam conceffit Jacobo Ogiluy de
Bennathy et Elizabete ftenart eius fponfe terras de Bennathy jaceii in
Wetter ftermonth ‘infra vicecomitatum de Perth quas idem Jacobus
refignauerat - Reddendo - x - lib - et ix fot - duplicando in introitu cuiuf-
libet heredis - Datum apud Dunfermlyne x - Septembris 1548 -

if

Preceptum fafine ejufdem datum codem die «


--- Dunfermline_page448.png ---
BS
S

567.

508.

396 REGISTRUM DE (cart. REC

Precept? Jo” Batouii -

Preceptum commendatarii de clare conftat pro fafina Johannis Betoune
filii et heredis quondam Archibaldi Betoune de capildra in annuo redditu
- xliii - marearum - iii - fot - et iv defi - lenand de terris de Raithtoun
- appreciat a Jofie melvill de raitht milite taq™ cau™ feu plegio quond
Rot* Orrok de eod et fuori complici - Datum apud Dunfermling - xxiij -
Septembris 1548 - Teftibus Alano Couttis Roberto lumifdeyn Jacobo
Harper et Willelmo Sym -

Preceptum de terris de Turhane -

Preceptum commendatarij de clare conftat pro fafina Johannis Betoune
filii et heredis apparentis quondam Archibaldi Betoun in dimidietate ter-
rarum de Turbane jaceii infra vieecomitatum de fiff- Datum apud Dun-
fermlyne xxiii? Septembris 1548 -

Carta noue infeoda’nis terray de Raitht et pédélis et ptinefi ut infra Pro
Dauidi hamyltout per foriffatura quond Jo” Melwill de raitht militis -

Georgius commendatarius conceffit Davidi Hamiltoune filio legitimo
Jacobi Comitis Aranie tenenti hereditario prefentato a Regina - terras
de Raith que fuerunt quondam Joannis Melvill militis et quas ipfe
foriffecit per juftificationem ad mortem pro criminibus traditionis et
lefe majeftatis de quibus convictus erat per tres regni ftatus - Reddendo
jura et feruicia folita- Datum apud Dunfermlyne xiiij’- Aprilis 1549 -



--- Dunfermline_page449.png ---
569.

ABBREVIAT. } DUNFERMELYN. 397

Carta contirmatidis jnnoua’nis Et noue conceflionis fact per dnos georgii
pmendatariii Et cSuentum monatterij de Diifermlyii de ct fup oMibus et
finglis libertatibus conceflionibus dona’nibus et priuilegijs cofiitat] Burgi
faj de Dunfermlyii per illorum Pdcceffores ppt trart ct cartarit detuper

ofectart vetultaté facis et conceflis ut jnfi

Georgius dury Archidiaconus Sanéti Andree Ac edmédatari? perpetuus
de Dunfermlyn ob preclara modernort’ prepofit) Ballinori: confulum bur-
genfin et cofiitatis Burgj de Dunfermlyne merita quibus ipi more pgeni-
fuori clarere dinofcuntur / confirmavit eartam que

toy et anteceflori
fequitur - Omnibus lane eartam vifuris vel audituris Robertus pmiffione
dia Abbas monaftij de Dunfermlyne et eiufd loc} ouétus humit - ebnam
in dno Salim Noueritis nos [efe. ut infra N. 591. ufque hue In c? rei tefti-
moium 7é-] huie carte Sigillum eapli firi appofuim? - Tefte caplo - Neenon
cartam hiis verbis - Omnibus hanc cartam vifuris vel audituris Johannes
dei gfa Abbas de Dunfermlyii ct ciufd couentus humilt in dno ePna Salém
Noueritis nos vnii confenfu et aff Gu capitulj iri dediffe cdceffiffe Et hac
pntj carta fira cdfirmafle p nobis et fuccefloribus Hris Burgenfibus firis de
Dunfermlyii eijs viz qui nie funt gilde fratres Et eort heredibus jmppetuii
Ac alijs Burgtfibus firis a prediétis burgenfibus firis et corti hedibus ad
gilda reeeptis vel jnfuturi: recipiendis gilda mercatricem Ci omibus

libertatibus juribus omoditatibus et aifiamentis ad libera gilda mercatricé
ptinentibus vel quoqnomodo de jure ptinere valentibus vnacii domibus ad
dicta gilda ab antiquo fpectantibus Saluo jure cuiuflibet Tenéda et habenda
Pdidis Burgenfibus firis et coy ledibus de nobis 7 fuccefforibus firis jn
vendicionibus emptionibus Et oimibus alijs pmiflis adeo libere quiete

plenarie honorifiee bene et in pace ficut aliqui burgenfes dnj iri regis jn
eiufd dnj jiri gildam habent tenent et poffident » Saluis
nobis et obediétiarijs Tris ct coy Miftris p firis ct obedientiarioy Brori
vfibus emptionibus ct alijs Antiquitus viitatis juftitia mediante / In c?
rej teftimdium prefentj carte figilli cOmune eapli firi eft appenfum tefte
eaplo - Nee non indenturam [fapra N. 396.] teftibus magro Abraham
ac officiali Sanéi Andree jnfra Archi-

aliquibus burgi

Creichtoun Ppofito de Dungla



--- Dunfermline_page450.png ---
a
—J

=

398 REGISTRUM DE (cart. REC.

diaconatii Laudonie Roberto Dury de eod balliuo p'ncipali Regalitate de
Dunfermlyii Roberto Steuard juniori duo de Roflyth Dauid Martyne de
Cardvefi Johane Betouii de Capildray Neend magiftris 7 dnis Wittmo
Murray thefaurario Dunblaneii Johanne Lauder Archidiacono Tenidalie
Adam Kyngorite vieario de Lyntoufi Ac Johe Covpar Et Thoma Maleum
capellanis 7 notarijs publicis - ii Augufti 1549 -

Carta Jacobi Kyrealdy de terris de fynmonth -

5 Georgius omédatarius ad feodifirmam conceflit Jacobo Kyrcaldy de

Grange thefaurario Regis et Jonete Meluile ejus fponfe terras de Fyn-
méth jaceii in Regalitate de Dunfermling infra vicecomitatum de Fyff -
Reddendo annuatim feptemdecim libras oo folidos et o&o denarios -
Datum apud Monafterium de Dunfermlyne -

P. receptum ejufdem -

Pittatio de Kynrof et Vruell -

2. Georgius comédatari? de Difermlyii prefentavit dominum Johannem

mowff prefb¥m domino Johanni Archiepifcopo Sané&i Andree ad vieariam
penfionariam eeclefiarum parochialium de Kynroff et Vrwell - Datum apud
Dunfermlyne xxv dic méf Auguft Anno dni «®- v° quinquagefimo p'no -

De terris de Coupermacoutty -

. George commendatour grantit til Jonet Creyehtoufi pe relic of wmqH

= a pe PS =
John Cimyng of Couper Makeoutty for ctane fowmes of money 7 edpo-
ficioull pait 7 delivit be bir The ward 7 nonentres of pe Landis of Coup
M'cowtty w' pe maner place fifchingis gardis and orchartis pairef in the


--- Dunfermline_page451.png ---
576.

ABBREVIAT. ] DUNFERMELYN. 399

Abbotis hands be the death of Johne Cimyng of Couper Makeoutty hir
fpous and with the mareage of Johne Ciimyng thair fone and air or of
vther air fueceiding to him - Given at Dumfermling the laft day of
Nouember The geir of God jM v° fifty ane geiris -

ony

Carta petrj dwry de Jy manis de Kyngorne weftir -

Georgius commendatarius ad feodifirmam conceflit Petro Durye et here-
dibus fis terras de nethir grange de Kyngorne veftir voeat ly manis eum
euftodia loci feu fortalicii pro cujus confvatione et euttodia hereditarie
habuit terras de Greiflandis et Cwnyngerlandis nune vocat Brunteland
jaceii in fehira de Kyngorne ct infra vieccomitatum de Fyfe - refignatas
a Roberto Durye de eodem et Katharina Lundye ejus fponfa - Reddendo
i-celdras et + viii + bolas ordei boni et fufficiétis WMeimonij et foralis
méfure neenon foluendo nonarium onus ommium carbonum fupra monté
carboeidi.

vnacii dedis hifioi carbon ’ ac etiam tres feé

ad tria placita -

Referuato portu de Newhavin alias port of grace voeat per fluxum et
reflaxum maris cum omnibus euftumis ejnfdem - Datum apud Dunferm-
ling - xxii? - Otto’ - 1552 - Teftibus Roberto Petearne  mgro Wthno
Murray thefaurario de Diblayh Alano Cowttis eamerario de Dunferm-
lyf mgro Joie Petearne magro Georgio Hakheid Jaeobo Harper et diio
Adain Kyngorne vicario de Lyntouit -

Preceptum fafine earumdem terrarum datum ecodem dic coram eifdem
teftibus -

Carta florentinj auchmowty de terris de Halbill 7% -

Georgins commendatarins ad feoditirmam conceflit Dauidi Auchtmowthye
de eft ferny florentino Auchtmowthye eins filio primogenito et Margarite
Dwrie fponte dicti florentini terras de Hawhill de Melgum et Lawgrenys



--- Dunfermline_page452.png ---
a}

400 REGIST. DE DUNFERMELYN.

jacefi in baronia de newbirnefehire jnfra vicecomitatum de fyffe et regali-
tatem de Dunfermling - Reddendo - xix « lit - xvi - fot - et iv - defi - xvi-
bollas frumenti xxiv pultreas nee non folnendo ad pittacias monachorum
jill - fot - et iv dei) - reddendo etiam nonum onus earbonum lucrandorum
ibidem - Datum apud Dunfermling x* Maij 1555 -

Precepti fafine Jonete giffert de frefhall -

Georgius commendatarius dedit preceptum fafine fuper terris de fherefhall
in fauorem Jonete Gifhart {ponfe WiHi gifhart fuper inquifitione retornata
ad capellam Regalitatis qua compertum eft illam effe heredem quondam
Georgii gifhart qui fuit frater patris ejufdem Jonete - apud Dunfermling
xxvi° Decembris 1555 .

Aneut pe weft mylite of Kirkaldy -

George cdmendatair of Dunfermlyng tet in fewterme till George bofwell
helein his fpou® 7 thair airis maile qubilkis failgand to maifter Andro
botuell and margarit bofuell his fpoute » the weft myliie of Kirkaldy wytht
pe mill landis and multourf of pe famy / Quha is obliffit to pay to the
faid abbot geirlye thairfor fourty bollis mele fewin pundf and twelf
thilling? monei Twelf caponis to giddir wutht hariage careage and dew
fwice and tua geirf mele at pe jntre of ylk air- and pe faid abbot one na
vayis fall grant nor giff licence to onie inhabitant of pe faid broucht of
kaldy nor of pe lordthip pof to bigg ony millis on the watter or wind
mitnis or horf mylnis witht in pe bound¢ of the faid toun and lordfehip
Swa pat nane of pe multourf nor pfettis of pe weft milne be abftra& nor
drawin pfira throw oceafioiie fot + at Difermling the xvij day of aprile the
geir of God ane thowfand fyve hunderit fyftefewin geirt befor witnef - - -
pete Alane Coutt¢ chamilaie Maifter William Murray-------
seats 7 William Durye -



--- Dunfermline_page453.png ---
580.

FORMULE.

Forma Mandati de Excommunicando -

i de fyfe 7

Ontié cur £8 andF sed vacat CapHanis pochialibs inf" decanat
de fothryf exiftétihs -- Satm in dno - QuerimGiam religiofoy viroy abbis

> Conent?de Dif... ee ee ee + Symi dés Elmeth 7
W - de P- fuggeftione diaboliea - - d@i- 6 ee ee :
A A aoe See = an rao

in quéd monacha fui noie S. de. K- ifm g*uit uberando . + +

9 a et A OP ee Pa GRO

fuat p abbem fui c'ea negocia domuf fue expeditda pp q’d + + >
ine*riffe qua’ vot) wandam? firmit’ Peipient? q‘ting - - - - 2 ee

miflay folempnia dieb3 Anicis 7 aliis feftinis exedicatos

deniicietis - 6 ee ee ee ee Pts Se 7 We durante
déa Putencia edt Plumant - . . - ~  don® cauéom pftitint ftare

sig off firi

mandatis Eedie 7 biificiti abfoluéois ~~

f. p&Xa pe feftii decollagbis - - 6. ee ee
Forma monitionis de deeimis folvendis -
Wits cifacde [dinina] St Andi @inif? humit . Capo poch - tat loci «

lim ci bédieéde - Quia diis abbs de Dunf-
& in dena? p

vt + ppetuo vieaF- de N.S
oquett? & nob - q quid pochi tri in bladis decimalibs - quid
eifdem bludis t"nfactis sibi tenent® - qui de déis bladis 7 dena¥ 7 d&o dne

3E



--- Dunfermline_page454.png ---
58h.

402 REGISTRUM DE [FORMULE.

abbi - seu ei? peuratori adhue wie satiffedunt » vob fiunit’ Peipiend can-
dam? - q“tin? oimes illos 7 singlos déoy bladoy 7 dena¥ debitores inf*
pochiam exiftentes de qnoy ndib; peurator dti dni abbis vob faciet
oftare legittie @oneat~ q inf* - xv dies cooniGont tray eis feay ? Bfato
dno Abbi vt ei? peuratori de Pmiff satfaciant - Sb pena excdicaddis - -
debita fateant® - qd si nd fetint ifos quos nos wonidibs s° Pmifl ex tic
in hiis se'ptis excOmunicam? in ecta Fra dieb dnicis 7 feftiuis int* ciflay
folépnia exedicatos fore deniicictis a déa deniiciacde nd ceflet> quoufy,
d&o dno abbi de Pfatis bladis 7 dena¥ plena¥ fatiffebint 7 bificit: abfolu-
Gdis infte valeat optine - In signi v° hui? monigis p vos fee sigilli vim
ptentibs in fda cauda apponat - Dat tali die - oenf - 7 loco 7 -

tra procuratoria -

Omtibus has tras vifut vel anditu¥ - B - pmiffione dia abbas de B- 7
ci%t loci eSuent? salém in dno - Nowit vniufitas tra q nos facim? - cdfti-
tuim? 7 ordinam? p pfentes - In dibus negociis - placitis - 7 querelis motis
feu mouend - inter nos némq, coonattinm ex pte vna- cont® quafeumq
pfonas ec@afticas vel seculares ex alta - coram q'bufetiq, indicibus dele-
gatis - shdelegatis - ordinariis - vel coy cOmiffariis - jufticiariis - vieecomi-
tibs dni reg + balliuis 7 aliis qualitenig, shftitutis - quib3eniq, diebs vi locis
ftatutis feu ftatuend - ditétos nobis in xpo dnos - H- p'orem- A. W -

D - 5% silies; monachos - magiftros - D+ R- P - 7@ silic

clicos pe%atores
firos {peciales 7 giales 7 coy q‘mlib3 in solidi - ita q nd sit welior con-
dig occupantis - Set q°d vn? incepit - aliu? poflit refumie 7 fini - Dantes
eifa - 7 eoy cuilibs Bam 7 ghalé p'tatem ac wandatii speciale agend
p nobis + nosq,- defendend - excipiend - replieand - ponend - poligdibs
relpondndi jurandi in animas firas de caliipnia 7 de Vitate dicenda - a
qedlibs, altin? liciti_ sac*menti gen? pftandi - Exfin8 petendi jurandi fap
eift ¢ si que fitint adindicate 2 Teftes 7 inft°menta pducend - appellandi -
appellaoni pfeqnd - et dia alia faciend - que veri 7 legittimi pe*atores



--- Dunfermline_page455.png ---
582.

583.

FORMULE, ] DUNFERMELYN. 403

aut peurator fave poffunt aut debét - ¥ si {peciale exigat’ mandatii - 7 nox
facerem? ¢ fi Pfent cflem?» Rati 7 g“tum bntes 7 hitut q'eq'd pfati
pe’atores firi - vel coy aliq’s sup Pmiflis duSint vel duit faciend + p citt
ag, et eoy q’libs indicatit solui - sub ypoteca rey monattij iri pm'tim? -
Pett tenor Pteni fignifieam? . Data 72 +

7 bY dibs quorit

Littera penratoris -

et ciufad

N- dei gfa - Abbas de Dif ordinis sti bndéi sti And diocefis
salim » Notlit vnittitas

loci cduent? vniufis xpi tidelibns has tras. vifui
Fra - nos feciffe - conftituiffe «ae eciam ordinafle « p nobis 7 onat'tie
jiro pd@o ac memb's cid wonat'tio Sbie&> - dilém nobis in xpo + cagiftri
Bartholomed de Guareino peuratoré nim legittim - 7 niciti fpecialé in
romana enria ad inpetrand p nobis - 7 dis @onattio » 7 wenk's « Tras
tam fimplices - q"m legendas iufticia - 7 gfam fpecialé cdtinentes et ad
cont“dieend - in indices 7 loca pueniend - recufand pponend - 7 narrand -
7 appelland - 7 ofiia alia et fingla faciend - 4 cirea pmifla vt aliq'd
pmifloy fuerit optuna - 7 fi mandatii req'rant {peciale - Dantes et cdce-
dentes cidm peuratori iro plenam 7 libera p'tat@ ac speciale @andatit
Sbftituendi alii seu alios loco fui in ead euria q' similé@ in omibs - 7 p
omiia heant p'taté - ac eos reuocandi - q’ciens viderit expedi? - 7 on?
peuratoY in se refuume - Rati 5 g tt: bntes 7 hituF nos pm'tim? sub
ypoteca rey Drarit - q'eq'd p dém pe%ato? nfm - fubstitutia - seu fubfiitutos
ab ipo in Pmiffis. seu Pmitfoy aliquo fem fit seu FE peuratii - NO eni

intendim? - q p dém_ peuratoria - p*uilegiis firis in aliq’? derogetur - aut

cout cont*hat® - In evi? 7@- Dat 7é-

Littera prefentaéonis -

- dei

Retlendo pat’ in xpo+ dno. / and? - A - eiufa pmil-

epo -


--- Dunfermline_page456.png ---
584,

585.

404 REGISTRUM DE [vorMuLe.

tione abbas de Dif . 7 eiuft loci couétuf humit fatm . retencia parit 7
honof - Ad r‘toria eectie de Newland fire dioces
Her. s- quonda r°toris eiuft ad ptens vac ‘antes cum pfentacd - de iure 7
de {to vad nos legie dinofeit? ptine® Pa itnitati Tre relierende « virii puida
7 difereti in téporalibus - 7 spualibus e'edfp tum - cagift™ R - de W ynn-
ftane pfent? exhibitoré vite landablis 7 cduerfacdis honefte caritatis
intnitn Pfentam? p pfent’ + vobis Innit fupplicantes quatin? pdém R -
ad rvorem cecte Pdée adm'te® dignemini «

porte - + +

Litta Pfentacdis -

Retiendo pat in patre Lint. dno J - nei gia. epo sti Andé - R - ead
gta Abbas de Daf 7 ei¢d loci convétus humit Salim Ret - of a Ca
conftat vobis p morté R - dudii vit ecte poch de Kynros - viearii: ecte
Pad@e adpfens tore vacanté - de qua view
qq, ome - Reddndo [re/poudendo?] de onibs ordinariis integ‘lit . ~
ext®ordinariis (p rata dée poredis - eni? pfentaéd ad nos legie ptinet
dinofeit? . Pathitati fre retlend - vird puida 7 dife'ti in tmpalibs 7 in
spualibs c'eifp'ti: dim - J - Iarears - vite laudabit 7 cétitagdis honette -
Lato Pent? - ad Batam porGom in eceta Pndinata caritatis intnitu
duxim? pfentand - vobis hunili? 7 denote fupplicant? - quatin? cid J

ad pfentagdm firam vt Pmiff7 eft adm'tere dignemini ac % ifm inftituer -
> in corpalé poffeffioné induceF - induétum defende# sedm canonicas

recep’ annuatim q‘draginta

ancédes - In cui? 7@ - figill’: Capitli firi plentibus eft appenti -

Littera prefentacdis -

Retlendo pat’ in xpo - dno Wittmo dei gia Epo Dikeldens - Robt? ead
gia abbas de Dif - 7 ei2d loci cOuent? Sha Retienciam in Gib3 7 honoré -
Ad porédem viginti warearii taxatam in Eeetia de Strahardot vieario q' p


--- Dunfermline_page457.png ---
et

FORMULE. ] DUNFERMELYN. 405

inpe fuit in cad - Et de oilibus ordinariis integ“lit- 7 ext“ordinariis

refpondebit - difereti: vir 7 ydonet: Johem de
Kyuros Caplin lato? ptent- patnitatt tre duxim? Pfeutanda - Ca ipa
vicaria nie vacat p worté dni and? dudi viea¥ eecte einft - cui? vicarie
entacd ad nos dinofeit® ptine® - vobs afftuote fupplicantes q‘tin? dém
- Jad déam vicariam cavitatis intuitu velit
palem poffeffionem inducendo induétiiq, fi neceffe fit canonice defeudentet
In cui? 7é - figilli Capitli tri appofuimus -

Ritue® in cor-

adm'te 7

Littera pretentaddis -

Retlendo pat" in xpo - ac dno suo Duo Wito dei gta Epo sti Audi - sui
humiles 7 deuoti RoBtus ead gia Abbas de Da? 7 ciutd loci eduent?

falim - 7 @ denotis oraGdnii fuilragiis obediencia reuencii 7 honoré » Ci

Keete

cd{tat uobis p refignagbem fpontanea dni H- de - E - mup vicari
ceetie Pdée_ ad

de Kynros in facras manus vias corpalit féam_ viear
Piens tam de iure q‘m de fo vacat « Cui? Plentag ad nos legie ptine?
dinofeit? - Patnitati tre retlende viri puidi 7 difetum in tmpalibs ~ in
sPualib; sireiifp*tii - magim KR. de D- vite laudatlis 7 cdtfaddis honette
ad cand viearid caritatis intuitu duxim? pfentandi - vobis humilit  -
devote fupplicantes quatin? Bd@m R- ad pfentagom fram admi'te? diy-
nemini ad déam vicariam
corpalé poffeflion® iIndueet
Dat =?

ipm ppetud vieariti inftitne?® in actnalé ~
ndudig, defender

dm canonicas fanxiones -

In eni?

Forma precepti Vieecomitis de diftringendo ad curiam Abbatis -

/W- de R vit de Ed Suientihs feodi conftabellarie de Hadington®
salut? - Quia p dim Abbaté de. D- nob dat® intelligi q diis - W . de
Waus diis de - D « Niehus de.) - Hugo de P - Joh « filius «Ad - reple-


--- Dunfermline_page458.png ---
406 REGISTRUM DE [FORMULE.

giauerat Th - dém Toch - de Syiii - Story senefcallo t ballio déi dni
Abbis ad gpendi cora déo dno Abbe vt eius loci tenent in curia de
Mufk* - die Jouis in craftio purificaédis He marie vg - de ftando iuri
ad fe&a Joh Gymok- - pfequenda in placito felonie ¢ quo die ps a&'x
gparens petiit dém Th voearj ad seéa sua in d@a curia in forma ptiti fui
Padé 2 qui q't Th - fepi? * legitie voeat? nullo - m°- ppuit vnd ps aét*x
petiit wardam ‘t iudiciti a cu¥ ex [quo] temp? diei fiat puentii - "t pte rea
nd ppente q 'd age deberet - taxando dampna fua ad mille libF fPling - parte
aét'ce intim Amota * in poftum reuocata  curia in caufa ind pleni?
contilta dee‘uit pdéos dim W. N-H.-‘t Joh dift'ngendos - p yno ameia-
mento fexdeci sot - t dari ad ple& - ad int‘ndii déam dift'eéom ad pxma
eur vid3 die Joi - px aii fm sti Maré Ewang in euria déi dni ADbis déo
die ibid ap’ COufk> tenend . t Pdéos ple& sumidiri ad int*nd dém Thofti
dis die t loco - Quoe'ea dés diis - Abb nob in hae pte oee’rens p iufticia
tua wmanutenenda fubfidit: regiii implorau' tang* is q* déam baroniam de
coutk - de dno jiro Rege tenet in 1iBo feodo * regalitate - Et qr dés diis
fir Rex déam baroniam in TiBtatibs fuis tang” puram 7 ppetua elemofina
fix de iure tueri t fouere tenct®- Vob v'tute offieii fri firmit Peipiendo
mandam? q*tin? vna dift’ecbm xvj sot capi faciatis de Pddis dno. W-N -
H % Joh - t dari ad pleg - ad int*ndii: ap* curia de Qutk- - d@o dic Jot -
pX aii fm s@i Marei addi t sumdiri faciate Pdéos dim W.N. H +t Joh
ad int‘nd pdém Th - déis die t loco de ftando iuri * caliipnie dt Joh
Gymok * vitius factur qd iuris flit t rdis Not vt loci: nfm tenené hoc
peeptum nfm ret“dentes q'lit tenoré pfentis wandati fuitis executi sb
teftio pfonay fidelii’ q' déis execucdni t citagni pfonatr intfuerint
Dat té -

Forma litere jufticiarie Regalitatis de Dunfermlyn -

Vniuf pateat p pnt Nos N pmiffice di* abbtes mo“ftij de Dif et eiufa
logj pventi vnai oft" 7 aff" feciffe oftituiffe ac ordiaffe necnd p pni fate


--- Dunfermline_page459.png ---
FORMULE. ] DUNFERMELYN. 407

oftittte et ordiare Nobiles duos» N N- Latoré feu latores pntiti jufticiarios
iiros toci? fire Regite de Dif ca ptineti jaceti inf* vieecoiti de fife Daii
7 omitteli di&e firis jutti
ptate; 7 renale madat atq, {Pale curias firas jtinis jutticiarie toci? fire
dée regite ftatuét ordinaii inchoaii affirmati 7 quociés op? ftlit otinuad
fect vocare facieti abfentes adciand amciameta et exit? jtinere leuad et
peifd diftngen t‘nfg‘flores 7 delinquétes piicd lites 7 queftides in date
ded 7 fie dehito Pmiad hoies firos

Bt

“et coy cuilibs oitétim 7 difim jira; plen“as

jtineribs motas feu monéd audiéd de

tenétes ac offies 7 finglos déaz jira; rega’ ihitali et eori bona q‘euq
quociiq, loco feu curia 7 fignat omies 7 figlos teneti firos 7 thitah déa;
rega® de Di arreftatos feu attachiatos p corona fupmj dni iri regf ad
pxim jter jufticiarie fupmj dni iri reg tendd 7 ichoand apud coupyr tli
die flis méé Cora dno jutticia’ fuapnj dni iri rege ex pte boreali aq de
forth Replegiad 7 reducéd ad jtina fira dée jire regitt de Dif et de
jufticia ptibs oquerétib; debite Miftranda plegios fufficiefi 7 caucioné
ydoneam pftand 7 iudiend jter dié 7 loci affignad p infticia exequéda 7 7
iiiftrad put i hae pte digattit ordo jure - Et fi 7 Pmifl nege flit plegios
luéiend 7 recont*riand 7 defup rdes 7 jura affignad judicia 7 ward peteii
7 audichi 7 ea feu eas cont*diceti 7 defup pleg téiei 7 res affignat
cotradiaaq, judié plequeh 7 rdes inf tim jure delibai judicibs quoy
inteft Et giialit ia alia 7 fingla facieti gerei 7 extcelt que ad ofticii
huidi jufticiarioy de jure feu ofuetudie regni ptine nofent® Et fi flia fint
q madat exigat magf {Pale Rat 7 gratii habeti 7 hituros toti 7 q'quid dai
iii jufticiarij feu eoy aliq’s piidim fen difim noie fro in Pmif? jufte teu
rite duSint vt duSit facieti - Quare ait 7 fin#lis tenentib 7 Thitaii déa
firaz rega" ex pte fupmj dni fri rege Peipi? 7 madae qts dete firis jufti*
7 cori: cuilib3 piticim 7 difim 7 bib; 7 finglis dém offm othe’ pmpte
fndeant pareat 7 itendat fub di pe" jure q ppete porit i hae pte - Dat fub
figit ei ca" firi ap’ Dif fli die lis mé6 Anno dni - -



--- Dunfermline_page460.png ---
5S.

408) REGIST. DE DUNFERMELYN [rorMULE.

Forma precepti et mandati Domini Regis de attornatis -

Jacobs di g* rex feot Sib; pb ho" ad q's Pnt> tre puenint {ts - Sciatt q
futcepi?- - - tles. N+ vt eori a’y’s vt a'qué attornatos vt attornatit p abbe
7 oueli de dif i negociis 7 q'rel€ placit€ 7 loquel€ mott feu moued ifos
abbes 7 oveli tagefi fen tige valeii q*b3eiiq, diel
qtbuteag, » QuaF vob Peip? 7 mada? gis dé --- N «ac eoy a'quos vt alqué
quos vt qué pntes vel Futé Ge ptigit tag attornatos vi attor"tii Pddoy abb
= oven i pmit recipiate fin" p? And mie valitur€ Indeq, Nos has tras firas
eis fierj foci? pateii ap* ediburgh die mé( Anno -

bs 7 loet 0° q'leigq, 7 cord


--- Dunfermline_page461.png ---
Carta pambulacionis de melgow -

Placita Jufticia® de fivf ajid wontem de Largauch die waré in f° Sti Daft-

+ + w+ cco”. yj’. Sup r'tis metis 7 diuifis faciend et pambu-
fand i int Tram Nithbren - +. + + «+ + Abdbatis 7 conuent? de
Daf q'm de Bno Re& - tenét in eapite inf’ vieecomitath - - + ex
pte vna : 7 ‘tram de Largauch - q eft dni Diicani Cofi de flyf - q*m de
dno rege tenet in capite infra ecundm vicecomitatii ex altera ad qua
pambulaéom faciendam scdm tenorem +» + + + + pambulaéde impe-
tti p Pd@m dim Abbatem de Dif - tales fuertt jurati . v - diis
Diss - W - de Lofidy - Diis - W - de Cambow - And? de Valoins - J - woni-

peny-Rog - + + + + + Lonchoy + AleX vnyoth -J-de Kingor - J -
de Hayia de Athnathtan - Philippufde - - - - - + W- de Renda-

lifton. J - de fore . + J+ de Kyndaloch Adam de Kynynmouth - J» de

: + Qui iurati diedt q pp'etas eampi qui vocat* welgum
@ dni cofide fy® . . - 6 ee ee. DOP. tnt cdmune in dé
campo pafeendo inf* metas 7 dinifas sbfetptas - - - - + + oe

. et Religiotoy viroy ABbis 7
cduent? de Daf - - - 5 - + + + + + jacentes ad pedes ptis
autt*lis di @étis de knock . - - : + + + + aflendendo de

3F


--- Dunfermline_page462.png ---
5a.

410 REGISTRUM DE [omtssa.

dis lapidib3 vfq, ad fontem q* vocat? - sos ++ ad Japidem
qui voeatur le crawftane 7 s° de illo lapide vfus boream viq,ad +

- + tras de Molaj gdeo. ¥fus boream viq,ad quandam
Ro + q® vooat® le soe + + + ad boream vViqgad - - + + de
rien de Nithbré Vfus Balbard p viam . . + + + de péth deinde

Yfus oecidentem viq, ad foffam pdam de Balbard ? Et q diis Comes de

fifo. 2 ee ee ee + + Vins Balbard videlid - incipiendo ad
fupd@os - + + ++ ftanes ad pedem auftralis ptis déi wontis - Hine-
inde afeendndo Vfas - + vi Le Craggegys - + + + vig ad colts q’
yoeat? Le Bolhit Debine afeendendo p quent sichetii vf, ad fout® q'
vocat? Le Crikwell - . - + vertus orient® p q‘ndam foffam q vocatur le
Cragmedu ufq le Northlandis 7 s° p d@am =. - ++ Northland « vig,
ad rinuli q! voeat® Le Corfbure deinde verfus boream vig, ad qimd

sore es ee delr + + + deinde p fram arabilé de Balbard
ty, ad pdZam fofiam de Balbard - - In pmiffoy dium teftionii prentibut’
Sigilla dni D .- de monte fixo tie Jufticia¥ de fif & appen® Dat die loco
7 anno fup"déis -

Carta int Dunfmelyi 7 Kambutkyneth vetis pei de St'ueliit -

Vnillis Sée firis Kecte filiis Bfons feriptit vil vt anditut W de LamBton"
miferaébe diuina ecete sti And? minift humit flim - Nott vnitifitas tra
q eh mota Get cdtrotlia coram ofticiario din agitata int Religiofos viros
Abbatem 7 cOuenti de Daf aétores ex pte vna Et Abbatem 7 conuetii
de Kambutkynet: reos ex alta fup iure reeipiend decimas zarbat vetis
nae de Strivelin Redad&i in culturam tempe dni RoBi ai gta Reg Scot

Tand ex cdfenta cord nob d&a edtrotifia amicabili? q finalit in hie modi
cdq'euit - viz q dé abbas Convent? de Kamb3kyneth ‘hebit ad +--+ firnam
de pdéis Abbate 7 cOuentn de Dat imppetuum oimies decimas g“rbat uille
de Camb3baron ci decifii vetis parci Pnoiat - 7 gaudebit cif tanq*m
suis: p+ c-sot-eifd foluend - + + - + cedietaté ad f™ Sti wartini


--- Dunfermline_page463.png ---
OMISSA. ] DUNFERMELY?

tli

in yeme 7 aliam cedictaté ad f pentechoft. Excepta - + vacarij in

- oH ears F ~
parco Snoiato incentis - Cui? erofti deceit pr Coy Abbat 7 cSucnt? de
I I 7

Kambufkyneth - cf - p tenor’ cniedt cdpoticdis int pléa @onat'tia ab autiq’

inite - 7 p Sigilla autentica . + + put pats pleni? in ead. Et si cdtingat
A = of) Fi 7 pana eR aan
d@in peit itato reeludi de d@is - - + + + defaleabiit vigint fot- Et ex

tune d@i canonici liberi c#t 7 imunes a solucde dtoy viginti solid 7 s
Aaa 5 5 ) Qa e 7

soluent p refiduis - + solid - annuos - sex @aré ad tminos pnoiat + q’
+ ineult?. Et si itato redigat® in cultura soludt -

vt pmiflum eft - + + fi cdtingat in deci garbalibs ville de Camb3-

solid annnatos

baron 7 pei aidéi - fterilitatem vattacioné - - trucédem fieri in parte vel

in toto notabilem p cSem guerra illo anno vel iH annis
lefionem huerint 7 p fideles pbari potunt - In foluée firme sue tiet
allocac - In cui? rei teftism Huie ato parti penes pd@os
Abbaté 7 7 couenti de Daf remanenti Sigik nfm vnacum + - - sigillo
yneth eft appenfum parti v’ penes Abbateu 7 cOucnti
+o. + + + sigillum nim vna citi sigillo capitli de
Dat eft appentin Dat. Act-et sept + + + + be marie Vigil) Ant -
dni w’ - ccc”

-quos

e'pto eyrog™

~ 29 a=
Qued pambulacd int abbem R- 7 ouétie de Div
q'da ptitla tre ap* Inukethin -

+7 G-de wubray de

+ \Vfus orient que se extendit Vfas boriam iux® fonte qui
voeatur Kellohouis Wet px“ ex parte orientali 7 ita Viius ptem borialem
vig, plukylaw ex pte orientali - 7 s* p semitam - lapidibs intfixam subt?
albii_ pratres vfus auftri’ pX adherent® ad pedem dé albi p*tres - vfq,
ad viridem viam Vfus orientale ptem - que via se extendit Vius boriam
inx* fonté q' voeatur le Tlafoewet - ex pte orientali - 7 s° ufg, ad collé

ni
figuati +7 8° ufq ad fiechetit maritij q' voeat® le Croflech - iw

ex pte oecidentali de Carnihole sedm q lapides ibi fixi St - 7 eruce-
marifity

qui voeat® Je Crofinire exiens Vius oecidentem - 78 Vius orient® del


--- Dunfermline_page464.png ---
593.

412 REGISTRUM DE [Lomissa.

threpeland 7 dm carifii - se¢m q pet® ibi fixe ft c*cefignate «7 s° vfus
boriam vfq, Croflech iux* dém qarifii - 7 s° ad arifil - q' voeat® marifin®
dni. vias 01

jenté - 7 s° vfq, ad viam regiam ex orientali pte - marifii dui
q’ se extendit de villa de perth Vfus Inukethyn - 7 eft seiendii q Pra fieea
+ arida - vq, ad feicheti q’ voeat* le Croflech remanebit abbi 7 cSuentui
de Dak. 7 tra carifioy remanebit dno. G de coubray +

De ecelefiis de Kynros et Vrwell -

Santtiffime pri in x° ae dno dno Clementi diuina_puidente clemeneia
sacrofanéte Romane ac vnitiiat Kectie siimo pontitic: Sun? ++ - humilis ae
deuotus ecapellanus ae creatura - Willitis Kectie sti Andf i Scocia minift
humit deuotiflima pedi ofenla beatoy - tre fanéitati hamili? significo 7
retient « q Diis Alek Abbs - @onattij de Dun? . sti And? dyoces ple
pient exhibitor . - Scoticanis - ci fira certa seiécia - ac licencia denote
petita 7 optenta Receffit 16 aliq™ leuitate seu tentitate duétut’ s3 Sto spu
ut eredo - inftin@us - caufa Tram sac’

gam sedem aflicam - ac limina
beatoy aploy pet’ 7 Pauli p falute aie sue vifitandi - vnd - ci ife pfatii
honorabile conattia de Dun? - diée Dyocef} mee Sd AndF¥ 7 q° Reges
Seoeie sua optinét seplturam inter - - - - t'bulaBnes - 7 anguftias « ac
diutiflimas guerray peellas - laudabilit’ rexerit ¢ tra dignet® Sanétitas
clementiffima ipm ac negocia déi coonaft ij sui p deo hre recdmédatii - Et
pochialé Eectiam de Kynros - cit capella sua de Vrwell qm ipe Abbs 7
qonachi déi wonat tj + ex cdceflione 7 donaédne bone memorie Robert
reg Scocie - ue ex cdcelliGe 7 ordinaéde Pdecefloy troy Epoy Sti Andé
+ cdMmaddne capli eiufd 7 pp'os vfus optinét n*non pacitice poflederunt

+ + + benignitate - ex certa scientia 7 g¥a speciali - ipis Abbi - 7
coonachis + ae @onattio tao edferre dig - + + + da Eee

ja 7 iure seu
poffetfione eiuftt - vexati fuerunt feu pt*bati jiufte - nd dubito qin -

coonaftio magna diminuéoné pateret® -co q magna ps sbftacie oinift'neitt
Jeo Gex frat - . + + nofeit® depiret « Vram Scitaté cdfuet altiffim?


--- Dunfermline_page465.png ---
duh

oMissa. J DUNFERMELYN. 41S

din felicem ad regimé ct exaltagdué Kectie

Dat ap’ Sém And? o@ave die @entis octob's -

Contirmatio Cardinalis Legati de viearia Kecletic conventualis .

Vatterus mi

cone dinina Ste Ro‘ne ecctic cardinalis Simoda Ptate legat)

a late in teocie et ybernic regni abbatj et
outtui de Dunf? ordis SG BAUZi SZ andy dioé {hlut® in dno + Religiofam
vita dneétibus tli decet puifione p{pite vt que eis ad vite fuftentagom ex
deuocione fit collata fidelii firma ofiflant et ipi p hoe dno quieci? valeant
faiiilari - Eras ei bone memo* Witi de lanbtos quod epi {ti andy ipi?
mmagno figillo fignatas fanas et jntegras nnp infpexim? forma que fequit*
otinelt Vnit6 1% mats ec

sad quos Put Ite pucnint Wits de
Sti andy Mit? hiilis {ttm in duo fempit na -
In oblacdib; beneficdy ecctiafticoy illos nd Tmerito decet afiponi quibs
gmédabiliort vite pfeccOrtq, caritatt merita tiffragant* Cum ig? in Religiof
vir abbate ct pudtu de dunt difeipline reGlar€ 7 pfeeGore ad dej laudé et
pxioy infor’dem feruor vigeat caritat( Nos eo ampli? in pmitB fucciores
ipos redde fpantes q“to min® téporalib? deftitutj fuerint auviliis - Ad
honoré dej et bti andree pat’nj fri neend et hte margarete regiv eui?
reliquie ibid fub celebritate venant® vicariam ecctic puctualis de dunt et
c& ipa ecetia pochit exittat Pate abbti ct oustui 7 pp'os vlis p nobis et

lambertoii mifacde dina eccti

fucect{Sb? iris imppetut conferim? p putes faluis Epalib? ita vis q
facrifta ipi? ecctie qui p tempo¥ fuit enra heat viearie fup‘diéte ¢ Et
pochie p capellant) ydonei facint defuiry Et q memorat? facrifta nod
obftante cura hmGi fibj pmifla p tui abbatem iux* Reglarem ipi? mo"tt ij
difeiplina ab adiiiftracde ipi? fac'larie lib® valeat amouerj - Inc? rej
teftism pntj fe'pto figilli nim fecim? apponj - Dat’ ap’ Daf: die lune px

p? fet fi nyeholaj conf anno dni mille tricétetio - Poft quay quit

a A ee rn ao aa
lfart infpexioné p pte Fra fuit hiilit fupplicati qts collagom et oimia alia
et fingla pfe'pta in di&e Fis ptéta in omibus fuis pact? et artidlis eou-



--- Dunfermline_page466.png ---
414 REGISTRUM DE (omissa.

tirmar benigni? dignarem’ Nos itaq, attendeti hofpitalitaté 7 alia pietatt
opa que fedule eScet? Frisq, in hac pte fupplicib? incliatj pmitff collaéom
fine donacioné et ceta in dite tris ote? oMiaq, alia et fingla inde fecuta
ratas et rata fintes ipas et illa afitate ap“ qua fungim? in hac pte ex ba
tia confirmam? 7 fntt fe'pt} pat’cinio omunim? - Nullj ergo dino hoim
liceat hane pagina jire of'maédis inf'nge vel ej aufu tema’ ot"iF Si quis

aut’ b® attépta® Prapfit indignaGdem dej omipotet> et btoy pet® et pauli 7
andree aploy ei? fe nowit ine’{aF Datum fub figillo quo dud vtebam®
vt Epns Glafeueii decio quito die més Decébrt poiit? dni ri cléte fpe

feptimi Anno oétauo -

rta de Gylda mareatrice -

Ofnibus 7@ - [hane carta vifuris vel audituris Johannes dei gta Abbas de
dunfermlyii ct ciufd céuentus humit in dito etna falim -] Notitis nos
ynanimi confenfa et aflenfu dediffe conceflifle 7 hae fnti carta noftra
confirmafle pro nobis 7 fuecefloribus iris Burgenfibs noftris de Dun-
fermlyn et cori heredibus imppetuii Gyldam marcatricem cum oimibus
LiBeatihs + juribus - 7 cSmoditatib; - ad libam gyldam m‘catricem ptinen-
tibus vel de iure ptinere valentib; - vna cum domibus ad di&tam gyldam
ab antiquo fp‘tantih; faluo iure cuiuflibs - tenendam et habendam p*déis
Burgenfihs iris et eorum hedibs de nobis et fuceefforibus ris in vendi-
cionibs empédib; et omib; aliis premiffis adco Be quicte plenarie
honorifice bi 7 in pace - fieut burgenS dni fii regis in burgis einfdem
dni fri tenent et poffident - Saluis nobis et obedienciat firis et eorum
miniftris pro noftris et obedienciarioy firoy vfiibus empcionib; et aliis
antiquit? vfitatis iufticia mediante - In cui? rei Teftimonii 7@ [prefenti
earte figillii cOmune capli fri eft appenfum - tefte eaflo .]


--- Dunfermline_page467.png ---
596.

5OT,

omiss. J DUNFERMELYN. 15

Carta de cSmunia Ville de Dunf -

Offiibus hane cartam 7% [vifuris vel audituris Robertus pmiffione dia
Abbas monat tj de dunfermlyfie et eiufit loci ouétns humit - etnam in
dito falém] Nouitis nos hito folempni 7 diligenti tractatu in eapitulo
pro vtilitate domus uottre dedife coneceflifle et hae pfenti carta firs
contirmafle cOmunitati Burgi firi de Dunf? ac Burgenf eiufdem cOmuniam
more fire a diuifis de Waltirfeelis vig, ad rectos Tminos fine metas de
Bedgatt in longitudine - Salua nobis petaria fira de BedgaH. Et a via

regia de perth - 7 a tminis fine metis de crenoyi - vlq, ad reétas diuitas
de Tuleh in latitudine et petaria in eadem mora eontenta

. : . . . roel .
petia tre a uia regia de perth vq, ad ripam de moncor int duo f¥cheta

et cum quadan

que linialit fe extendit a moncor _vfq, ad uiam regia de perth quanti
latitude de moneor - inxta eand tram fe extendit - Tenet 7 habend
pfatis cmunitati 7 Burgenfibs qui pro tempe faint imppetui - Be
quiete plenarie honorifice Bi 7 in pace et oMibs affiamétis dée more
qualitetiq, vt pmittitur {p*tantibs -Tam in herbag - q" foeali p te 7 aialibs
fuis pafeendis vtendis 7 hnd - Reddendo inde dé cdmunitas 7 Burge

nobis 7 fueeetforib; ris Anuati in fetto trantlac s ste jargarite regie vnii
par cyrotechay albay pytienS vel. vj. d+ felingoy bonoy 7 legalit, in
augmétum fme nobis 7 monattio fro p eoft Burgtfes de burgatio dai
Burg iiri cit fuis iuribs anuatim debite 7 pfuete « In cuius rei teftionii 7¢
(luie carte figilld cali iiri appotuim? - Tefte ciple -]

Memorandum de Reddendo W - Withoyemnur -

tH} ¢ Witls Withoyem? - hedes tai 7

f™ sti marti 7 yeme vnam libri pipis p q‘dam ptidla tre ex pte boriali

lignati debét foltte annuati ad

. we De De oT x aD
ville paflagij iacéte iux* tra Robti Turnetow qém q'dé tram tenet ct

carta.


--- Dunfermline_page468.png ---
599.

416 REG

. DE DUNFERMELYN Lonissa.

Copia patronat? vni? capellaie 1 hurgo de Kyrcaldy ad nos fpectaii -

Sciant putes 7 futurj nos Adam pmiffione dina Abb; mo"{tij de Dun-
et einfd loej onéti q"da carta Witi morifon burgei burgi iri

fermly
de Wirealdy -

Subtidium vit - de Are

f- LExtenta

+d vieccomitat? de are de + fabfidio eSeetlo. pro ne-
nel a. ob.

gociis expediend in curia romana

serplicet.


--- Dunfermline_page469.png ---
APPENDIX If.

AUTOGRAPHA.

sos. Btn Nomine Sante Trinitatis . Ego Matcolmus Dei Gracia
Srottorum Bafileus authoritate Wegia ac potettate . Margarete
Regine udoris mec epifcoporum comitum baronumgue Regnt
mej confirmatione et teftimonio . clero etiam adgquiefeente que
populo . Sciant prefentes ct futuri me fundafle abbaciam in
Monte infirmorum in honorent Dej omnipotentis ec fantte et
individue Trinitatis pro falute anime mec et omnium antecctio-
runt meorum et pro falute anime Regine Margarete vroris mee
et omnium fucceforum meorum . concefi enim ct Hac carta mea
confirmabvi predifte Abbacic omnes terrags ct villas de JOardulin .
Witnaurcha . [ittecorthin . Wetbachichin . Lauar . Bolgin . ct
hiram de Wirkaladunt . et Jnnerele minorem . cum tota fehira oe
SFofriffe ce Mulelburge cum omnimodis fuis pertinentijs tam in
capellis ct Decimigs altifque oblacionibug quam in omnibus alijs ad
cas terras villas ct (chpras jufte (pettantibus ita libere teut
aliquis ret aliquas climofinags vngquam dedit vel contulit ab
initio mundi ad Hunc diem. Teltibus Jvo Kelledcorum Abbate .
felackduffe Comite . Duncano Comite . Aralds Comite . Neif
tilio TClillielmi . frteriefwain . apud Edinburge .

Concordat cum autographo in omuibus
St. Ja. Balfour Lyone .
3G


--- Dunfermline_page470.png ---
418 APPENDIX fT. {auTo-

Confirmatio Ricardi Epifcopi Sanéti Andree -

. Rid. di gia ecetie fi Andree humilif minif? - unidhif f%e mat's ecctic

 clericif 7 laicif - fat - Qi ad officid n?m nonim? fpeétare in etlia di
are - & que edificata ff in meli? emendare - dignd duxim? - ea q in
ia Dunfermelinenfi confirmanda erant - fub pacif fire trang'Ilitate
fiteipe & carta fira confirmare - Ditica g* moniti & freti auétoritate ta
abfentibs q’m Pfentib; notificam? vof conceffiffe 7 carta jira confirmaffe
ut Bfata ecctia eectiaf ( eari poffeffiones 7 omia ecctiaftica biificia 4
eidem largitione regi pontifici 7 alioy fideliti in elemofina largita fuerint :
ita libere 7 honorifice 7 q'ete ab di feruicio & exaccione poffideat - ficuti
aliq® ecctia meli? 7 honorificenti? 7 liberi? 7 qeti? poffeffionef fuaf in
toto epatu firo tenet & poffidet - uidelicet ecctiam de pert - 7 feola ei¢dem
uille - 7 capella de cafiello - 7 eectiam {¢i leonardi - 7 ecctiam de uilla
Glinen « 7 eccliam de St'uelin - 7 feola ei%dé uille - 7 capella de eattello
1 ceta qj iufte ad eaf ptinent - 7 ecctiam de Kellin - 7 eeetiam de Aber-
crumbi + 7 eecliam de Nithbren - 7 ecctiam de Kilgleffin - 7 capella de
inuerehethin - 7 eectiam de jnucrefeh - 7 capella de covflande - 7 decimas
de Keth - 7 ecctiam de Wimet - 7 ecctiam de hala ci omib3 apendicijt

fui’ 7 ecetiam de Neutune - 7 eectiam de Wehtercaledonre - faluo iure
efali - 7 confuetudine - Teftibs hit. G- Efo de Dunkelde - W - abbe - de
1Ga cruce - W - p'ore de f@o Andrea - Q) archidiacono - A - arehid - Laud -
Aiulfo deeano - Johe nepote R - epi + Roto - filio Sevi - magiftro Herets -
A + capellano - magift? Barthot - magift’ Turf - magift? Abraa
capelt - archidiaconj -

Confirmatio Pape Alexandri IIT . de Ecelefia Dunchelden -

. ALEXANDER eps feruus feruoy di Dileétis filiis . Giffredo . abbi ste

Trinitatis de Dunf? . einfq, fratribus - Salt «7 aplicam bedi - Juttis peten-
tinm defideriis digni: ett nos facilem prebere contfenfum - et uota que a


--- Dunfermline_page471.png ---
, :
ian si sums eS any me SBUMAIIUOD aw o=yeney ge

Pog

Te FS Sassen ey

road “ny “Wy
eapaorpe Hon wi stuomey anh wen AY stun
ve \
\

f roo sgl “ayer sou i
= Us , roo . Jo. ) d
i anne s | stag weedy ape) “re yn" \

3
sR.) BIS WAN -OVMLA = sryre SU arI-19 ome suTevE sd? ine
~wme aS gc a
co


--- Dunfermline_page472.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page473.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page474.png ---
“Viti ste matt cecté fur Rieandur der git duundheldentt epesat-eptoopalenr
benedich ove: iit ad nrttn fpectac offtcrumn (ce-reltgiotuf cutrit amplaficarey’
nofeane tam pofti giia pfentel meconcefhiffe eehac mea carea sfirmatte abbarr de
dunfinet -smonadnt ibidem deo fernirermily donartoric ref inalcholat yan
dive opi harenentit tein git eoxe care reftani cotiam Sennanlde dimdrede
sori traf te ad eam pernencel Bats qerafab dt cvadhoneeccliafhiee sy. Gari
pfone faluo eptftopalt arre: Conedo end 1s sifanoneieprtcopari ineo. yt dt
toni srerweane offteuttfubdiror: fizoy aati habeane anmarim-yur stifan ~
ef ito pean Jad xplanucare pemerte:acnpranr Te MYatheo ard
Acono, Diao pore de mfila. Vichacte clertco, Magiftro tharbes. & Tobe fia
aw fito. ober dapifero epi. Radult capellano Thoma prefGo. (untae de’
tio. Abraham paras.


--- Dunfermline_page475.png ---
GRaAPHA. J APPENDIX U. 419

rationis tramite non difeordat : effectu funt profequente complenda - Fa
propter dilecti in dno filii firis iuftis poftulationibus grato concurrentes
affenfu ¢ Eectiam sce Trinitatis de Dunchelden - Ab Andrea efo Catenen
eum affenfu illufiris regis Scottorum rationabilit’ monafterio tire con-

ceflam cum uillis ad eamdem cectiam ptinentibus : uobis 7 p uos ecete

fire andtoritate apoftolica confirmamus
mus exprimédas - fordouin - dunmernee - Bendachiin - Cupmaceulim -

quas propriis ndibus duxi-

Inche - raum - Cethee - Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat hane paginam
ire confirmationis infringere uel ej aliquatenus contraire - Siquis autem
hoe attemptare prefumpferit : indignationem omnipotentis dei - et heatoy
fe nouerit incurfurum - Dat Senod - vi -

Petri et Pauli apoftolorum eius
kt Ave

Carta Ricardi Epiteopi Dunkeldentis de Ecelefia S ~~ Trinitatis de
Dunkelde -

Vnillfif ste mat ecete filiif Ricardut’ dei
epifeopalem benediction - Qii ad niin fpectat offi
amplificare 7 nofeant tam pot ti qua Pfentef me conceffiffe Q hac mea
carta ofirmaffe abbati de dunfinct 7 monachif ibidem deo ternientihs
donationé regif malcholmi 7 andree epi Katenenfis fedm qd eoy carte
teftant® eectiam & - tnitatif’ de dunchelde 7 off traf i%te ad eam ptinentef
liBat 7 q'etaf ab di exattione ta ecctiaftice q* fetaris ptone faluo epitcopali
iure - Concedo etia eis gufationé i epifeopatu meo - 7 ut diuinii exerceant
officit’ 7 fubditoy fuoy curd habeant animarum - 7 ut pilfantes i diocefi
mea a me q ad xPiantaté ptineret / accipiant - Teft- - Matheo archidiacono
S-andree - Brieio p'ore de infula - Wichaele clerico - Wagiftro matheo -
Y Johe fratre {no - Roberto dapifero epi + Radulfo capetlano - Thoma
prefbro - (urdao clerico - Abraham paruo -

duncheldenfit’ epe Sat 7

um fe religionif culté


--- Dunfermline_page476.png ---
599,

600.

APPENDIX L. Lavre-

Innocentii PV - de privilegio excommunicationis -

Tsnocentivs eps feruns feruoy dej Dileétis filijs . -  Abbati 7 con-
uentuj @onafterij de Dunfermlin ordinis fanti Benediéti St Andree dio -
Salt 7 aplicam bei - Cum ficut ex parte tira noftris eft auribus intimatum

nonnull iudie

eectiaftici cum aliquos fibi obedire nolentes uinculo
excommunicationis aftringunt in participantes excommunicatis huimodj
non folum in crimine - fed etiam alio modo excommunicationis prefumant
fententias fulminare - nos deuotionis ueftre precibus inclinati auéoritate
uobis prefentium indulgemus ut fiquando uos uel familias firas huimodi

excommunicatis communicare contigerit propter hoe maioris excommuni-
rationis laquco nequaquam ligari poffitis dummodo non communicetis in
erimine criminofis - Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat hane paginam fire
coneeffionis infringere ucl ci aufu temerario contraire -

attemptare prefumpferit indignationem omnipotentis dej 7 beatoy Petri

quis autem hoe

7
Pani apoftolorum ecius fe nouerit incurfuram . Dat Lugduii - v - kt waij -
Pontifieatns firj Anno Secundo -
Innocentii IV - Ne tralamur ultre mare Seoticum +
Innocentius efis feruus feruoy dei? Venerabili fratri - . Epo - et
Dilectis filijs - - Decano. 7 + - Thefaurario Glafgueit - Salf et
apticam bei - Paci et tranquillitat] Dile&oy filiog - - ADbis 7 con-

uentns wonatterij de Dunfermelin ordinis {Gi Benedi&i Sti Andree diot
paterna uolentes follicitudine prouidere / eis duximus indulgendum ut
ultra mare Scotieum fuper bonis que habent in Scotia in caufam trahi
per litteras aplicas minime ualeant nifi littere ife plenam fecerint de
ipa indulgencia mentionem - Quocirea diferetioni tire per aptica feripta
mandam? quatinus fupradictos Abbatem et Conuentum fuper hijs non
permittatis ab aliquibus contra conceflionis fre tenorem indebite molef=
arj - Woleftatores huitmodi per cenfuram ecctiaftieam appttone p°tpofita



--- Dunfermline_page477.png ---
ui


--- Dunfermline_page478.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page479.png ---
n 2 Geneusd) nas Sranania, ois , parcinond” amany
po eemepe euranee Pele, FALL BS wranwg, f° ours apm FER, 7, Bia frwoe pain
uop 2 “ae * fon yy fe all mbna 29 BYE _ bag ae » cio cxf oneane| ,

are . Zong, wet a oe ot eS sent ae als Fmanwent
- =

_anb* omoq aednf Gare aun aa


--- Dunfermline_page480.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page481.png ---
ool,

602,

GRAPHA. | APPENDIX L. 421

fe tu frat

es hijs exequendis potneritis int

competcendo » €¢d fi won om

Epé cum eoy altero ea nichilominus exequaris - Dat Lngduii iij - Not oaij

Pontificatus fir} Anno Seenndo -

Johannes Abbas de dimidia marea de Bolgin -

Omnibs xpi fidelibs Pfous feriptum uifuris uel Audituris - Johannes dei
gta abbas de dunfermlin - t eiufdem loci conuent? humilis etnam in dno
salutem » Noueritis univerfi nos habuiffe quandam cartam communi figillo
eapituli de Sto Andrea fignatam - fup dimidia w*rea argenti - q"m peipie-
bam? annuatim de terra de bolgin - quam % diéis priori 7 conuentuj t
eoy fuccefloribs p nobis 7 fuecefloribs firis q'etam clamam? imppetuii -
Quare uolum? 7 concedim? - ut fi di&a Carta penef aliqué nim inmenta
fit ¢ de ceto mullam optineat firmitatem - nec eif p eandem in aliquo
poflit Piudicari - In cni? rei teftimonifi Pfenti feripto commune figillum
fivi fecim? apponi - Teft> capto -

capit

Alexandri IV - commiffio de capella de Perth -

Alexander Ejis feraus fermoy dei - Diledtis filijs - +  Abbati de
Driburch Premoftrateit ordinis 7 - + Priori de Coldingham Sci andree
diog - Salé 7 apticam bef. Sua not dileti filij), - - Abbas 7 Conuentus
wonafterij de Radingia petitione monftrarunt - qd» - abbas 7 Conuent?
@onatterij de Dunfermelim ordinis 1¢i Benedi&i Sti andree dioé - Capel-
Jam de Perth cum oimibs iurib; et ptinentijs fais ad @onafterinm ifim de

Radingia pleno iure tpe&antem oceupatam per longum temporis fpatium
tenuerunt laicali fuléti potentia 7 adhue detinere prefwmunt in ciufdé

de Radingia graue preiudicium 7 grauamen - Ideoq, diferetioni
ipta mandam? - quatin? uocatis qui fuint euocandi 7

aonatter

fire per aplica fe
auditis hine inde ppott
facientes quod decreueritis p cenfura ecctiafticam firmit obfua

quod canonicum fuit appHone petpofita ftatuatis
- Teftes



--- Dunfermline_page482.png ---
603.

429 APPENDIN 1. [auto-

aut qui filint uoiati fi fe gia odio ut timore fubtra8int - cenfura fimili
appHone ceffante cogatis Ritati_teftimonit phiBe - Nd obftante indul-
gentia qua tibi fili abbas nt ffib3 tui ordinis a fede aplica dicit® effe
conceffi ne de caufis que uot p litPas aplicas eSmittunt® cognofeere
teneamini nifi expreffa litte ipe de indulgentia hui?mdi fecerit fitioné -
Dat Vithij Id9 Jnnij Pontificat? iri Anno Quarto -

Comuentio eum Wichacle Scot imilite -

Cc Y R O G R A P H VS.
Anno gie + @°- ce’. Oeogefimo dniea pxima p%t feftum sdi_ iohannis
ante porta Latinam fta eft hee cSuené ind Radulph abbem * cuenti
de Dunfimelifi ex vna parte - t @ichaclem Seoti wilitem t heredem bone
memorie Ricardi de Balweri militis ex alfa - videlicet quod Pdiéti Abbas
% cduent? firmabunt ftagnii wolendini sui de Kirealdid sup tram padi
ciebaelis t heredi fuoy imppetuii q’ciens s' viderint expedire - Et curfum
vt'ufy, aque scilieet aque e’entif in? Balweri % Inuirtule . + aque int
Balweri Pram de wilnetuii quicte ad Pdém colendina suit poffidebunt -
Pred@i uw’ wichael «wiles t heredes sui toftum rogi Bsbiti + offis alias Pras
in quib; Pde? rieardus de Balweri ciles obijt veftit?  savtitus - adeo
libere » honorifice -  quiete sicut Pdi&? ricardus de Pdidis abbate *
conuetu eafdem tenuit - inppetui poffidebat - t annuatim a molendinarijs
Pdi wolendini pro tempore exiftentibs ynii par ceroteeari parifien3 aut
t's denarios ad feftiun t*nsladnis beate wargarite regine peipient - Et ad
Gonem inuiolabili? obSuandam vt"q, pars pro fe t fuccefforibs,
suit’ t heredibs se fide media obligauit - In huius rei teftimonii parti
huins fe'pti in modum efrog“phi confeéi penes Bdéos abbem * coustii *
eori succeffores refidenti - Bdés cichael coiles sigillum sui appofiti -
parti u” penes dém cichaelem % heredes fuos remanéti sig
ituli de Dunfmelii eft appditum -

hane conué

lum Commune



--- Dunfermline_page483.png ---
junniniop win NHS pauviral™ ah 2 m9) Ge evuat wn camlatty me uny 2,

eye Pp 14 mee snsgpl ces ec ogre ‘ ox a “the es wy

a on emnG oh {prongs fl pir BIg Qu » ive % ee ozd ie |
“4

Bide of re UUgaNN UY! (js BD - cuales. “nasal sled ava] ong ed a wal BB 8°
iQ. 82 iF anfle| ghnde = 1S Ssbuas oA mignyjobe os sithong dy oo puraymany 25
lan ably gprattn aaa Eee mgm ane oad aa ost anns aasmb Bo 45 ou ‘; callags iy Rg
Sok aby eH 08 cal Tole es enghenl esd gb pub ut or eel evn - sam wall umgdoa i

| ool 120 a> wre aaah at ad m9 ad) g mw QBagmban ant a 4, ake, yen
| eg Ay fads ny jo sity i ie mals vaso m1 is aa al [agls or ome nara a
|

~ BS y at hy a re egy wre myQUy a o*4 amgeich aaa B a 1b 2997 es
i I seg oun 39 leah jen bo wo” a ia 2, sol mad qa ae a1engy

Lat bg oe ow 2h tit ol mm J a 3 BS tw | pusd” a) Bs ate aap “29 & dan “B.

/\\ rea VPI PY SOVIN

ayy.

\|


--- Dunfermline_page484.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page485.png ---
604,

GRAPHA. } APPENDIN L.

Willelmi Epiteopi de ecelefia de Kynros et capella de Vrwell -

Uniuerlis fanée catris cede filiis prefent® Cartam vilué ut audit
Willis de Lambirthoii pmiffione dinina cete {ti Andree init? hit
end in dno falnté - Licet omib; fire iurifdiesdi fabiectis ¢ in fuis iuftis
pottulagib; adeffe debeamus ? illoy tamen puifion® peurare tenem? fpe-
cialins t ptecti / qui {pontaneam fub religionis jugo fernituté cligentes +
omiia fna paupi fuftentaédi t hofpiti fufcepési deputar pt nos
Abbati et conachis de Dun-

de confentii capituli iri dileétis filiis ivi:
fermelyi deo feruientib; et ippetui feruitu® damus coneedim? +t hac
nros :  capellam de vrwett

prefenti carta jira confirmam? Eetam de Ky
ae terra ecée 7 cum omib; ad eas infte ptinentibs - Habend ppetuo
in pp'os vias ¢ ad fuam t paupi fuftentacbem / hofpitalitatis augmentit
adeo libere quiete ‘t honorifice ficut aliq’ abbathia in Dyocefi ira alig'm
ectam liberius quiecius plenius t honorificenci? tenet %t p%idet - faluix
qng, @areas

epalibz t poréde vicarij que extendit fe ad q*dragint
annuatim qui viecari? refpondebit p oiod onerib3 ordinariis t q"ntii ad

porédm fia ptinet p extraordinariis Et quociens chori dée ecée * capelle
cooptura indiguerint aut ecéa ul capella libris veftimentis aut cetis
ornamentis : onus pd@oy * reparaGd ad vicarios q’ p tempore fiunt
ptinebit q' pdéa fais fiptibs fieri ae inueniri peurabit Et ci vacatiit
vicaria d@i Religiofi honeftam pfona nots t fuccefforib; iiris pfentabunt
figillum nim fecim?

ad eandem - In cuius rei teftimoniai prefenti Carte ir
apponi - Dat in @onatterio de Dunfermely ii - die venis pxima poft fettii
fanéi Nicholai Epi t confeflot - Anno gfe witto Tricentetimo Decimo-

feptimo -



--- Dunfermline_page486.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page487.png ---
APPENDIX II.

Tue ReNTALL OF THE HANL PATRIMONTE oF THE ABAGE oF DusrERstse
r Lymekill

is and teyndis of townis sett in asseda’un

Tn pennie meall anuellis enstomes borrow meallis fed oxin sil
maill ka

for mo® As followis perticularlie in every +

vnes fermes teyndis

chyre be ye self Gevin in and

sus' be allane Cowttis chalmerlane thairof ete, [1561]

Dunrermiine Scnyre.

Maistertoune in penny meall in anno
Ejst barnes in penny meall
piteortheis in penny ineall
St Me
The W
Stensanis in burne mouth

irettis stane in anno.

alker land in burn mouth

Selletoun .

Legattis brig .
Wyndmilhill
Knokas
Prymrois
Pitbawillie
Wester baw

jij i vi

Eester Bawdrik
Middle bawdriek ;
Wester baith . . : vilj.icijes.



--- Dunfermline_page488.png ---
426 RENTALE DE

Blacklaw . . : : . iij li. vij.s

Nethe bayth . . . . . . yjlicijes.
Bayth wnder the hill . . : . : vij ij
Luscureweit . . iii.
North ford. . : . . : vj.licxv.s ij ed.
Towehe . . . . . . iiij liijes.
Wyndeage

Coklaw

Vuerlassody

Eister lassody
Nether lassody
Bawmill
Blairathie
Craigluscer
Lauchamoeht :
Wester eraigenky : : : : iij Hi. vij
Eister craigenky

Wester Luscer

Touche my!ne

Northe Lethumes

The Knok : : . :
The thrie mylnes of ye toune of Dumfermling

iij liv

Lathangy . . . :

The oucht

South ford . : : ‘ 5
The borrow meallis of Dumfermling toune —. : viiij i. xij.

The enstumes of ye burghe of Dumfermling

is and eustumis of
s.iiij.d.

Summa of ye penny meall borrow mea
Dunfermling is ijt. Ixxxvj . li.»

The annualis perteining to Dumfermling

Crummye . x.li.
‘The gliebe of Stirling . : : : xi.


--- Dunfermline_page489.png ---
DUNFERMELYN . MDLXI. 427

The
‘The annell of pittinweme
‘The anuell of gartinkeir

anuell of seoone .

Summa of amnuellis

xxyj li

iiij a.

Item of fed oxin sylver within the parrochin of Dumfermling .

Hem the bouplaces and wedder gangis within the parrochin of

Domtermling Ixxxxvj. li.

Item the forsaid bouplaces geves be zeir : : » XXXY. stanes butter
and of cheis : : : . : ifXXX . stanes
viz
Reseobe : . . . . . XXX . stanes cheis
and of butter . . : : . . + Vij. stanes
The gask, of butter. : : : » Vij. stanes
and of eheis : : : : . XXX. stanes

Suthelethemmis, of butter

ij . stanes

and of cheis stanes
Tunegask, of butter. . . : : «Vij. stanes
of cheis . . . . . . + XXV. stanes
Blarnebothie, of butter : : : . : + Vij. stanes

and of cheis

tanes

Suma of butter xxxv . stances

Summia of cheis if xxx . stanes

Doloure in penny meall be zeire

The horhart
Dolonre beig .

‘The mylne of Doloure
Sehirdaill

The mylne of Doloure beige
The bank in anno

Summa of penny meal of Doloare with the bank Ix


--- Dunfermline_page490.png ---
428 RENTALE DE

Newburneschire in penny meall

Newbirnetoune in anno . . . : vj eli. xiij os .iiij od.
The mylne of newbime . . : . : 2 ip i.
Mandurpe

Lathalland . . .

Hawhill . . . xi. xiij os. iiij.d.
Balbaird . ; ; velivyjes.viij.d.
Melgum and lawgreinis . . . . xls.
Drummeldrie . . . . x.li.
Baleristie

Cott

The aikeris . . . . . xjes.

Summa of penny meall of newbirnschyre Ixxiij . li. xviij os .jiij.d.

Kynglassie schyre in penny meall

Pitzowquhair in anno
Stentounes in anno
Inchedarnie in anno
King!
The smidie land
The brewister land

je toune

Cassebarrene : : s. vil}

Pitlawquhy . . vj li. siij.s.iiij.d.
The Walk mylne
Gaytmylk

Finglassye . . . xvj li.

Fynnis
The anuell elynie

Summa of the penny meall and amuell in Kingl
parrochin i¢

xsxij li xvij.s.iiijd.


--- Dunfermline_page491.png ---
DUNFERMELYN . MDLXI. +29

Kinghorne wester in penny maill and annuall

The vuer grange in ano
Weltoune in anno
Fister quarter . . .
The mylne . . . . vj li. xij.
Moy hous liij
The lymekill maill

The annuell of orrok .
The annuell of selibalbie
The annnell of abirdour

Summa of penny meall and anuell i© x i. vj. viij .

Kirkealdie .

Abitishall and inyltoune
The westmylne
Duniekeir

The annuell of balweri
The annuell of Rayth
The borrow meall of ye burghe
The meall of ye salt pannis
‘The east mylne .
The annuallis of certane rudis
The enstomes of Kirkeal

Summa of penny meall annuellis eustonmes and horrow meallis of the
paroehin of Kirkealdie

Kynnedderis .

Vuer kynneddir b
Bandrum. : . . . : vj li. xv.s.itij.



--- Dunfermline_page492.png ---
430 TALE DE

Drumkeppie

The mylne

Nedder kinneddery
The brewland
Killarne

Summa of penny meall in Kynnedersehyre sliij «li

viij od.
The penny meall and annuell within Mussilbrughe schyere .

{uneresk in anno . : : . - Isp -livavjed.
Monktounhall
Littill monktoune
Natoun
Smetoune
Caldeottis
Wonat bank
Carberrie

Costertoune

Pynkin and cars

The fisching

Womett

Stanyhill

The mylnes 5 :
The borrow meallis of miussilbro® toune Payt be ye bail
The annuell hill Pait be ye laird hill

The annuell of edimistoune Be ye laird thereof . xiijes .iiijed.
The annnell of ed. Be the tht thereof . . . . voli.
The annuell of hadingtoun Be ye baillies . . xls.

The ammell of quh
Mr. da! and his s , .

The amnuell of the pannis Be ye laird eraig millar

The annuell of newbotle ‘The abbot of newbotle

Be ye lard fawsyde now be

The terroris croft. Be bessy froge . Loxxyjes.

and anuellis within
siiij.d,

Summa of ye pemy meal

mussilltnghe iiij® xix is



--- Dunfermline_page493.png ---
DUNFERMELYN . MDLNI. 431

‘The haill money within the parrochin of dumfermeling of

penny meall custome borrow meall fed oxin silver
mart silver within the weddergangs
to the soume of

Exten¢
The penny meall of doloure withe
Extendis be yeir to ye soumeof . . . . Asiiij i.

ii. xxvijliex. 8. viijd
> samene

» bank of 3

‘The penny meall of newbirnschyre be

Extendis to ye soume of
The penny meall of King!

vif. iif a,
ic and annuell be

Extendis to ye sonme of . . cxxij Hi xvij.s iii}.

The penny meall of wester Kinghorne and annuell be yeir

ed

Extendis to ye soume of : : .
The penny meal annuell borrow meall and eus
of Kirkealdie
Extendis to ye
The penny meall of Kynneddersehyre
Extendis be yeir to ye soume of : ; : sliij li. xv es
The penny meall of mussilburghe with anwellis and

‘oume of .

borrow meallis

Extendis to ye sonme of clsy li.

The penny meall of southe fe

ye withe anwellis

Extendis be yeir to ye somne of
‘The penny meall of Stermonth

Extendis be yeir to ye soume of
Kirkis and teyndis sett for money

Extendis be yeir to ye soume of

The ferme quheit within the parrochine of dumfermling
mussilburghe and newbirne as followis particularlie

liem In the first of ye gullatis win Dumfermling of ferme
qubyt extendis til . . . . . vech.

Newbyrne .

The cott . : : . . . : jech.


--- Dunfermline_page494.png ---
432 RENTALE DE

Drummelerie
Newbirnetoune
Manturpe

Massilburghe .

Inveresk in ferme quheitt

Monktounhall . ch. iiij.b.
Smetoune . . . . . jech.iiij.b.
Carberry . . . . . . xij.b.
Natoune : : : . : : : viij.b.

Summa of ye ferme quheitt win the parochins of Dumfermling
newbime and mussilburghe —.xv.ch. vj. bo.

The ferme beir within the parrochinis of Dumfermling Kinghorne
newbirne and Doloure

Item within the parrochin of Dumfermling the gullettis . ch.
nid . . . . . . . \jebo.
ij-ch. viij. bo.

i.ch.v.bo.

Girs wut!
Lymekillis
Lymekilbill
The new Landis . . jech.ij.bo.
Dolour sehyre . . . . . jech.
The nidder grange of Kin:
The dry multor of west Kinghorn
Mauturpe . . vip bo.

eh.
bo.

Summa of ye ferme beir win the parrochinis of Dumfermling Dolour
Kinghorne and Newburne —. xij sch vy. bol.

The ferme aittis within the parrochin of Dumifermling

Item the tua gullattis : : : : : : xv eh.

Summa of ferme aittis : xv eh.


--- Dunfermline_page495.png ---
DUNFERMELY

. MDLXI. 133

Horme ait meall within the parrochinjs of Dolour Kinglassie

and Kirkeald

Item in Dolour schyre

In K rrochin vehi

rkealdie
In Kinglassi

parrochin ch ij bo. i. f.iij.p-
i

th,

Summa of aitt meall win the parrochinis of Dolonr Kinglassie and

Kirkealdie

fferm salt w"'in the parrochin of Nirkaldie

‘Pwentie thrie panes ilk paune payis of ferme salt he yeir . viijp.b.

Summa

ferme kayne Lyme win the par xx veh.

chin of Kinghorne w

Kirk

and teyndis of touncis set in assedatioun for money
as followes perticularly

The kirk of strivling sett to ye laird of Cardem . 2 xxx di.
The kirk of icallis set to Mr. henry foulis for . . if merk
The kirkis of vnerquheill and Kinros to ye laday lo‘levin :

The kirk of sanet johnstoune to ye laird of eraigi

The kirk of Innerkeithing to Jo" faryntoun. : jij li. vj.
The kirkis of mollen and straithardell :
The kirk of wester Kinghorne : : .

‘The teynd of Monktounhall sett for
he teynd of Inneresk sett for . . .

The teynd of smetoune sett for

The teynd of natonne sett for

The teynd of Carberrie sett for
The teynd of Cowisland sett for
The teynd of pinkin sett for


--- Dunfermline_page496.png ---
434 RENTALE DE

The teynd of edmestoune sett for. . xxvj oli xilj ad.
The teynd of Vomett set for vd,
The teynd of hawhill . : oli,

cris of Kirkealdie to Dat
Kinghorne : : . xiij Hi

The teyndis of borrow ai

The teyndis of ye aikeris of ye burghe of Dumferling

set for. . . . . .xxyj eli

Summa of Kirkis and teyndis off tounes sett
for mo i i

The tynd quhyte of mussilburghe .

Littill monktoune

Hill : .

Caldeoittis —.

Stanebill : : : : : :
Qubytehill

Shirefball

Summa of teynd quhyt win ye parrochin of mussilburghe sehyre
that is set for monej i.eh yb.

The teynd heir of mussilburghe that is not sett for money .

Littill monktoune . . : . . : xjeb.
Caldeoittis . . : . . :

Stanyhill : : . . : . :
Qubitebill —. . . . . . .  Miij.b.
Quhytsyd . . . . . . . ij. f.
Shireffhall  . . : . . . : : ilij.b.
The sandis . . . . : . jech.

Summa of ye teynd beir win mussilru® sehyre not sett
for mong) iiij. ch ib. iff.


--- Dunfermline_page497.png ---
DUNFERMELYN . MDLNI. 435

The teynd aittis within mussilbruche sehyre .

Lyttill monktoune . : : : . i.ch. xij. b.
Hill : . : .

Caldeoittis .

Stanyhill . . : . . .

Quhytehill

Quhytsyde . : . :

Shiretthall : : : : . :

Summa of teyndis aittis of mnssilbrue schyre v. eh. vij.b.

Teynd quhyt within the parrochin of dumfermling as
followis particularlie .

Eeister gullett of teynd quhyt

Wester gullett . .

Eister barnes : .

North ferry. : .

Murtoune . : . . .
Pitlener

Pittrave : : : . : : .
Ditttirrane

Prymros
Randellis era’
St margret!

Selletonne —.

tanes .

Summa of teynd quhyt win ye said parrochin of
Dumfermling iij . eh . iij. b.j.f.

Teynd beir within the parrochin of dumfermling as followis
particularlie .

Wester gullet : . . . . . jech.ij.b.


--- Dunfermline_page498.png ---
4136 RENTALE DE

Eister gullett
Burne mouth
Baw myln
Sowilfurd

Bayth Murtoune
Blaklaw

Bayth stewart
Bayth keir
Bayth trumbill
Bayth Stenestoun
th bell.
Blair bothie norther
Blairrathie

Baith Danyell
Baith bonala
Baith parsone
Coklaw

Cawill
Crownarland

Craighiseor
Clyne
Craigduky west
Craigduky
DPundutt
Drumthuthill
Eister barnes
Galrick

Gask
Hoillbawdrick
Ruokas
Kavek
Legattis brige
Lymekillis
Lawthamoch
Luscer wester
Lusecur eueat



--- Dunfermline_page499.png ---
DUNPFERMELYN . MDLNI. 137

The Lasoddeas
The souddis
North ferry
Milhillis
Martoun
Morlabank
Medle Bawdrick
Meldrames inylne
North lethemis

Ocht ij. peekis .
Pitleuer . . ijb.
Pita
Piteortheis : x.
Pitfirrane . vb.

y vjeb ei

Primros
Pitduneis

Pithawlie i.
Piteonquhy

Pittinereif

Raindell eraiges

Raseobe

Selletoun halkheid

St mer
Selletoun sandes

Touche . ii.
Tomnegask
Woyndeage j
Windmilhill . . . . ijt.
Walkerland . . . jeb

reattis stane

Summa of teynd beir win the parrechin of Dum-

formling xv . ch. vj.b.

Teyndis aitis within dumfermling parrochin

Eister gullett : : : : iij el itij bd.


--- Dunfermline_page500.png ---
438

Wester gullett
Burn mouth
Aceorne waird
Bawmeill
Sowilfurd

Bayth murtoun
Blaklaw

Brumhill

Bayth stewart
Baith keir

Baith trumbill
Baith stenstoun
Baith bell

Blair bothe norther
Blair rathi

Baith

Blairnebothie souther

Baith bonale
Baith personne
Coklaw
Cawill
Crownerland

Craigluseur

ieduky wester
Dundut¥
Drumthuill

Eist barnes

Girsmurland .
Gask
Hoilbawdrick
Knokas

Knok

Kelly wod

RENTALE DE

iiij ch. ij.
job.



--- Dunfermline_page501.png ---
DUNFERMELYN . MDLXI.

Legattis brige
Lymekill
Lathawmoth

Wester luscur

Luseur ewot : : : .

Lasoddeis cister and wester
Sandis south and north
North ferrie

Milhillis

Murtoune

Moirlay bank

Middle bawerick
Meldrumis mylne

prth part quhyt feild

New landis

Northelemeis .

Oucht

Pitliuer

Pittarvie : : : . .
Pitcortheis
Pitfirran

Prymros :
Pitdyneis eist and west

Pitbawlie

Piteonnoquhy . .

Pittinereif

Randellis eraiges

Reseobe

Selletoun hakheid

St mergreatis stane

Selletoun sandis

Sout lethemes

Touch

Touch myln

Tunegask

Wyndeedge : : . : :
Wyndeege p* kewk

y.
jech. xij.

jock.
ij. ch.
iiij eh.

iiij ch.



--- Dunfermline_page502.png ---
140 RENTALE DE
Wyndmilhill
Woodaiker
Walkerland

Suma of teiyndis aittis win the parrochin of Dumfermiing

quhyt and blak Ixij . el. xiiij.b ij.

The teynd quhyt of Kinghorne wester

Wade grange
Weltoun

Rist quarter
Or
Sillebalbie

Summa of teynd q! in Kinghorne j . ch ijt
The teynd beir of Kinghorne
Wohder grang . ject
Weltoune
Fist quarter
Orrok.

Sillebalbie

Summa of teynd beir in Kinghorne ijj ch. ij. b.

The teynd aittis of Kinghorne

Wohder grange . . : . : jij .eh.xv.b.
Weltoune : . .

Eist quarter

Orrok strane hous moy y hows and dunhair .
Sillibalbie : . . . : . jech. itp. b.
The terrouris aikeris. . . . . . : ij.b.

Summa of teynd aittis win Kinghorne xj. eh. vij .b.


--- Dunfermline_page503.png ---
DUNFERMELYN . MDLXI. 44d

The teynd quhyt of Kirkealdic
The abotishall
Balwerie
Bogie
Bayth

Summa of ye teynd quhit in Kirkealdie 2 j seh

The teynd heir in Nirkealdic

Abitishall and myltoune
The West mylne
Balwerie

Boggie .

Bayth tarbane and piteonmerk
The muretonne of Kirkealdie

Summa of teynd beir in Kirkealdie iiij ch ix ob ijt.

The teynd aittis of Kirkealdic

Abotishall and mylutoun
Balwerie
Bogey . :
Bayth piteonmerk and turbane
The murtoune

Summa of teynd aittis in Kirkealdie xii

veh iiij eb

The teynd quheitt of Newbirneschyre

Phe eott
Baweristie

Drummeldrie



--- Dunfermline_page504.png ---
442 RENTALE DE

Newbirnetown : : vib

Manturpe

Summa of teynd quhyt in Newbimne ij eh. xj. b.

The teynd beir of Newbirne

"Phe eott
Baweristie
Balwaird
Lathalland
Drummelerie
Johnstounes mylne
Newbirnetoune

Maneturpe
The terrouris aikeris

Summa of ye teynd beir of Newbirne vi. ch. xiij .b

The tynd aittis of Newbirne

Cott
Balerystic
Balward
Lathal
Drummeldrie

mid

Lawgrenus

Newbirnetoune
Maneturpe
The aikeris

Numnna of ye teynd aittis iu newbirne xj och.
The teynd quheit of ye parrochin of carrnbie as it wes riddin thar
last yeire be honest men and suorne in quheitt

Extending till



--- Dunfermline_page505.png ---
DUNFERMELYN . MDLNI. AS

Of teynd beir
Of teynd aittis

ynd beir of Kinglas

Pitzowquhair

Kinmoehtie —.

Gaitmilk .

Pitlowquhy

Finglassy

Inchedarnie

Stentounes —. . . . .
Fynmonth

Myldanes

toune

Brewlandis
Smiddeland
Craigsyd

Fostertoune

Clyne mylne
Muretoune .
abarrean

Summa of beir in Kingl

y xj. el. iiij .b. ij.

The teynd aittis within Kinglasy

Aynmonth,
Fostertoun . : : : : jee
Clyne mylne
Hawtoune
Murtoune
Cassebarrean

Summa of teynd aittis of Kinglassy viij . ch. iiij . b



--- Dunfermline_page506.png ---
t4d RENTALE DE

Summa totalis of tynde aittis win the parrochinis of Dumfermling
Kinghorne Kirkealdis Kinglassy Newbirne carnbie and Mussil-
burghe qu

itt and horseorne extendis to vij8*3 och. xj ob. ij. 1.

Summa totalis of aittis ferme and teynde is vi®*xviij veh oxj. bij.

‘The haill money win the parrochin of Dumfermling in
penny meal] annuclis customes borrow meall fed oxin silver
Kayne mert silver extendis be zeir to the soume of iii
‘The penny meal of Dolour w' ye bank meall extendis he
voir to ye soume of.

<vij lies os. viij.d.

. . . . . . Asif ti.
The penny meall of newbirne be zeir : . ii
The pemy meal and annuel of Kinglassy be zeir es
tendis to the soume of

The penny meall and anmuell of Kinghorne

The penny meall custoume borrow meall and annuell of
Kirkaldic extendis be zeir till

slieyjes.v

‘The penny meall of Kynnedersehyre be zeir . slij.Hivxv.s. viij.d.
The peamy meall of Mussilburghe borrow meallis and an-

nnellis extendis be zeir to ye soume of . . iijexix li. sii. s. viijd.
The penny meall and ammnell of soutbferry : xxiij li. ix.s.vilj.d.
‘The penny meall of stormoth be zeir : : Lo xlvij He xijes.

The kirkis and teindis of townes sett for mo* extendis

be zeir till the sowme of : . : .  ixtviij. i.

Summa of ye haill mo of ye patremoney of ye abbacie of Damfermling
extendis to the soume of ijPiijSiiij i. tiij . 5.

‘The thind heirof extendis to ye sonme of viijf «li. vi

Sie subseribitur
Allane Cuttis chalmerlane of Dumtermling w" my hand

Item of ferme quhyt win the parrochin of Dumfermling
extendis be zeir to

rme quheit win the parrochin of newbime ex-
tendis be zeir till

Item of fe

. : iiij eh. ij.



--- Dunfermline_page507.png ---
DUNFERMELYN . MDLXL HES

Item of fe
be zeir extendis to : : : : : vj-ch vy oh.

e quheit win the parrochin of mnssilbruche

Summa of ferme quheitt win the parrochin of Dumiermling newbirne
and mussilbruche extendis till xv. eh. viij .b.

Item of teynd quhyt win Dumfermbing parrochin
Item of teynd quheit win Kinghorne . :
Item of teynd quhyt w"'in Kirkealdie

Item of teynd quheit win newbirne

Item of teynd quhyt win mussilburghe

t in earrnbie

Item of teynd qu

parrochinis of Dunvermling Kinghorne Kirk-
b.iij.f.

Summa of teynd quhyt win
caldie newbirne and mnssilbruch extendis be

ir till xj eh.

Snumna of ye haill quheitt pertening to ye patrimoney of Dumfermling ex-

tendis be zeir in ferme and teynd till xxvij eh. jij bij ot.

‘The third thairof extendis till ix eh ib. ij.f.i.p. 8 pt. ps.
Item of ferme beir win the parrochin of Dumfermling

extendis be zeir till.

n dolonr

Item of ferme bei

Ttem of fi

rime beir in Kinghorne

Item of ferme beir in newbirne

ne beir win the parroehni
Kinghorne and newbirne x

Summ of fe

Item of teynd beir win the parrochin of Dumfermli

ttem of teynd beir win ye parrochine of Kinghorne

Item of teynd beir win King
Item of teynd beir win the y
Item of teynd beir win the parrochin of mussitburghe

arrochin of newbirne

Item of teynd beir w'"in the parrochin of earnbie


--- Dunfermline_page508.png ---
446 RENTALE DE

Item of teynd beir win ye parrochin of Kirkaldie ii

choix. b. ij.

Somma of teynd beir win the parvochnjs of Dumfermling Kinghorne Kirk-
caldie Kinglassy newhirne and mussilburghe Ixj. eh. vj.b. ij. £ ij. pekis .

Summa totalis of beir ferme and teynd Ix:

The threid heirof is

j ech. siiij boi

Less nor ye first Lo xjech.yj

j.b.ij.f.ij.p. ide pt

Summa totalis of aittis ferme and teynd wchev

(Yof quheit aittis to the thrid
and of blak aittis to the thrid
Item of Kayne lyme

(of to the thrid

Item of ferme salt

(yof to ye thrid : jefe
Ttem the eolpoitt of Wally! furd to put ane man y"till for wtaking of ye thrid
Jtem the new mylIne of nmssilburghe sicklyke .
Ttem the thrid of aitt meall

Item the thrid of butter

Item the thrid of cheise

Of eapones win nmssilburghe .

Of capones win Dumfermling parrochin

Of eapones win Kinghorne

XX. ch.

Of eapones in Kirkealdie
Of eapones win the parrochin of I

nlasy

Summa of capones iijel

The thrid heirof

Item of pultrie win Dunafermting

Item of poultrie win Dolour Kinnederis
Item of poultrie win Kinghorne

Ttem of poultrie win Kinglassy

Item of pultrie in newbirne

Summa of poultrie — vijxhyj.


--- Dunfermline_page509.png ---
DUNFERMELYN . MDLNXI. AAT
The thrid heirol . . . : . ijl
The alteratioun of ye assumptioun of Dumflermling for Newbirnschyre

According to ye kingis warrand direct to yt effect of ye deit at halyrud-

house the day of

Thrid of ye moe

Tak

The penny meallis and auuellis win mussilbrucsehyr

s.viij.d.

edinbru® newbotle and hadingtoun
The teynd of monktounhall

The teynd of earberric
The teynd of Cowisland
The teynd of pinky

The meall of ye new mylne of hnussiburghe li.
The meall of Dolour sehyre li.
The penny maill annuellis Lymekill mneall feid oxin silver

wester Kinghorne by the beir sett to the the" in few

and w" ye peumy meall of ye kirk. . © Pssif di yjos. viij od.
The kirk of sanet Jonhestoune : : . . . if .li.
The kirk of Maillis —. 7 . : : Ixyj li. siij iiij.d.

it be ye abbowt and

And the rest extending to j% eto be pa

umerlane)

out of ye best and reddiest | pay! ment of ye tna pt viz Isxiij

< iif. yuhitk wes assumit of anld out of ye kirk of newbimie and sem syne is sett

in tak and asseda’un to andro wood of Largo comptrollar toon
vietuallis therof he ye abbot quhilk he is obleissit to warrand In respeet qrof The

awld assumptioun is ordenit to be alterit conforme to ane warrd

suht be ye king

and collectonr heirvpone .

Quheitt

Phe thrid therot
Tak of ye teynd of littill monktumn
The teynd of quhythill



--- Dunfermline_page510.png ---
148 RENTALE DE

The teynd of ye hill . : :

The teynd of caldeoittis

The teynd of stanyhill

The teynd of shereffhall .

The ferme quheit of carberrie . . :
The ferme quheit of natoun

The forme quheit of Tnmeresk and monktoum yt

thesaurares few : : b.j.f.
Out of wester Kinghorne . : : viij.b.j.p.3ptp.
Beir

Thrid therot : . . xxjoch xv bo iij. fp.

The teynd of ¢ ubeithill
The teynd of littill monktoun

The teynd of ye hill

Tho teynd of caldeoittis

The teynd of stanyhill

The teynd of quheit syd

The teynd of sheretfhall

The teynd beir of Kinghorne

Out of Kinglassy 7 5 : : nec
And the rest of uewbii

caussis abone specifeit . : . vee

chyre fra the abbot for ye

Meill

‘Thrid therof (jij. p-

Tak ve meall of Kinglassy by ‘the thes psuraris few ch. xv.b.i. f.iij.p.

Aittis

Phrid yerof : . . . - xxxviij
(Quharof ar quheitt aittes

Tak ye teynd of quheithill .
‘Tak out of mussilbrut sehyre of ye hill . . . vob



--- Dunfermline_page511.png ---
DUNFERMELYN . MDLXI. 449

The teynd of ealdeoittis : : : . . : xij. b

The teynd of stanyhill : : : : : : vob.
The teynd of quheitsyd : . : . : iiij.b.
The teynd of shereffhall : : : : : : viij bb.
Wester kinghorne : : : : : : vij.eh.

Out of Kirkealdie
Aud ye rest for newbirnschyre fra ye abbot

Thrid of ye blakaittis . .
Tak ye blak aittis of wester Kinghome
Out of Kinglassy : ;

‘The aittis of torbane and pittonimerk
And fra ye abbot in place of newbirne
Custumes ete. vt antea.

ffollouis the tennour of the warrand

Lordis auditouris of chikker we greitt yow weill florsamekill as in ye first assump.
tioun of ye thrid of ye abbay of dumfermling the kirk of newbirn

hyre wes athirmit
for ve, vii). f. beir vj.ch. xij. b.ij.f. quheitt aittis and iiij . eh. xiifj

blak aittis as the said auld assumptioun in ye selfis at mair lenth proportis A
the said kirk w" ye haill fruitis and ren

s of ye parsonage and vicarage yerof is sett
in tak and assedacioun be patrick m* of gray commendatour of Dumfermling to andro
wood of largo comptrollar be ressoun q'of

» auld assumptioun of ye said thrid is
vitiat be ye said commendatouris proper deidis to our greit preiudiee and hurt Albeit
the haill prelaceis of our reallme ar bund and obleissit to warrand thair thridis to
ws fra thair awin dei
alsmekill beir and ait

is Thairfoir it is our will And we command yow to assume

out of ye reddiest and best payment of ye tua pairt of ye
abbacie of Dumfermling as ye said kirk of newbirne schyre was assumit of befoir in
awld extending to ye quantitie abone writtin To ye effeet yt the haill thrid of ye said
abbay may remane with ws to our vse in the same estaitt and jntegritie as the same
wes in the lsj zeir of god vnviciat or deminishit in ony maner of wayis . quhilkis
landis and teyndis to be assumit out of ye tua part No place of ye said kirk of new-
birneschyre salbe comptit and estemit in the thrid in all tyme cuming subt w our
hand at halyruid hous the xx day of Januar 1586 Sic subseribitur . James R.
Thirlestane . Tho: m of glames . Lyneludene Collectour .

3L



--- Dunfermline_page512.png ---
450 RENTALE DE

This is the haill rentall pertening to the abbay of Dumfermling in
pennie meall annuellis fermes teyndis kirkis and tonnes sett in
asseda°’un for monej +

The parrochin and barronie of Dumfermling

Item in penny meall and annuellis w"" ye borrow

meall of the burghe of Dumfermling

Dolour schyre

In pemie meall and annuell

Mussilburghe
In penny meal and anmuell
Newbirne
Tu penny meall and annuell .
Kinglassy

ad

In penny meail and annuell

Kinghorne wester

In pennie meal) and annvell

Kirkealdie

wli.xics.

In peunie meallis annuellis and custumes

Kinnedir

tn pemnie meal . . : . : slij lic sv.

viij ad.


--- Dunfermline_page513.png ---
DUNFERMELYN . MDLNI. 451

South and north ye queneis ferric

In penny neal . . sy eliesixes ved

armouth

In penny meal . . . © sly li. ij es iti.

Annuallis

‘The hail annuellis aué to the said abbay extendis tu

The how placeis

The how placeis payis be zeire in mone} . . jexvip li siij.

Summa of penny meall and annnellis j ij lie xv

The kirkis sett in assedatioune for silver

‘The kirk of Stirling for .
The kirk of wester haillis . . 2 Asyp li
The kirk of Kinvos and vrwale
‘The kirk of St. Jolnstoune

‘The kirk of Innerkeithing — . . . . hii
The kirk of wester Kinghorne

‘The kirkis of mollan and strathardell . .

The kirk of Carnebie . : . . ifSlsyj i

Summa of ye kivkis sete for silver

The teyndis of tounes sett for silver -

The teynd of smictoune . . . . Lax,
The teynd of monktounhall . : : : : xx. li.


--- Dunfermline_page514.png ---
452 RENTALE DE

The teynd of Carberrie

The teynd of Cowisland

‘The teynd of natoune

The teynd of Inueresk

‘The teyndis of pinkie

‘The teynd of Hawhill

The teyndis of ye aikeris of Kirkealdie

Summa of thir teyndis

Summa totalis in penny meall annuellis kirkis and teyndis sett for
silver ij". voxiij i. x

ix. d.

The haill vietuall alsweill ferme as teynd In quheit beir meall
and aittis as followis -

In quheitt

‘The parochin of Damfermling in ferme and teynd
‘The parochin of mnssilbraghe in ferme and teynd
The parochin of newbirne in ferme and teynd
The parochin of Kirealdie in teynd

The parochin of Kinghorne wester

The parochin of earrnbie
Summa of ye haill quleit in ferme and teynd xx:
Beir

‘The parochin of Dumfermling in ferme and teynd
The parochin of mu

xlv . el

b . iif . peckis .
veh b.

burghe in teynd
The parochin of newbirne

-viij. ne ce f.
The parochin of Kinglassie in teynd Xxxj- a + viij f.
The parochin of Kirkealdie in teynd : : vj-ch.v. 7 :
Kinghorne wester in teynd iij.eh.ij.b.
Carnbie

x ch.

Summa of ye haill beir ferme and teynd iii**xvj och. vij.b.j.£.3-. peckis .



--- Dunfermline_page515.png ---
DUNFERMELYN . MDLXI. 453
Meill
The haill ferme meall of Kinglassy Dolorchyre and the mylnes
extendis to. . . . . . Lovee
Aittis
In Dumfermling parrochin in ferme and regal of quheit eattis —xxxij eh. iij.b
Of mureland aittis for hors come —. . . xij ch ist

ch
. veh
The parochin of Kinglassie in hors comme. . © vif. eh. ij b
The parochin of Kirkealdie of CTS aittis

The parochin of Kinghorne wester in quhyt aittis
Of hors corne

Of hors eorne

The parochin of newbirne in quhyt aittis : vj.
Of hors corne . : ij
The paroehin of Mussilbrughe i in quhyt aittis

woh. xiiij .b.
xh. xiijb.

Summa totalis of quheitt aittis

ch. xij. bij .f

Summa totalis of hors cone iiij®® vij ch .iiij.b. jf.
Off this forsaid rentall thair is to be reduced In ordinar chairges and fies ay efter
followis

In pecunia

Item of silver to the sustentatioun of ye convent beand in

number xxvj quhilk yai have had of langtyme assignit to

thame of ye parochin of Dumfermling Dolour and Kin-

nedderis with certane uther small annuellis the soume of iij®* xitij Li
Item to my lord Duik in bailzie fie for mussilburghe : : xx li.

Item in contributioun to ye lordis of ye sessioune —, 2 dex eli
Itein to ser Adame Kinghorne in pensioun quhairypone he
hes ye commoun seill . . . . xleli.


--- Dunfermline_page516.png ---
454 RENTALE DE

Item to Mr. James Mowteray in sicklyk pensioun :

Item to ye porter of ye yett of Dumfermling vuder ye com-
moune seill

[tem to the plumbarand glai

inwrycht wnder ye commoun seill

Item to the foster of ye wood wnder the commoune seill

Item to the bailzie of ye regalitie of Dumfermling

Item the haill oficeris fies of Mussilburghe Dumfermling Dolowr
Kinghorne Kirkealdie Kinglassie and Newbirne

Item to ye sklaittar and his servandis

s.iiij dd.
Item to the procuratour of ye actiounes of ye place
Item to the ruid kirk of Stirling of annuell
Item to the chalmerlane

Item to the barbour

Sumnna totalis of silver that is to be deduceit of this rentalle extendis to vij® xiiij . li.

Summa restis frie j vij

Tn frumento

Item to ye sustentatioun of ye convent

Item to the puire in ordinar of baikin bread. :
Item to the lipper men at ye magdelanes besyd Mussilbrugh
Item to r

art prestoun qubairvpone he hes my lordis hand wrytt

Summa frumenti ix ch .

Summa restis frie xviij . eh. xiij bi

In ordeo

Item to ye conventis sustentatioun

Item te ye porter of Dumfermling

Item to the plumbar and glaissinwryt

Item to the carpentar

Item to the meassoune . . .



--- Dunfermline_page517.png ---
DUNFERMELYN . MDLXI.

Item to richard prestonn quhairwpone he hes my lordis hand wrevtt xveb.

Summa ordej xx

iij chix sb.

Sumina restis frie lgj . eh . x

bjt ij

In farina auiena

Item to the plumbar and glaissinwryt . : . © xxiii hb

Item to the keipar of the tapis vader the commoune s ich.
Item to the millar of ye abbay mylue . . . . wch.
Item to the forvester of the wood b.
Item to the smyth of ye abbay ob.
Item to the Jauendar of the abbay ob.
Item to the wryt . . : . . . . b.
Item to the meassoune b.
Ttem to the barbour . : . . : -  xxiliy. b.
Item to the keipar of ye vesehell : . . : iif. b.
Item to the beddell . . . viij .b

Item assigned to the convent to be gevin to hair sevvandis

he xij be.

In auenis

Item to the convent in assiguatioun of oe aittis . XXXViij och.

Item in horseorne 5 .
Item to the portar of ye yett of Dumtermlin: of quheitt aittis
Item to the serybe of ye Court of regaliti
Item to ye officiare of Dumfermling of hors corne
Item to the skleattar of quheitt aittis

Item to Mr. Johne spens of eondie of quheit aittis
Item to the ehalmerlane of hor:
Item to John Young serybe of ye bailliarie of Mussilburehe
Item to Johne Wallace of quheit aittis : 5 c

of “quheit aittis

corne

Item to richard prestoun quhairwpon he hes my lordis hand weytt

Summa of qubeit aittis xlv el. x.b,


--- Dunfermline_page518.png ---
RENTALE DE

Summa restis frie xix eh. ii. b. ij
Summa of hors corne xxvij
Summa restis frie lix . ch. xij .b. i

ch.

Item yat sa mekill ayer of silver or victuall as is jntromittit with and is tane vpe of

this j
or ony wtheris in thair names be deducit to ws and allowit of ye quenes g.
parte .

tant Ixj zeiris crope be my lordis arrane argyll the mf! of lyndsay

Ttem we haue not chairgit the ferme and tynd of nether grange of wester Kinghorne

We

Of money thrid

Tak

Kingl:

The
The
The
The
The

Kinghorne wester

Off quheitt —. : . . : ix ch. ix. b,j

quhilk extendis till vj .ch. viij.b. beir Beeaus peter Durie hes my lordis dis-
cherge yerof for all the dayis of hes lyfe wnder the subse
of my lord of Dumfermling and
mak na rentall of ye coill of we

jptiounes and seallix
suceessonris .

fuird becaus it is bot ane casualitie and in the
zeitis of god Ivj . vj . Iviij . large expenssis wes maid in wynning of the [samin]
abone the soume of voli And in ye lix zeiris the Erll of arrane and his factouris
Introwettit yerwith and sen sted the haill coill in sic sort that na
proffet can be had yerof without greit expensis in tyme cuming as the haill
cuntrie knawis . Sie subseribitur Allane Couttis with my hand in name of my
lord of Dumfermling .

The assignatioune of the thrid of the abbacie of Dumfermling .

mussilbunghe for

sie
bow places

teyndis of Causland
teynd of Carberry
teynd of monktounhall
teynd of natoune

Summa viij®. Wviij li. jij

gif in sx. li. vij

p.dp..


--- Dunfermline_page519.png ---
ull to the quene

DUNFERMELYN .

The terme quheit of mussilburghe

Beir
Parrochin of Kingl
Parrochin of Kir

Wester Kinghorne
Teyndis of mussilburghe

oxque
Meill

Off ye formes of Ki
Quhcit aittis
Wester gone .
Tak out of Kirkealdie

jassie Dolloureschyre

cho cb
‘The teyndis of Mussilburghe sel
Stany hill and quheit hill

eque

Horseorne
Wester Kinghorne
Parvoehin of Kirkealdie

Parrochin of Newbirne

Parrochin of King :
The mure land aittis of Dumfermling

MDLNXNI.

and ye imylnes

137

scchvijboj fej p. halt p.

xxii ole bij

Vjechev bai

nd viii. eh. by addmestoune .
x.ehixv.b.

.pe2ptep.
iii ch. vif. b.

jij eh. x sb.

iij ch. siij. boi Li. ps.

Bring the haill eoill as superplus with caines sxxiiij poultrie earrages gresstmes

entrie silvar and all wtheris dewteis omittit
Item the new mylne of Mussilburghe omittit
Item ont of Inneresk exvi thraflis stray

Note tane downe of the quheitt aittis be y

And sua the haill chairge of the quheitt aittis
viz
Wester Kinghorne

Massilburghe

Newbirne

Deduceit hereof

sndis to

Vij. b. gevin down to the

© lead of pittis of earberry
anditouris of the ehekkar

xx ech.

vijech ex
x.chexvih,
sind of reaith .

The alteratione of the assignatioune for Newbirn .

Penny meall and annuell

Ix:

ii Li. iij. 8 iiij dl.


--- Dunfermline_page520.png ---
458 RENTALE DE

Ttem the parochin of Newbirne ferme and teynd of quheitt
Beir

Quheitt aittis

Hors corne

Give for this silver
The bow placeis quhilk wes tane of befoir for

And now out of ye bow placeis tak.

Gif in the haill quheit extending to

Give for ye beir of newbirne the beir of Kirkealdie quhilk wes
tane of befoir for : : : : + Vjech.veb.ij.f.
And tak now out of it allanerly f

Quheitt aittis
. ft. quhilk wes takin out of Kirkealdie
sive out of newbirne

Gif for it ij.
and sua restis to

Horseorne
Gife ye nureland aittis of Dumfermling extending to .
And gife out of Kirkealdie quhilk gave of befoir in our thrid,
for ye rest of newbirne

Sa Kirkealdie sall give only j.eb.ix.b.j.f

The assignatioun of ye abbay of Dumfermling conforme to ye rentalle
thairof gevein for the setting of the fermes and few to the thesaurar

The haill penny meallis and annuellis of ye haill patremony of
ye abbay of Dumfernnling extendis to. J. iiij©. Ixxxxvij li. ij.d.
‘The teyndis yerof sett for silver bayth kirkis and tonnes comptand yerin the teyndis

of edmestoun for xl merkis the teyndis of wolmett for }. merkis and the

teyndis of carrnbie to i

lif li. vj.
nor it wes of befoir and also comptand yerin the
yndix of ye aikeris of Dumfermling to xl merkis extending in the haill
to . - : : . . : he

.d. Be ressoune of ye downe

ryding to xx merkis |

wi Asif. ti

Summa of ye haill money ij". vo. tix li

- iiij.d



--- Dunfermline_page521.png ---
DUNFERMELYN . MDLNI. 159

"sof 3

Item to be eikit to this silver the pry jcch. xj. iij.f.

thesanrar in few for x

ferme quheit sett to y
chalder extending to . .
~b. ferme beir sett to ye same Tor x.

Ttem xv . ch . ix
ehalder Inde moneta .
tem v.ch .itij.b. ij. perkis ferme me: all sett to the same at x
merkis the chalder Inde moneta » xxxvli.x

Ttem xv eh, ait amie tetera yee shalder jnde . ili.

Suna of the thesauraris fermes iiij®.xlvij li

Summa of ye haill silver with the thesauriris termes sett to tip. jovj 113.8

sob.

Thrid_yairot ps

Tak ye penny meallis and annuellis within mussiiburghe
edinburghe newbotle and Hadingtonne for

Tak ye teynd of monktonnhall for

Tak ye teynd of earberrie for

Tak ye teynd of Cowisland for

Tak ye teynd of pinkie for.

Tak ye meal] of yé

‘Tak ye meall of Dolour sehyre fore : :

Tak ye penny meall annuellis lymekill meall and fed oxin silver
in wester Kinghorne forby the frie beir sett to ye the-
saurar in few and with ye penny meall of ye kirk » jee

new mylne of mussilburghe for

ij.licvj.s.

Tak ye penny meali and annuell of newbirneschyre —. — Ixxiij . li. xviij. s ody
The Kirk of sanct Johnstonn for wi.
Tak ye Kirk of heallis for ad.

Summa ixe . Lx

‘Tak ye rest extending [to] xxxviij li. xix
The haill ferme quheitt and teynd within the patrimonie of ye
said abbay exeeptand the ferme quheitt xett to the the-
saurar in few extending to .
Thrid part yairof is. . . .  vech. xb. 8 part boll



--- Dunfermline_page522.png ---
460 RENTALE DE

Tak ye teynd of littill monktonne for : vieb
Pak ye teynd of ye hill for ij
Tak ye teynd of caldcvittis tor
Tak ye teynd of stany hill for iiij hb.
Tak ye teynd of sheretf ii
Tak ye ferme quheitt of Carberrie for

all for

Tak ye ferme qubeitt of natome for vii
Tak ye ferme quheit of Inneresk and mon Ietonn ball hy ye the-

saurar sett for. : : : och WB. bjt.
‘Tak furth of wester Kinghome : 2 vip jp. a. pt pee.

The haill beir within ye lordschipe of Duinterniing by the ferme sett te
extending to Ixy ch .xv.b

the thesanrer

Thria yerot is

Tak ye teyndis of ye sandis of * Slassilburghe for
Tak ye teynd of littill mouktoune for

‘Tak ye teynd of ye hill for

ak ye teynd of ealdeoittis for

Tak ye teynd of stany hill for

yd for

hall for

ir of Kinghorne toc

Tak ye teynd of quhyt
Tak ye teynd of sh
Tak the haill teynd tw
Tak out of newbie
Tak ye rest furth of Kinglas: 3 quills i
Nota of this beir of Kingla: thair is isehairgit > yj.ch.
the fermes of nether Kinghorne and dry multouris yerof and restis to be tane ont of

». to be tane of

Kinglassie bot iij .ch. xl}. ps as the writing heirefter insert beires .

The haill aittis within the patrimonie of ve abbay of Dum-
fermling by the frie aittis sett to the thesaurare in few is VS yiiij . eh jb

‘Thrid yerof is 7 : : . xxxviij ch.

Quhairof ar quhytte aittis

And they ar to be takin within mussilburghe sehyre of ye ill

k ye teynd of ealdeoitt for
Tak ye teynd of stanyhill for



--- Dunfermline_page523.png ---
DUNFERMELYN . MDLNI. Gl

Tak ye teynd of quheitsyd for viij . b
Tak ye teynd of sherretlhall for. viij
Tak wester Kinghorne in quheitt aittis for b
Tak out of newbirne of quheit aittis j
‘Tak out of Kirkealdie i
Thrid of blak aittis . vf
‘Tak ye blak aittis of wester Kinghorne for hs
Tak ye blak aittis of newbimesehyve for b.
Tak out of ye aittis of Kinglassie . ijt.
Tak ye aittis of turbane and piteonmerk for . ifijeeh.

Thar haill ait meall within the patrimonie of ye abbay of Dumfermling by ye

frie meall sett to ye thesaurar in few is

Tad yerof is : :
Tak ye meall furth of Kinglasie by ye o thesaurar is few
Capones in the hail

Thrid yerof is :

Tak furth of mussilburghe sehyre

Out of Wester Kin;

‘horne

Pultrie vij@ xiviy .
Thrid yerof

Tak Dolourschyre for

Tak newbirnsehy

re for xviij .

Tak wester Kinghorne viz stanchous for 5 . viij . pultrie

The rest extending to ix to be tane furth of Kinglassie .

Cheis in the haill x stanes

Thrid yerof

: 5 1. stane
Tak ye same furthe of ye bow placeis

Butter in the haill xxxv staines

Thrid yerof is Nj stane 3 part stane

‘Tak it furthe of the bow phicvis

Lyme in Kinghorne xx eh .
Thrid yerof is xjech Gb. 2 part bh.
‘Tak yo same furth of Kinghome


--- Dunfermline_page524.png ---
492 RENTALE. MDLNI

Salt xj.eh , vilj.b.
‘Thrid yerof is

ch. xij -b.3 part. b,
Tak ye same furth of Kirkealdie

At Leith the xviii day of Januare

The Comm
moveing thame Ordeanes thare collectour and clerk ouer the rentallis to exchange
»/ yair assumptioune of ye beire of ye abbay of Dumfermling vj. el. viij. by. heir
qubilk wes takin out of befvir of ye parochin of Kinglassie To be now takin out of
ve ferme beir of ye nedder grange of Kinghorne i

jona

is of ye kirk for certane ressonable ecanssis and consideratiounes

eand be zei

1. And of ve

in the Kir
xb. j.pe.and the remanent of ye beir quhilk wes assumeit ont of Kinglassie of

assumptioune of befoir x . eh. ij. b.

f sall now pay bot jij . eh.

betuir extending to ye saidis vj. ch. viij.b. to be now tane out of wester Kinghorne
and dry multeris befoir specifeit Makand in the haill x. ch. ij.b.i.p. quhilk
wes tane haillalie of Kinglassic of bel k find)
that thay and thair eol-
lectour sall hawe reeours agane to thair wld assumptionn or ells the commendatour

ing alw thame

ir Provy

s give ye

selifis hurt be this exchange throw evill payt or wtherw

of Dumfermling sall a

igne thame better payt at yair optioun quhil vai find thame
seltfis in als guid eais as thay wer be thair awld assumptioun . Sie subseribiture

R. Dumtermeling M'. Johne wynrame Jo” Erskene



--- Dunfermline_page525.png ---
APPENDIX ILI.


--- Dunfermline_page526.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page527.png ---
ITl.

APPENDI)

TIONUM.

REGISTRA INFEODACIONUM ET ALIEN:

1, The buik withe the blak covering Callit nouum rentale Begynnand
in 1555 and endand 1583.

Carta feudifirme sen emphyteosis adawj wryt. fol. j.

Carta Eduardi themseun. — fol. 2.

Carta Joannis Case. fol. 3.

Carta fewdifirme Joannis cranstoun in monktounhall. fol. 5.

Tak of the teind sheves of the paroehe kirk of striveling set to Alext forester of
garden, fol. 6.
Marta magistr) Jacob) Megill terraram de Pinkie de Carse cum fortalicin de
Pinkie. tol. 6.
Pre
‘arse, eodem.
Carta teudifirmaria Jo™ shaw et Elet mortoun eius sponse terrarum de Lathangy.

ri Jacobj Megill terrarum cum fortalicin de pynkie de

tum sasine ma:

C

fol. s.
€
Carta feuditirme Jo™ warno in Inueresk. fol. 10.

Preceptum sasine Jo Warno in Inueresk. fol. 11.
Carta fendifirme Ro! Douglas in Inueresk vnacum precepto eiusdem, eodem.

Carta fendirme georgij forman in Inueresk. fol. 12.

rta feuditirme willelmj merchamstoun in Inueresk. fol. 9.

Preceptum sasine georgij furman. fol. 14.
Carta Petrj crichtoun et Jonete leslie ac Dauidis erichtoun de terris de bogy. fol. 14
3N


--- Dunfermline_page528.png ---
466 REGISTRA INFEODACIONUM

Carta cum precepto feudifirme henriej reid in craigheid quarte partis de sherif-
daill, fol. [deletur et reseribitur fol. 30.]
Carta feudifirme Joannis Rowane in craighous. fol. 16,
Preceptum sasine eiusdem. fol. 17.
Carta fendifirmaria ar® prestoun de Walafeild et demidietate t
toun. fol. 18.
Constitutio gulielmj Dur

‘um de new-

in officium Janitorie munasterij de Dunfermeling, eodem.
Carta feudifirme seu emphiteosis Jo" Loswell in stentoun quarte partis terrarum
eiusdem, fol. 19.
Preceptum sasine Jo boswell in stentoun. fol. 20.
Carta feudifirme seu emphiteosis gei
oveidentalj de Ki
Preceptum sasine ciusdem, fol. 21.

Carta Joannis boswell in stentoun. fol. 22.

wij boswell et helene seytoun de molendine

ly, eodem,

Carta Jacobj gib in villis de ouer et neyer stentounes, tol, 23.

Preceptum sasine ciusdem, —eodem,

Carta Danidis boswell de glasmonthe de terris de pitzochir. fol. 25.
Preeeptum sasine Dauidis bossuell de Balmowtow de te
Carta Jacobj haket de quarta parte de gaitmilk. fol. 2
Carta georgij boswell de west milne de Kirkealdy. fol. 28.

de pitzochir,

Preeeptum sasine eiusdem, eodem.
Carta Henrie] reid. fol. 30.
Preeeptum sasine eiusdem. fol. 31.

Carta magistr} Jacob} Meaill de pynkie et earse, fol, 32.
Carta Jacohj makeartnay de gleba lie kirk land de mus
Carta Joamnis boswell in stentoun, fol. 34.
Preceptum efusdem, fol. 35. (fol. 36.]

Preceptum Henr

silburghe. fol.

j Rowane. eodem,
Preceptum Jo™ Rose de nistrane. fol. 36, [fol 3
Preceptum nigillj stewart, eodem. [fol 37.]
Gift of pensioun to James Douglas of ane pensioun of x1 merkis out of ye landis
of Raithe and piteonmer!
Carta feudifirme Robert} aytoun et Eli pitcaimne de terris de inchedarny. fol. 37.
Preceptum sasine eiusdem. fol. 38.

eodem,

Carta Arehibaldj edmieston de womett, fol. 40.
Preceptum sasine eiusdem. fol, #1.


--- Dunfermline_page529.png ---
ET ALTIENATIONUM. 467

Carta Hen
Carta foudifirme Robert} orrok fiij

} Durie de Jathalland in newbimeschyre. — eodem.
min} de sillebabie de oetana p:

te de over

grange. fol. 42.

Carta Jacobj hammilteun t um de stanehill, fol, 45.
Pri

Carta feuditirmaria Jo™* broun de se

ceptum sasine eiusdem, fol. 4.

parte vnius decime sexte partis aque
passagij. Precepto sasine in eadem contento. codem.
Preceptum sasine ciusdem. ful. 45.
Carta confirmationis dominj W Lummisden terrarum de neyer stentonu, tol. 46.
Ane precept and command direet be ye quenne. fol. 47.
Carta contirmationis terrarum de bennoquhy pro Danide Murray et Merg
Kirkealdy. eodem.
Dispositioun of the tend sheves

of Dundaf to deane William Iunimisdene. tol. 48.

Carta dominj Ro! richartsone the de quibusdam terris de mussilburghe.  eodem.

Preceptum cinsdem. iol. 49.

Carta terrarum infra viceeomitatum de fyfe et Kinroscher dieto domino Ro"
richartsoune, —codem.

Preeeptum sasine eiusdem. fol. 50. [ ful. 51.)

Carta reliqnarum terrarum pertinentium ad dictum nostrum monasterium magistri
roberti preseripti, fol. 51.

Preceptum superiorix carte. fol, 52.

Carta quadraginta aerarum domini de cardene, fol. 53.

Carta Joamnis betoun ct Issobelle scot eins sponse terrarum de finglassy pitlouthye
vt quarta parte de gaetmilk. eodem,

Preceptum carte prescripte, tol, 54.

Carta Joannis edmiestoun et Ewfame wauehope dimidietatis terraruam de natoun.
vodem.

Carta feudifirmaria Willeln

hatoun de tribus deeimis

xtis partibus ville de

Waltoun alias newbigin eum precepto. fol. #

5.
Carta feudifirmaria communitatum de mnssilburghe. —eodem.
Carta confirmationis domini de Tullibardin Junioris de terris de Lymkillis et
aliis. fol. 56.
Carta feudifirme patrieij de halkheid de petferrane. tol. 57. fewret hoe ful. hodiv.]
Preeeptum sasine eiusdem. fol. 58. [caret hodie.]

Carta Petri Logie de southeferrie alias Danid thomson. —eodem.

Preeeptum de sherrefhall. fol. 54.


--- Dunfermline_page530.png ---
+68 REGISTRA INFEODACIONUM

Carta magistri Abrahamj [et Georgii] criehtoun de terris de Lathalmond. fol. 60.
Carta Alanj couttis. fol. 61.
Preceptum eiusdem. eodem.

Carta Nigelli Stewart de gleba de mwling. fol. 62.

Preceptum ejusdem. eodem.
Carta Dauid hutcheone et grisseldis Lundy. fol. 63.

Carta terrarum de bennathy pro magistro Jacobo ogilvy et mergareta gray. codem.

Carta georgij baleanquel de lie westmiln de Kirkealdy. fol. 64.

Carta feudifirme Joannis criehtoun de brounstoun de totis terrarum partibus de
stanyhill. fol. 65:

Carta henriej reid de bruland de Dolour. fol. 66.

Procuratorium earundem. eodem.

Carta Patricij Dury de middilbaldrig, fol. 67.

Procuratorium Patricij Durie. fol. 68.

Carta Willelmj swyne de octaua parte de gaitmilk, —eodem.

Procuratorium eiusdem. fol. 69.

Carta Dauidis boswell de dimidictate terrarum de Kinglassie. eodem,

Procuratorium Dauidis eiusdem. fol. 70.

Carta feudifirmaria Andree halkheid de molendino pontis orientalis de Kirk-
caldy, eodem,

Preceptum eiusdem, fol. 71.

Carta feudifirmaria Joannis broun de octaua terrarum parte ville de gaitmilk. eodem.
[deletur hee charta et infra reseribitur fol. 135.]

Carta fendifirmaria Dauidis boswell Junio
gaitmilk, fol. 72.

Carta feudifirmaria Joannis weluod et helene wairdlaw cius sponse de dimidietate

de quarta terrarum parte ville de

terrarum de Touch, fol. 73.

Carta Joannis weluod de septima parte terrarum de eistharnes. fol. 74.

Carta Abrahamj welwod de tertia parte tertie partis terrarum orientalis partis de
neyer lessodie, fol. 75.

Preeeptum eiusdem. fol. 76.

Carta feudifirmaria georgij fleming et Issobelle broun eius sponse de terris de
blaklaw. eodem.

Preceptum presentis carte. fol. 77.

Carta feudifirmaria Ro nicolson de dimidictate mollendinj fullonum de gaitmilk.
vodem.


--- Dunfermline_page531.png ---
T ALI

NATIONUM.

Preeeptum eiusdem. fol. 78.
Carta feudifirmaria Laurencij Trombill de duabs

septimis t

de eist barnes, eodem.

Preceptuin carte superioris. fol. 79.

Carta feudifirmaria preceptum sasine in se continens Thome kyngorne de octanst
terrarum parte ville do gaitmilk. —eodem.
Carta feudifirmaria Nicolay Rowane et margarete Iawsone de dimidietate tert

asine in xe coutinens. fol. 80,

ville de bandrum preceptum

Carta feudifirmaria Jacohj dewar et Jov
partis de neyer Iessodie, fol. 81.

Carta feudifirmaria Alanj coutis eamerarij de Dunti
bus terrarum ville de eistbarnis et sex acris terre arabilis voeate lie gresmurland. fol.52.

Carta feudifirmaria willelmj blak de tribus octauis partibus terrarum ville de
Coklaw. fol. $3.

Preeeptum eiusdem. [eodem.]

Carta feudifirmaria willelmj makkie de terris trium octauarani pa
fol. SA.

Preceptum eiusdem. eodem.

Carta Willelmj horne terrarum orieutalis partis de ouer Jassodie, codem.

Preceptum carte superioris. fol. $5.

te Jaw eius spouse terrarum occidentalis

sling de tribus septimis parti

de coklaw.

Carta feudifimaria guillelmj christie de tribus decimis sextis partibus terrarnin
ville de stentoun, eodem.

Preceptum eiusdem. — fol. 86.

Carta feuditie® Joannis broun de dimidietate terrarum ville de sanet ma

reratis
stane. vodem.

Preceptum eiusdem, fol. 87.

Carta feudi®™ Patricij christie et Jonete torrentine eius sponse de terris de hoyle
alias Legattisbrig. eodem.

Preceptum eiusdem. fol.
Carta feudi® Thome Lugtonn de septima parte terraram de ¢
Preceptumn carte superioris, fol. 89.

Carta fendi™® Ro® stanchous et Jonete thomsone ejus sponse de quarta parte ter-
arum de northfode. fol. 89.

Preceptum efusdem. eodem.

Carta feudi™ Thome bemnet de dimidictate molendini fullonum de yaitinilk. fol. 90.
Preeeptum eiusdem. eodem.

tharnis. codein,



--- Dunfermline_page532.png ---
470 REGISTRA INFEODACIONUM

rta feudi™ Alexandrj galrik de dimidietate terrarum de Sanet mergratis stane.

eodem,

Carta feudi™ Willelmi bonaylay et eatherine cunningham eins sponse de dimidie-

tate te fol. 91.

uum de beyth bonalay

Preceptum eiusdem, fol. 92.
Carta fendi®® Dauidis Kellok de tertia parte orientalis partis terrarum ville de
neyer Lassodie, eodem.

Preceptum eiusdem. fol. 9
Carta feuditirma
Carta Alani couttis camer

moun. fol. 94.

Carta feudi®™ Ro¥ cole de eleishe de terri

ja Joann)

Kellok terrarum oetaue partis de wynde edge. eodem.

ij de octo acris terre arrabilis acrarum de pittie com-

is de northlathanis. eodem.

Preeeptum eiusdem, fol. 95.

Procuratorium superioris carte. eodem.

Carta feudi®™ Thome henrysone et

gnetis Kyrie de quarta parte terrarum ville

de Bandrume. eodem.

Carta feudifirmaria Clementis sanderis de dimidietate terraruam de Randellis
craiggis. fol. 96.

‘arte. fol.

joris

Preceptum supe

lo

Carta fendi" adamj broun et ehristine dur

» de quarta parte terrarum ville de
northfoid, —eodem.

Carta feudim? W™ rofsone et Jonete boswell eius sponse terrarum de eister evai
dukie. fol. 9

Carta fendi"? Willeluyj
fol. 100,

Preveptum ca

anderis de dimidietate terraram de silletoun sanderis.

 superioris, eodem,

Carta foudir® Jacobj boswell et Sonete boyd eius sponse ded

cima sexta parte
terrarum ville de Waltoun alias newbiggin eum precepto sasine, fol. 101. [Hee
carta deletur et infra reseribitur fol. 119.
Carta feudifirmaria Roberti fraser de quarta terrarnm parte de uewlands. fol. 102.
Preeeptum eiusden. endem.
Carta feudifirmaria domini de Dury de officio balliatus. eodem.
Carta confirmationis terrarum de quarta parte de pityowther, fol.
Carta fendi™ henriej durie de duobus molendinis granarij
lajus dominii. fol. 104.

astrietis multuri
C

ta fendi Catherine sibbald de eister pitcorthic cum precepto sasine, fol. 105


--- Dunfermline_page533.png ---
T ALIENATIONUM. 471

Carta fendim® Andree boswell et margrete allardes eins sponse de dimidictate

terrarum de Kynglassy exeeptis peudicnulis, fol. 106.

Proceptum ejusdem. code

Carta fendi" Robertj orrok de octana parte ville de weltoun alias newbiggin eum
itur fol. 110.)
um ville de Waltoun alias

precepto sasine. fol. 107. [deletur hve cart et infra res
Carta feudi™™ W) hutoun sen

de oetaua parte terra

newbiggin cum precepto sasine. fol. LOS. [deletur et reseribiter. 111.)

Carta fendi" Joannis thomsone de octaua parte terraram de waltonn eu preeepte
sasine. eodem.  [deletur et reseribitur, 120,]

Carta feudit™ Joamnis boswell de oetana parte terrarnm de Waltoun alias newbigin
118. ]
Carta fendi™ Ro® orrok et Lssobelle sehewes cius sponse de vetaua t

vibitur,

cum precepto, fol. 109, [delete et re

Arn parte

de Waltoun alias newbiggin pr

Carta feudi"® W" hutoun senioris de ectaua terrarum parte ville de Walton.
fol. 111.

Carta feudifirmaria Antonio Rutherfurd confecta de decem aeris
sine. fol. 11
cldis Lundy
parte terrarum de bale sine, fol. 113.

Carta fendi™ Willelm) swyne de octava parte terrarum ville de Gaitmilk, eodem.
carte. fol. 114.

Carta feudi™ Thome smyt et catherine Chaluer

cepto sasine in eadem contento, fol. LO,

terre arabilis ad

otficium elimosina
Carta feudi™ Da

jatus pertinentibus cum precepto

dis hutcheome et G na sexta

sponse de de

cunt preeepto

Preceptum superiori
jus sponse de quarta parte terra

ute. eodem.

rum ville de northfoide precept sasine in eadem con
Carta feudi™? Aguetis fyn et Catherine Walwod ac J
rum de never Beithe. fol. 115.

mis Cunningham huins

sponse de t

tia parte terr

Preceptum cinsdem, fol. 116.

Carta feudi™ Willelmj Trombill et Jonete Douglas eins sponse de terris de trim-
billis baithe emm precepto. — eodem.

Carta feuditirme Patri

ij Murray terrarum de wyndmilne hill. fol. 117.
tls,
Carta feudifirme Joannis boswell de oetaua terrarum parte de waltomm alias

Preceptum ciusdem.

newbiggin. eodem.

Carta fenditir™® Jacobj boswell et Joamre boyd cius sponse de decima sexta parte
terrarum ville de Waltoun alias newbiggin cum precepto sasine. fol. 119.
Carta feodifirmaria Joannis thomson de ortaua terrarum parte de Newbiggin eam

precepto sasine, fol. 120.



--- Dunfermline_page534.png ---
472 REGISTRA INFEODACIONUM

Carta feoditirmaria W Kinloehe de octaua parte terrarum de baleristie eam pre-
vepto, fol. 121,

Carta feodi% thome michell de octaua parte terrarum ville de balerystie preeepto
sasine in eadem contento. fol. 122.

Carta feudi™ W" Warrander de octaua pa
ne. eodem,
Car

‘te terrarum de balerystie eum precepto

feuditirmaria Joannis Wilsoun de de

ma sexta [parte] vnacum decime sexte
partis dimidio terrarum de balerystie cum precepto sasine. fol. 128.

Carta feudifirmaria Joaunis menemane de decima sexta parte et decime sexte
partis [dimidio] terrarum ville de balerystie cum sasine precepto. fol. 124.

Carta feodifirmaria Alex cornefutt de deeima sexta parte terrarum de Baleryst
i fol.
Carta feodi™ Wd Dischingtoun et agnetis seytoun eius sponse de tribus octauis

cum preeepto sa

partibus ville de Drumelyy eum sasine precepto, fol.
Carta feodi®™ Joaunis stevinsoun ot W stevinsoun eius filij de stevinsounis beyth
cum preeepto. fol.

Carta feodir® Jacob} Dewar et Agnetis Jonstoun eins sponse de Dewar
iouliund. fol. 128.

Carta fendi™® Roo Lammisden de duabus octauis partibus terrarmm viz vna de
coklaw et altera de oner lassody eum precepto. fol. 129.

beyth alias

Carta feudi™ W™ Dury et Jeanne gourlay cius sponse de quarta terrarum parte
dle newlandis cum precepto sasine. fol. 130.

Carta feodi™™ W Dury et Joanne gourlay eius sponse de Kelty et eius sylua enm
precepto. fol. 131.

Carta feodi

\j Dewar et catherine Kellock eins sponse de dimidietate cum
setaua parte terrarnm ville de Wyndehedge.  eodem.

Carta foodit® Andvee trombill et Margarete andersone de quarta terrarum parte
de Wyndehedge cum precepto. fol. 182.

Carta feodi"™ Patric

blacader de terris de mylhillis et earum molendino eum
precepto sasine, fol, 133.

Carta feodit® Petr] Warrander de quarteria et decima sexta parte terrarum de
balerystie eum precepto sasine. fol. 134,

Carta feudifir™ Joannis broun junioris de octaua terrarum parte ville de gaitmilk.
fol, 135.

Preceptuin sasine Dauidis thomsone in southe ferrie de octana parte terrarum
lem. fol, 136.

elu


--- Dunfermline_page535.png ---
ET ALIENATIONUM. ATS

Carta coutirmacionis thome Law ct cius sponse de terris de nether stentoun, fol. L37.
Cu

ta feudifirmaria Ro¥ fraser de yna oetaua parte terraram de newlands. codem.
Carta conirmationis ma

tri WY seott de terris de balweirie, fol. 138.
Proceptum Alex! Kynnair de quar fol. 139,

a parte terrarnm de arrok,
Gift to Rot lmmmisden barhour of the said abbay. codem,

‘ine tenentibus de Waltoun et de wester Kingorne. fol. 140,

1 Joamnis cumming de eoupe
Preeeptum Walter

makulty. code,
j Landy de selainwell, fol. Hh.
Preceptum Joannis cuming. eodem,

Preceptum de Edmestoun. —codent.

Submissioun and decreit toward the milne
M® Jamis na

Precept

of gaitmilk promuncit be ye abbot and
yill, fol. 142. [earet hoe ful. hodie.|

ne Ricardj prestoun et helene coutis eius sponse. fol. 143.

nde sherrethall. fol. Me. [145.]

Preceptumn ciusdem. —eodens.

c

Preceptuin de terris de bo

Carta Jacobj ai

j spens et Cristine gibsone de terris de never stentoun, fol. 145. [L46.]
et alijs Willelni cricltoun de dryden, fol. 146. [147.]
sine Willelmi Kirkealdy de grange de terris de fh

month, —eadem.

Preceptam

Carta feudi™ Alanj Couttis de hospitio sacello et horto diue Catherine, — fol. 147.
[Audie fol. 143.

Carta feudi™ Alan

Carta fendi™ Ro® Li
deeima sexta parte aque

Cartafendi™ Joannis broun de oetaua parte terrarum de ¢

Preceptum cins fol. 151. [fol 150.)

Carta feudi Laurentij Walwod de dimidictate molendinj de towehe et terris de

Couttis de quarta parte terrarum de randellis

aygis. eodem.

rum de Murhall et
fol. 149. [everet hodie.]
itmilk. £01150. [ fol. 149.]

ie in erawmond regis de oetaua parte t

passagij de forthe eum precepto sasine

wester hald vodem.

[Carta feoditirmaria Dauidis Steniious de browsterlandis de K)

]

Carta feudi® guillelmj stenhous de quarta parte terrarum ville de northfoide eum
Bt

la

YY precepte

sasine in eadem contento, fol. 15)

prevepto, tal 14

Carta fendi ) Joamis Wemis de erofta vulgariter voeata lie ackorne

warde eum pi

»pto sasine. fol. 153,
Carta feudi™ Joamnis stephansone in bury

mouthe cum precepto sasine. fol. 154.
Carta feudi"® Joannis Lytill de partibus deeima sexta de Mureball et decima s

ayne passagij de forthe eum precepto sasine. fol. 155.

30


--- Dunfermline_page536.png ---
47+ REGISTRA INFEODACIONUM

Carta fendi#* W™ Alaue de decima sexta parte terrarum ville de Murehall et tri-
ma secunda parte aque passagij de forth cum precepto sasine. fol. 156.
Carta feudit® Joannis Wilsoun de decima sexta parte aque passagij super aqua de
forthe cum precepto. fol.
Carta feudi** Ro Jameson pro vitali redditu tantum de decima s
rarum de muirhall et deeima sexta parte aque pas

57.

sta parte ter-

sine. eodem.
Carta feudi% Georgij Dawson de decima sexta parte de Mnirhall eum preeepto
sasine. fol. 158.

Carta foudit® Dauidis thomson de trigesima seennda parte aque pass

gij eum precepto s

ij super aqua

forthe cum preeepto sasine, ful. 159,
Carta {oudifirme Roberti hill de decima sex

a parte terraram de Murehall eun
aque passagij super forth. fol. 160.

‘obi filii de decima sexta parte terrarum et decima se:
per forth cum precepto sasine. fol. 161.

quarta ynius decime sexte parti
Carta feudi™ Jacobi J.

ute aque passagij s

ta

Carta feudi™ Ro! dauling et Elet Mortoun ejus sponse de trigesima secunda parte
tervarum ville de murehall cum trigesima secunda parte aque passagij eiusdem cum
preeepto. eodem.

Carta fendi" Jacobj dawling et Jonete bartane de decima sexta parte ville de
murehall et dec

sexta aque pass

ij eiusdem eum precepto. fol. 16:

Carta fendi#® W™ Wilsoun de dimidietate molendini fulionum in burnemouthe
cum precepto sasine. fol. 163.

Carta feudi*® Joannis Lochquhoir et Egidie boswell ejus
parte de Waltoun alias Newbig
’@ Alexandr W
cepto. eodem.

sponse de quarta terrarum
in eum sasine precepto, fol. 164.

Carta feudi alker de molendino fallonum in Barnemouth eum pre-
Carta fendi We! Brown incole de leith de decima sexta parte aque passagij super
forthe precepto sasine in eadem contento. fol. 165.
Carta fendi Henrie] thomsone et Margarete burne eins sponse de deeima se

parte aque passa

gij precepto sasine in eadem contento, tol. 166.

Carta Adamj Wawehope et Catherine Kineaid octave partis de murehall et trige-
<ime seemde partis aque passagij eum precepto, fol. 1
‘ta feudi™ adamj Wawchope de octava parte ville de mnrehall cum trigesiy
nda parte aque passagij eiusdem eum precepto. fol. 168. ;

Cs

rta magistri Jacobj Balfour militis de terris de natoun. fol. 169.
Licentia pro arbitrie rerum Gulielmj lumsden disponendarnm. — fol. 170.
(arta domini edmistoun terrarum de natoun, fol, 171.


--- Dunfermline_page537.png ---
ET ALIEFNATIONUM. 475

feudi™ Catherine sibbald terrarum de cister baidr

s eister piteorthe uniusque

j de soutlfoid cum pr ‘ine, eodem.

Regres of the laird of Raithis. fol. 172.

cepto

173.

Carta feudi
Carta Hen
Carta alanj Contis de north warde. eodem.

Carta feudi™ Thome horne et W™ horne ¢

W" durie et Jonete gourlay de terris ly medew end. fol.

sj murray de ter

is prope eapellam. fol. 174.

filij et Jonete philp eins sponse
de Lessodye wester, fol. 173.

Carta Jacobj halkheid de octava parte de gaitmilk cum precepto. fol. 176.

Carta fendi Thome hutoun de tertia parte occidentalis lateris de wester lusker

eum pre:
Carta feudi"™ Joannis waluod et grisilidis maistertoun de dimidietatibus terrarum
et molendini de Towehe. fol. 178.
Carta feudi"™ Dauidis durie de eodem de ter
tuthill, fol. 179.
Carta fendi* Jacobj dewar de tertia parte tertie partis terrarum orientalis partis
de nether Lessody cum pertinentiis, —eodem.
Carta Alex
Carta feud:
Preceptum sasine Henrie} orrok de octava parte de ower grang. eodem.
Carta feudi* dominj de Lochlevin de earbonaria de Kelty. fol. t

spto sasine, fol. 177.

de lochend eum pendiculo drum-

x de Kinghorne. fol. 180.
’ parte ville de ouer grang. fol. 181.

ndrj orrok et sue eonj

is

de ouer grai

Henrie) orrok de octa

Carta confirmationis Davidis clerk de una octava parte terraram de Weltoun. eodem.
Carta feodi™™ Jacobj halkheid et eius fi
caldie. fol. 183,
Carta feod: Davidis hutchoun de crofta sacelli diui Joannis baptiste et gleba
diui Leonard} prope Dumfermling. fol. 184,
Carta feod: Robertj logy in eramond regis ct sue sponse de oetava parte terrarum
de murehall et decima sexta parte ayue passagij de forthe eum preeepto. eodem.
Carta feod: Joannis boswell de dimidictate terrarum de Kinglassie. fol. 185
Carta feod: Mariorie fyne et Joannis fyne eius sponse de terris ville de pithauchelic
ine. fol. 186.
Jacohj dewar de occidentali parte ville de neyer lassodie cum precepto

de molendino pontis orientalis de Kir

cum precepto s

Carta feod:

sasine. fol. 187,
Carta Dauid
Carta Dauidis balfvur de balledmonth terrarum de bog:

fol. 190.

boswell de mylndaneis, fol. 188.

balssusnie et smetoun



--- Dunfermline_page538.png ---
476 REGISTRA INFEODACIONUM

Carta feo

domini de pitiirraine de tertia ean

mdem terrarum parte. codem,
Carta eonfirmationis Jaeobj richartson de smetoun de terris suis, fol. 192.

Carta Thome Wanchop de oetava parte terrarum de murehall. fol. 19
Carta contirmationis Jacolj richartsone terrarum de wester baithe et reliquarunt.
fol. 194.
Litera pensionis magistri Georgij Young de j® ma
Alex’ colvillis gift of pensioun for ye office of +
ling. eadem.

fol. 196,
aittarie of the Abba

y of Duinferm-

James Cowperis gift of plumbarie,  codem.
The contract and appointment of Catherine hakheid Elit Denynstoun and James
Moubray hir spous and Margrat Denynstoun and Rot fraser hir spous.

fol. 197.
Carta Joannis ged de molendinis de Kingorne wester.

eodem,
Carta Jacobj Munray de perdewis de ten
Carta feod:
Carta feod:
Carta feo:

de lymekilhill. fol. 198.
dominj Jacob) Balfour de villa terrarum de Costertoun. fol. 19:
: Danidis currour de sua parte terrarnm de arlarie 157:

eodem,
: Juannis quhite de sua parte terrarum de arlarie. fol. 200,

Carta feod:
Carta feod:
«a
art

: We lowthiane [et filii] de sua parte terrarum de arlarie. fol. 202.
: Thome forester uxoris et filij de sua parte dietarum te
: Ro'j hend
1 contirmacionis te
mn. fol. 203
Cart

‘arum. eoden.
umn de arlarie.  eadem,
nm de knokas Elizabethe Iundy relicte dominj de pit-

0 feod:

vane de una quarta parte ter

2 confirmationis Mariote Lander terrarum de eister haillis cum moleudine
einsdem, fol. 204.
Carta Jacobj murray de pardowis de terraris medow.
Ca

D5.

‘a feod: Ele stewart et Ro! dauidsone sni filii de mma decima sexta parte ac de

tertia parte vnius decime sexte partis aque pas:
Carta feod: Petri Wilsoun et sue sponse de tr

de south Terry, fol. 206,

de forth, eodem.

esima secunda parte aque passa:

Ane tak of the teind scheves of Pinkie and ears maid to M' James makgill.
eodem. [fol 207.]

Carte feod: Thome gour'

et sue sponse de vna oetava parte de oner gran
Carta confirmacionis Dauidis erichtoun de terris de sherrefhall.
Lettres of ré

eodem.

fol. 208,

eres of James giffert of sherrefhall. fol. 209.

Tndentura jnter commendatarinm et conventum dominnmgue de durie et eomnuni-
tatem de bruntjland facta 15

eodem,
Carta feod: Robert} stewart de quarteria terrarum de ouer



--- Dunfermline_page539.png ---
ET ALIENATIONUM. 47
‘arta Andree lundy de terris de sehanvell. fol. 211.
Carta dominj de glammis de terris de tentis muris. eodem.
Carta feodi™ Ro cousing de octava parte de newlands facta 1574. fol. 212
Carta confirmacionis quorundam annuorum reddituum vietualimm Ro" aytoun

213.
Carta Robert} aytoun de uno annuo redditu de mylndaneis. — eodem.

Carta Ro® aytoun de alio amuo redditu de mylndaneis. fol. 214.

Preeeptum sasine communitatis de bruntjland. — eode
Litera pensionis Joannis dauidsone. eodem.
Carta comitis de mortoun de officio balliatus de mussilburgh. fol. 215.

Carta introitus Jacobj lindsay de dowhill in et ad dimidietatem terraram de Logy
facta L574. eodem.

Carta noue infeodacionis Joannis Cranstoun in munktounnall, fol. 216,

Carta dominj de glammnis de terris de tentis muris.codem, [fol 217.]

de terris de sehanwell et fotheris. fel. 248.

Carta domini de glammis

Preceptum sasine Joannis stevinsoun in baithe. eodem.
edmestoun de dimidietate de natoun. fol. 219.
Carta confirmacionis magistri Jacobj makgill de nouo molendino de mussilburgh,

Carta Patrici

codem.
Carta Dauidis thomsone de decima sexta parte aque passagij. fol. 220.
Carta confirmacionis Jacobj dury de terris de [Jescor-eriote alias} lochend. fol. 221.

Carta contirmacionis Alex” auchmouttie de terris de stentoun, fol, 222.

Yarta confirmacionis Isobelle hepburne de tertia parte terrarnm de pitfirraine.
fol, 22:

Carta contirmacionis Issobelle hepburne de terris de knokas. fol.

+.

rris clemosinarijs prope burgum. fol. 2

‘arta Anthonij Rutherlurde de te
Carta feod: Jaeobj Robertsoun 4 partis terrarum de waltoun, — [facta

Carta domini de dowhill de terris de logy. fol. 2:

Carta confirmacionis

magistri georgij halkheid de dimidietate terrarum de sille-

town eister. eodem:
Carta confirmacionis magistri Georgi} halkheid de uno amuo redditu terrarum de
piteorthie. fol.
Carta Andree lundy de terri
Carta dominj de dundas de octava parte de murhall.  codem,

Carta magistri georgij halkheid de terris de silletoun wester. fol. 230.

de schanwell. fol. 229.


--- Dunfermline_page540.png ---
178 REGISTRA INFEODACIONUM

Carta feod: petri wilsone in southferie et sue coniugis 32 partis vnius deeime
jde south ferrie. fol. 232.
Carta henrie} murray de vna octava parte terraruin de
Varta Jacobj ro'sone de quarta parte terrarum de newbiggi
Carta Jacobj tod de terris fabricalibus de Kinglassie. ful. 234.
Carta feod: henrie} dury de novo molendino de mussilburgh. fol. 2:
Carta Jacob} richartsone vxoris et filij in mnssilburgh scliyre. fol. 236.
Carta feod: Joannis wemys de pittinereife de dimidietate de wester baith.
fol. 237.
Carta feod: diet] Joannis wemys terrarun de fosterland nuneupat’. fol. 238.
Carta feodit® Henrie} pe

sexte parti

aque passa:

‘oun et mariorie dewar ejus sponse de tertia parte ter-
varmn de neyer baithe, fol. 239,

Carta feod: Joannis stobie de tertia parte terrarum occidentalis lateris de wester
luseour eum preeepto sasine, fol. 240.

Carta feod: Thome alext de sex decimis sextis partibns terrarum et ville de drum-
ne continens. fol, 241,

meldry preceptum s

Carta food: Danidis mitchell et agnetis benis ejus sponse de nna decima sexta
tis terrarum de drammeldrie. fol. 242.

Carta feod: Thome forrett de yna decima sexta parte terrarum de drununeldrie
e in se contento, eadem.

parte et dimidietate decime sexte p:

precepto
Carta feod: Henrie) clistom de duabus sexdecim partibus terrarum de newbirne
cum precepto sasine. fol. 243.
Carta feod: Dauidis rouch de tribus sexdecin partibus terrarum de newbirnetoun
cum precepto sasine. fol. 244,

Carta feod: Andree rouche de tribus sexdecim partibus terrarum de newbirntoun
ne. fol, 245

cum precepto

Carta feod: martin dischingtoun de dimidietate terrarum de newbirne cum pre-
cepto sasine. fol. 246.
Carta feod: Joannis

Johuestoun de molendine de newbirne eum precepto sasine.
eodem.
Carta feod: Thome gawie de una xxxii® parte terrarmn de drummeldrie eum s
eepto, fol. 247.
Carta feod: Joannis adesoun et Margarete forsyth ejns sponse de decima sexta parte
terrarum de Drummeldrie eum precepto, fol. 248.

Carta feod: Dauidis horne et Issobelle page eius sponse de una acra terre arabilis
lic smithis aiker nuncupata. fol. 249.



--- Dunfermline_page541.png ---
ET ALIENATIONUM. 479

Carta feod: Joannis smyt et Andree smyt eius filii et Margarete Watsone suv

sponse de una aera terre arribilis. fol, 250.

Carta feodi Allanj Tuneis et E
1

jzabeth Myre eins sponse de dnabus aeris terre di

Murheid. fol. 2
Carta food: patr
Carta burgj de sonthe ferrie. fol.
Carta feod: Joannis Betoun de capildra et Lssobelle soot ejus sponse de mydil

haldvig et masoun land. fol. 254.

Carta feod: Dauidis Lundy apparentis de halgony et lilie oliphant ejus sponse ck

ij brown de vna quarteria parte terrarum de westerbaith. codein

terris de Dwnykeir. eodem.

Carta feod: Henrie} murray de dimidietate ville et terrarum de over lassody eum
sine, fol. 2
istri Alex” dr
um de sehyredaill fet terris de foste

precepto 5
Carta feod: ma; ateyth ejus sponse de una

quarta parte terr nd] tol. 256.
Carta feod: Jacobj peirsoun de una aere terre in villa de newbirne. fol

ij ville de newhirntoun quondam Mertinj dischington nune Andre«

daill et Issobelle mi

vn
Carta quarte
Bruce speetantis.
Carta feod: Mag

eodem.
W lundy de eodem de terris de lathalland. fol. 258,

Joannis betoun jrnioris et Barbare traill ejus sponse de midilhs

Carta feod
{et mesoun land.] fol. 259.
Litera Joanmis cass in Monktounhall. fol. 260.

Litera Joannis eranstoun in Monktounhall, fol. 261.
Carta feod: Allanj Couttis de bowhill et Joannis Couttis ecius filii de dimtidietar
fol.
lay de quarta parte terrarum de randels eraigi

terrarum de baith bonal

Carta feod: I
rta dimidietacis te
264.

Carta feod: Dauidis thomson in southe quenis fery de veto aeris terrarum de mur-

. evden

m de oner lassody Joanne rnthyen [domine de awdie

hall eum suis pertinentijs. fol. 265.
Carta feod: Catherine oliphant domine de Dund:
octo aeris terrarun de murehall. fol. 266,

et Jonete Oliphant sue tilie de

Carta contirmacionis Joannis lundy de strawtharlic et [Helene dudingstoun] sue

sponse de molendino de newbirne. fol.
Carta confirmacionis Allanj Couttis de bowhill de una oetava parte terraruin dk
ouergrange et Kingorne Wester. fol. 268.
Carta feod: Georgij Rowane de una quarta parte terrarum de bandrant, eudem,


--- Dunfermline_page542.png ---
480 REGISTRA INFEODACIONUM

rta confirmacionis Henrie} dury terrarum de eister baldrige eister et vester pit-
fol

Carta confirmacionis W seot et Joannis seot eius filii de offiie
ot novi molendini de Muss

corthie 270,

js molitorum antiqui

Iburgh. eodem.
Carta confirmacionis W%

cott bargensis de Mussilburgh de eisdem.
Carta feod: Joannis Young de una acre terre cum decimis ejusdem inelusis cum
precepto sasine. fol. 272.
{ Donatio Andree Durie ex pensione centum marcarum.

. 273.]
Carta confirmacionis Jacobj comitis de mortoun de terris de stanihous et moybous,
fol.

1 feod: Jaeobj prestoun et Agnetis philp cins sponse de tertia parte ville et
fol. 275.
Carta nove infeodacionis Jacobj Lytlejohne et sue »
Kirkealdy. fol. 276.
Carta none jnfeodac

um de neyer baithe.

onse de vna patella salinaria in

js Alex? Anchmonttie de vua patella salinaria in Kirkealdic.
eodem, .

Carta feod: Jacobi Wemys de lathokker eins sponse et filij de terris de balmule.
PY itig
The act and deereit obtenit befoir the lordis be Mr. Johnne piteaimn of forthour
ines the conventuale brethir and monkis of Dumfermling. fol. 278.
d
cinsdem terrisque de eoitt eum molendinis
ilyeraw et lie heuch myllis. fol. 279.
a Magistri Joannis pite
Carta fend: Geo

Carta Magistri Joaunis piteairne de eodem de terri eister et wester gellettis

maistertoun reseobie cum lie wedder gan}

airne terrarum de lymkill et morpheis fauld. fol. 280.
trumbill de duabus septimis partibus terrarum de eist barnis,

Carta feod: Thome Meldram uxo1
281.
Carta feod: W™ MéKie eius sponse tilijque de quingne solidatis terrarum de kok.
law. fol. 283.
Carta eontirma
Carta feod: Colinj comitis Argadie de terris de dolor, fol. 285.
Carta feod: W™ Walwod de nna octava parte terrarum de southfoid. —eadem.
Carta feod: Joannis Welwod et helene Wardlaw sue sponse de quarta parte ter-

is et filij de molendinis de Meldrumis myhwe.

tol

ionis M® Jacobi Betoun de creich ville et terrarum de eoitt.

rarnm de newlands. — fol.


--- Dunfermline_page543.png ---
iT ALLE

ATIONUM. IST

Carta fe
Carta fe
Cn

Roo mudie de vetava parte terrarum de Maisterton, — {ol

Thome cunnand et tilij de S parte de Maisterton, — fol.

ta food: Joannis Kellok sue sponse et filij de una octava parte terrarum de

Maistertoun, fol. 289.
Carta feod: W™ Kent sue sponse et filij de S parte de Maisterton, fol.
lenriej durie de yna 8 pi

eter

arum de maistertoun, — fol.

‘arta feod: Joannis stainhous ct ti

ij de una octava parte terrarum de M,

toun. fol,
Ca mn de qubittinghill, f
Carta Euphamie coutis et Jacohj Melvill sui fil de una patella salinaria prope
burgum de Kirkealdic, fol. 204,

ta patricij hoswell de dimidietate terr

Carta (ed: Rod henrisone de quarta parte terrarmm de Arlorie, —codem,
Carta Joannis Lowdoun de una patella salinaria prope burgum de Kirkealdic
situata

av food: W
tec
rum de southfoid. —codem,

» dewar sue partis terrarum de sonthtoid. fol. 296.
ndree Walwod dev

1 oetava enn devia ser

ta parte ville ct terra-

ta feod: Joannis Calp de dimidi

ate terrarum de qubittinghill, fol.

Carta Agnetis boswell et Thome peirsoun eius sponsi de oetava parte terrarum
ville de Waltoun. fol. 298.
Carta feo

: Joannis

adesoun ct Laurencij sui filii et sponse de una acra terre et
tenemento ad tinem ville. fol. 290,
Carta Magi
( Joamis Waluod de otic

ling. fol.

triJoannis danidsone de una oetava parte terrarum de newlandis, eodem.

seriandorum regalitatis et dominii de Dunierm-

ta Dominj
rta Andree p
newlands, — eodem.

 Jonete blaike

Jor eiusque filij de terris de wester baith. fol. 302.

‘ta Robert} Lundy [Lun] de vna quarteria parte terrarum de Maistertoun, fol. 303.
a Jacohj Wemys de easkybariane terrarum de blarothye. fol. 304,
Durie terraram de eraighuseoure. fi

1 Tacobj tal ex atfiein s ie. eodem.

iandorum parrochie de Kingla

ta Jacobj Murray molendinerum de evilyeraw et heuch mylnis. fol. 806,

‘arta Elizabethe dik de dimidietate patelle salinarie tencinentoque prope Kirk-
valdie. fol, 306.

3p


--- Dunfermline_page544.png ---
482 REGISTRA INFEODACIONUM

v Catherine halkheid de dimidietate terrarum de wester luseoure. fol. 307.
Carta confirmacionis Elizabethe Ventoun de una par
maeulty, fol. 308.
Carta Rober sponse de duabis patel
Carta Jaeobj de carbonaria de wallefurd. fol. 309.
Carta Henriej erystie eiusque sponse de dimidietate patelle saline eum tenemento
terre. eodem.
Carta Andree wod de largo de terris de balbard. codem. — [310.]
Carta Andree kilgoure de dimidietate patelle saline. fol. 310.
a Henrie} Orrok de eodem de terris de stanehous et moyhous. eodem,
Carta Ro® fraser de quarteria parte terran is, fol. BEL.
Carta feod: Thome toscheaucht eamerarij de nouo prato. _eodem.
Carta Henrigj baleanquell eiusque sponse de dimidietate patelle saline. fi
Carta Joannis swyntoun de dimidietate terrarum de baith ynder the hill. fol. 313.
Carta Magistr} Eduardj bruce de tertia parte occidentalis lateris terrarun de
wester luseoure, eodem,
Carta Jacobj Williamsoune de dimidietate patelle saline jacentis prope Kirk-
caldie, fol. 314.
Litera pensionis Joannis tod de terris de gaitmilk. eodem.

» terrarum de Cowper:

eodem,

aistertoun eiusq

ichartsone eiusque fi

mn de erai:

Carta Henricj ss de terris de south lethame. fol, 315.

Carta Andree coilyear de dimidietate patelle saline cum tenemento in territorio
de Kirkealdie, eodem,

Carta feod: Joannis halkerstoun eiusque sponse de una oetava parte ville et terra
rum de ouer g) fol. 316.

Carta feod: Jonete orrok [et Joannis Gardnar ejus filii] de decima sexta parte
ville et terrarum de ouer grange. fol. 317.

t Jacob} Dow

ng de kingome weste

Carta helene horne et petri dewar de decima sexta parte terrarum de foid, tol. 51s.

Carta Magistr] Joannis piteaime de terris de Reseobie

ister et wester Gellettis

et lymkill eum deeimis inclu: arundem, eodem.

Carta feod: Danidis boswell de molendino de mylnedanis. fol. 319.

Carta Alex” Christesoun de tribus decimis sextis partibus de ouer stentoun. tol. 3

320,
Carta Jacobj murray de pardewis et Agnetis lindsay efus sponse de terris de

‘Tunygask. codem.
Carta W® patersoune einsque filij de una patella salina jacente in territorie de

rkealdie, fol. 32).

obj Muresoun et Dauidis Loudoun de patella

Ki

lina, fol.

Cart


--- Dunfermline_page545.png ---
T ALITED

ATIONUM. Iss

a Dauidi:
Carta Cath

hucheoun de duabns dimidietatibus patellarum salinarum. fol.
arete et Issobelle ba

ine Mar; anquellis de dimidietate patelle saline,

vodem,
Carta Ro! horne de terris de mydilbaldrig, fol. 324.
Cart

a Thome honyman de yna deeima

sexta cum dimidia ville de balerystic.

Car

Thome peirsoun ciusque sponse de duabis is terraram de Mnirheid.

vodem,
Carta feod: W™ + de Ontht. fol. .
Carta feod: Henric} thomsone de quarta parte terrarum de ferryhill, fol. 327.
hill. fol. 32
fol. 329.
peirsoun eius sponse de tertia parte molendin)

ott de Abbotishall de terri

Carta Petry Wilsoun de quarta parte ville et terrarum de fer

a food: Jacobj dewar de tertia parte molendinj de lasso:
Carta feod: Joannis Kellok et El

sodie, fol. 330,

de la
Carta feod: Nicolaj Kellok de tertia parte molendinj de lassodi
Carta terraram de blairncbothies Dauidi durie de eodem, fol. 334,
Carta feod: Alex?
tertoun baith. fol
Carta Alex 0
‘antum terrarum de baith M:

aistertoun et Catherine brown eius sponse de terris de mais-

iste

oun cinsque sponse de quatuor septim
ertoun, fol. 333.
Carta Joannis et W" Walwodis de ter

s partibus de Grainge

in wat

de south vard. eodem.
Carta confirmacionis Andree Rowan de terris de Neyer Kynnydder, tol.

Carta Petr} durie de terris de eist quarter et neyer grange. fol.

Carta confirmacionis Domino To® Malvill et Catherine Adamesoun sue sponse de
unum de wester Kingome, fol. 336,

de sillictounis Magistyo Joanni piteairne de eodem.  eodem.
obj Moubray et Elit da
ibus [vulgo the braid leyes] cidem annexi

quarta parte ter
Carta
Carta feod
ema Te
Ale
Alexander steyins gift of v
usque sponse de terris de Middilbald
lina j
Carta Jacob} Murray de moro vulgo muncupate lie m
rta comitis de eraufurd de terris de cluny et ali

rbong
J

uidsoune sue sponse de molendino de pitle

is noua

fol. 337.

ander stevins assignatir

n of his pensioun, fol. 838.

ij hollis beir in pensioun. codem,

eodem.
rkealdie. fol. 340,
rtmyr

Carta Ro® bruce

Carta Jacobj Kingorne de patella cente apad K

codem.
fol. B41.
ionis Rot hay et Alisone orrok eius sponse de sex acris terraruu:

. BAL



--- Dunfermline_page546.png ---
484 REGISTRA INFEODACIONUM

Carta confirmacionis Patrieij hog eiusqne sponse de decem acris terrarum de
xmetoun, fol. 345
ta confirmacionis Thome lamb de

s de Bal et ali
Assedatio Dauidis phin de decimis garbalibus de pitbauchlie. [earet hodic.]

sili act eodem.

Assedatio Henrie] echlin de pitadro de decimis carundem ten
fentoun jeonomum, fol. B45. [dmperfecta.]

arum per Joannem

2. The buik with ane quhyt covering begynmand 1586.

Charta eonfirmacionis Normanj blakeader de ter

de Mylhillis. fol. 1.
Carta Dominj de pitiirrane de terris de buruemouth. fel. 1.
Assedatio Dominj de Reidhall de decimis de Reidhall. fol. 1.
c
rum de Imeresk. fol. L.

rta Jacohj richardsone de smetoun eiusque sponse et filij de tribus bonatis terra-

Carta confirmacionis Jacobj henryson de fordells de ter

fol. f,

s de tuny
Carta Patrieij futhie de dimidictate terrarum de sillictoun eister.
Carta confirmacionis Alex Orrok de
w i

ava parte terrarum de Veltoun,
"ta confirma

nis Alex® Orrok Junioris de deeima sexta parte de oner Grange.
a Dominj Joannis Maitland de thirlstane de officio balliuatus de Mussilbrugh
sehyre.

Carta confirmacionis W Rotsone de terris de eraigduky.

Carta confirmacionis Alex" commendata
Carta Marej
Carta jacobj fuda in juchtervy de decima sexta parte ville et tervaram de bal-

crystie, 1587.

Carta We Wa

halerystie,

Aj de Culross de terris de neyer Kynnedder

swyntonn de dimidietate terrarum de Inseour wester.

‘auder junioris eiusque sponse de xvi parte ville et terrarum de

Carta dominj de brinstoun de terris de stanihill,
Carta feodjt Magistr) Dauidi

ij de terris vulgariter yoeatis lie
linkis de balerystic cam eunicularijs earundem infra seriptis.
seixdem, 1588,

Precept of elare constat maid be ye erle of huntlic as commendater of Dumferm-

Carta feudit™ Dauidis broun de fynmounthe de te

ling to andro durie of the lands of neyer gy
(

yta Ro" bruce de terris de middilbadrig.



--- Dunfermline_page547.png ---
ET ALIENATIONUM. 1

oa

Preceptum sasine Ro® Bruce de dimidietate molendinj fullonis de burnemouthe. 1598
Preceptum sasine clare constat Dauidis boswell de dimidietate terrarum de

pityocher, 1588.

de silliton wester,

Preeeptuin sasine clare constat Ro® Halkheid de pithirrane de te

Mr? Thomas er:
James Kingorni:

gift of pensioun of j€ me

sedatioun of the teindis of St Margrats stane and randellis cvaivi

Johne gib his gift of keeping of ye plaiee and pensioun.

James Murrays assedatioun for the eustomis of Dumfermeling and lymekillis.
Assedatio Henrie} Durie de de: s garbalibus de Piteorthies.
Robert quhittis assedatioun maid to him and his aires of the teindis of his px
halsusny and smetoun,
Willian Lambis a
Thomas Lamb
Ro!
Assedatio Ro! quhite junioris
Patrik hogis assedatioun of his part of ye teindis of balsusny and sinetomn,
Rot Maistertounis assedatioun of his part of ye teindis of I

ssedatioun of ye teindis of his part of balsusny and smetoun.

assedatioun of ye teindis of his pairt of Balsusny and Smetoun.

ayis assedatioun of ye teindis of his part of balsusny and sinetoun.

Iensny and smetonn,

Jamis quhitis

edatioun of his part of ye teindis of smetoun,
f

Euphame couttis assedatioun of hir part 0

> teindis of Balsusny.
Assignatioun maid be my Jord to Robert qubit and his colli

Sir Rot melvillis letter of presentation of ye plaice of brontiland and twa aikers
of land.

Johne walwodis assedatioun of ye teindis er of Newlandis, 1555.

of ane qua

Robert cousi sedatioun of ye teindis of ane auchten part of newlands.
M? Jo" Dauidsonis assedatioun of ye teindis of ane auchten part of newland>

Patrik murr

‘ays assedatioun of ye teindis of Wyndmilnebill, 158

Jamis Lwnes gitt of pensionne,

Pro™ of res

ignatioun of ye lordschip of Mussilburgh.

ignatioun of ye landis of Kingorne wester jn favour of ser Rot Meluill
Murdicaimny knyt.
Ww ft of pensivun,

Prot for resignatioun of ye lordschip of uewbirnesebire jn favour of Andro Wod
of largo.

Pro™ for ¥

ame Gleghorns

Phynlaw tailyors gift of pensionn, 1587.


--- Dunfermline_page548.png ---
486 REGISTRA INFEODACIONUM

Jamis Kingornis tak of ye erle of huntlie of ye teinds of Saint Margrats stane and

vandellis eraiges,
Patrik Murrays assedatioun of ye teindshevis of wyndiemilne, 1588,
James Muwrays gift of pension.

3. The register with the quhyt parchment covering. [1557-1585.]

Assedationn to M' James m¢gill of ye teinds of pynkie. fol. 1.

Assedatio Allano coutis de eistbarnis. eodem.

Assedatio Ro® aytoun de terris de inchederny. fol. 3.

Assedationn Alex” cuke of twa oxengangis land in Monktonhall. fol. +. [east

Litere Martinj Dishingtoun de dimidietate terraram de newbirnten. fol. 5.
jearet hadie.]

Litere Ricardj marshell ininistrj. fol. 6.

Assedatio Dauidis hucheoun et grisilidis lundy de le gleih terrarum sanetj
Joannis, eodem.

Assedatio Dauidis hammiltoun de fingaltoun de quinque bonatis terre de smetoun.
fol. 7.

Assedatio agnetis Dryisdaill et Andree vannand de tribus houatis terre de lie
maynis de dolor. fol. S.

Presentatio Thome burrell ad vieariam de strathardell. fol. 9. [earet hodie.|

Presentatio Alex cokburne in tempilhill. fol. 10. [earet hodie.]

Assedatio Harbert} maxwell de duabus bouatis terre de Imnueresk. fol. 11.

Assedatio willelmj dishington de viii* parte de Drummeldry. eodem.

Assedatio Willielmj Kinloche de octaua parte terrarum de balehristie. fol. 12.
Assedatio Gulielmj Warrander de octana parte terrarum de balehristic. eoden
[t3.]

Assedatio ceelesie de kinross et vrwell. fol. 15.

Assedatio Joannis Robertsone de holbandrik [est baldrige.]

Assedatio Robertj frissall de newlandis, fol. 17.

fol. 16,

Assedatio Joannis ged et christine boswell molendinj de Kingorne wester. fol. 1s,

Assedatio Katharine sibbald et Joannis durie eius

le tribus quartis partibus

um de pitteorthies eister. fol. 19.


--- Dunfermline_page549.png ---
ET ALIENATIONUM. AST

Assedatio Wilielnj ge. fol. 21. Lewret hodie.|
Assedatio Patrieij halkeit de knokas et prymrvis. fol.
Assedatioun to James Kellok of maistertoun, fal, 2
Assedatioun to Dauid lundy [huteheoun] and Gr

of ye land of baleristie. fol. 24.

A

skraveling de octava parte de (

I Iundy of ye sixtene parte

aistertonn. fol
26.

fol. 27. [26.
s blaimebotly. fol.
29.

edationn to William Kent of ye auchtene parte of M

edatio Petr} dury de decimis terrarum de Inueresk.
The tak of Catherine halkheid of hir parte of weste
Assedatio Guliclmj murray et barbare pitearne de ter
edatio Alani Coutti
ssedatio Mariore tailzefeir de terris de Balmule. — eodem.

edatioun to Christiane lindy of ye milne of newbirne. fol. 31.

The tak of ye bailziarie of Dumfermeling to Dauid dur: 1563. eodem.
Preeeptum sasine Georgij lundy de tei iy fol. 32.

The assedatioun of ye teyndis of striuiling to ye laird of Cardene. tol.
» half teyndis of coisland to James rig. fol. 34.
Nathan carboury. fol. 85, [caret hodie. |

tol. 36.

de deeimis de Natonn. fol.

The assedationn of }

edatioun to Adame wauchope

Assedatioun to Allane conttis of ye twa sevint partis of eist barn
[caret hodie.]

Assedationn to Allane couttis of ye teyndis of Natoun. fol. 37.

Assedationne to James rig of Carberrie of ye landis quhilk pertenit in tak to Rot
lumisden. fol. 38. [87.]

Assedatioun to robert Jumisdane of ye half landis of cousland. —codem,

Assedatio Elizabethe hume de maistertoun. — fol. 39.

Carta Allanj Conttis de annuo redditu. fol. 40.

Carta confirmacionis mansionis siue tenement) in Perth nobili ct potent} Patricin
dominy de Ruthven et Janete stuart ejus sponse. 1564. fol. 41. [imperfecta]

Assedatio Jacohj Dewar et sue sponse ae filie de tervis de baith dolar. fol. 43.

Assedatio W™ trumbill de baith trumbill. fol. 44.

Assedatio Joannis weymis de pettinereif de decimis terre de pittinereit. fol, 45.

Ane precept of seising to Jo" Walker de tenemento [et] terra in Dumfermeli

eodem.

Inquisitio Joannis barroun de spittelicild cum precepto einsdem de spittelfoili
tol, 46.

Assedatio W™ trumbill de baithe trumbill. fol. 47. [46.]

Assedatioun to Jo" stevinsoun of baithe stenistonn. fol. 48.


--- Dunfermline_page550.png ---
488 REGISTRA INFEODACIONUM

Assedationn to Lanvence home of lassoddy. fol. 49.
Assedationn to Peter warrender of baleristie. fol
Preceptum sasine Thome fav
Assedatioun to Jo rose of er

le de eodem, — fol. 51.
ie of ye kirk of Perthe. eodem.
Assedatioun to John Auehtmoutie of ane yaird. fol. 52.

Assedatioun of ye teind sehevis of eraighim to MF thomas maison. fol. 53.

Assedatioune to Jo™ Boswell of ye aneht part of waltoun with pertinents. eodem.
Ane precept of seising to W™ murray of tuchadam of ye lands of wester hai
fol. Sk
Ane assedationn of ye kirk [of ye] halis to Mt Henrie foulis of colingtonn. fol. 55.
Assodatioun to Peter durie of ye landis of Inueresk. fol. 56,
Assedationn to Jo" swyntoun of ye kirk of Imuerkething. fol. 57.
g [to] Catherine sibbald. fol. 58.
Assedationn to Rot aytoun of ye landis of Inchederne. fol. 59.
Carta confirmacionis Ro aytonn de ammo redditu de terris de balwerie, fol. 60.
Axsedation of ye kirk of saint jonstoun to Patrik ross. fol. 61.
Assedationn to Jo" gourlay of ye auchtene parte of vuer grange of kingorn vestir.
fol, 62.

Assedatioun of eister baudri

ation to helene pont [kilpont] and Jamis Mowbr
yeitis of ye landis of eowdennyes baith. fol. 63.
Procuratorium Joaunis Waluod. fol. 64.

y for ye xpaiew of xix

Aliud procuratorinm dict} Joammis Walnod, —eodem.

[Aliud procuratorium dieti Joamnis Waluod. eodom.]
Procuratorium Georgij fleming terrarum de blaklaw. — codem.
Procuratorium Abraham weluod. fol. 65.

Procuratorium W™ Rotsone. fol. 66.

Procuratorium Thome beunet. eodem,

Procuratorium Ro Nieolsoun ciusque sponse. fol. 67.

euratorium W Christi. eodem,

Procuratorium Margrete peirsonn et W" blak sui filij.
fol. 6S.

- 6S,

Procuratorium W®) steihous in North foid.
Procuratorium Jacobj Dewar. fol. 69.
Procuratorium W® bonaylay in bonaylay brae [baith.] eedem.
"

[Procuratorium Alexandr] Galvik in sanet Margrettis stane. eodem.]
Procuratorium Nicolai rolland in bandrum. fol. 71.

orium Joannis broun, fol. 70.



--- Dunfermline_page551.png ---
ET ALIENATIONUM. 489

Procuratorium W™ horne, codem.
Pro Patrieij Christie in hoill. fol. 72. [émpenfecta.]
Pro Joannis broun de octava parte terrarum de gaitmilk, eodem.

Prom 4

ndree peirsoun et sue sponse. fol. 73.

ignationis pro Andrea trumbill in Vyndiedge. eodem.
Pro™ Ws Durie et sponse de quarta parte terrarum de Newlandis.
Proc: W"i M°Kie, code.

Proe: Joannis Aissoun. fol. 75.

Prom 4

fol. 74.

Proe: resignationis Nicolai Dewar in Wyndyedge. eodem.

Proe: pro Patricio Durie et sponsa. fol. 76.

Proe: Jacobj Dewar. fol. 76.

Proe: Patrieij Christie in hoill. fol. 77.

Proe: Dauidis boswell. eodem.

Proc: resignationis septime partis terrarum de Graing pro thoma lugtoun. fol. 78.
Proe: Thome smyt de Northfoid. eodem.

Proe: Dauidis Kello. 79.

Proce: W™ swyne. eodem.

Proc: Dauidis kingorne. fol. 80.

Proe: W™ trumbill in baith trumbill. eodem.

Proc: Adamj broun de quarta parte terrarum de Northfoid. fol. $1.
Procuratorium Allanj Couttis. eodem.

Proe: pro Joanne stevinson. fol. $2.

Proc: to Patrik Warrender. eodem.

Proe: to Rot lummisden. fol. 83.

Proe: Joannis Kellok. eodem.

Prog: resignationis duarnm septimarum partium terrarum de vist Graing pro
trumbill. fol. 84.

Proe: Joannis broun de octaua parte ville de gaitmilk, eodem.

Proe: to Henrie durie. fol. 85.
of Dumfermling [of the corn mills of Mussilburgh.] eodem.

Proc: to ye monaster)
oun de southe ferry, fol. 86.

Proc: Georgij da

Proe: Joannis Wilsoun. fol. 87.

Proe: Ele’ burgane. fol. 87.

Proe: resignationis W™ Allan in queensferry. fol. 88.

Pro: W™ stenhous de quarteria terraruin de Northfoid. fol. 89.

Pro: Laurencij Walwod of half mill of Towel and hail of vester badrig.  eodem.
3@



--- Dunfermline_page552.png ---
490 REGISTRA

FEODACIONUM

Proe: Rot logie de erawmondregis,

Proc: Danidis thomsone de trigesima secunda parte aque passagij super aqua de
forth. eodem.

Pro

Pro

pro Joanne steinson in baith steinson, fol. 91.

Joamnis Lyttill de xvj* parte de mui
Proe: Ro! Dawling. fol. 92.
Preceptum Janete durie de codem terrarum de Kynnerny neyer Kinneddir et

dolar beg. fol. 93.

patricij murray de wyndmilhill. code

Assedatio Ro¥ fra fol. 94.

Assedatioun to Cathrine sibbald. —eodem,

hall, eodem,

Assedationn to Mt Jamis m*Cill of pynkie and ears. fol. 95,
fol. 96.

to the Queen «

Preceptum Joannis lyndsay de logy.

Assedatioun to margrat
strathardill. tol. 97.
sedatioun of baith persoune to Danid persoune. eedem,
uilielmj Durie, fol, 9S.
Preeeptum de Orrok Henrico Orrok. fol. 99.

od pante

ye kirky of muling and

um Tanitoris loc

Car
C;
Preceptum sasine de oetav:

a Juannis broun de tordell et fynmontht. fol. 100,

allani couttis de horto et columbario diue Caterine. fol, 102.
mi de Gaitmilk. fol. 104,

parte terr
Carta feodif: Jacob) bertane. — eodem

Proe: Jacobj dawling de deeima sexta parte terrarum de nmirhall et de
aug super aqua de forthe. fol. 106.

Proc: clementis sauderis de dimidietate ter
Proce: W™ sanderis de sillitoun wester, eodem
Proe: Jonete Wilsoun de dimidietate molendinj fullonam de gaitmilk. fol. 105.
Proc: Patrieij blaeader de milhill. eodem.

cima
sexta parte lie walter

arum de randellis eraiges. fi

107,

Proc: Jonete dawsoun de deeima sexta parte terrarum de muirhall. fol. 109.

Proc: resignationis catherine halkheid de pitleuir braidlayis cum molendino eiusdem,
oodom.

Proc: W™ Wilsoun de dimidietate molendini tallonum Jie Walkmilne in burne-
mouthe. fol. 110.

Proe: pro Thoma henrisone in baldrome. —eode

s de wester lassodie. fol. 11.
Proc: Alex stenhons de brewland de Kinglassy. — eodem.

Proe: resignationis pro Thoma horne de te:


--- Dunfermline_page553.png ---
ET ALIENATIONUM. oT

Assedatio Allanj Couttis de decinis garbalibus de Nawtoun. fol. 112.
Assedatio Thome Alex’ filio et heredj quondam Georgij Alext. code.

The Assedatioun of Thomas ottirburne of ye teindis of Monktounhall. fol. 113,
Assedatio Thome Meldrnm de molendino granario de Meldrumis milue, eodem

Preceptum sasine dauidis peirsoun de eraigmiller, fol. 114.
halkerstouns tak. fol, 115.
eeristane of Dumfermling tak oil ye teindis of ye half landis of piteorthe t

The
W® Jumisden persoune of cleishe. fol. 116.
jady edmiestoun. fol. 117.

‘The teinds of consland ye half to ye
Jamis clisounis tak of nnbnrn. fol. 118.
Assedationn of Randells eraiges. fol. 119.
Assedatioun of Jo" gairdener of ouer graing. eodem.
Assedatio Allanj Coutts, 19 aunoram de aeri
fol. 120.

baleanquell de duabus aeris terre. fol. 121.

is et terre croftis prope burgum de
dunfermli

Carta het
Preeeptum
Preceptum sasine Georgij trumbill. codem.

‘ine clementis saunderis. fol. 122.

nerk

Carta confirmacionis Margarete bonare domine de raith terrarum de piteor
et dimidietatis terrarum de raith in speeiale warrantum, fol. 123,

Carta feudi Joannis boswell in Abirdour de quariour landis. fol. 124. [caret
hodiv.]

Assedatio Elizabethe symson et Jacohj Weymes de easkibarriane terraram de
Mlavethj. fol. 125, Lewret.]

The laird of Dundass assedatioun of ye landis of seottistoun for the space of
nyntene years, eodem.  [caret.]
edatioun of Jo" smyt elder and Andro smyt younger in ye murelieid of

The a
Newbirntoun. fol. 126.

Assedatio Martinj dishingtonn of Newbirne. eodem,

Assedatio Joannis Iyn et Marriorie fyn. fol. 127.

Assedatio Allanj Couttis de deeimis de Natoun. fol. 128.

Assedatio Allanj Couttis de deci uum prope burgum, fol, 129.

The Assedatioun of ye Kirkis of Vrwell and Kynross,  eodem,

‘The assedatioun of ye Kirkis of Mulyne and strathardaill. fol. 130.

The assedatioun of W" Wauchope of ye landis of Caldeoitis, fol. 131.
Assedatio Joannis Weymis de terris de Knok. _eodem.
Assedatio Joaunis Weymis de pittinereif de terris de Monturpy. fol. 132.

t



--- Dunfermline_page554.png ---
492 REGISTRA INFEODACIONUM

‘The tak of ye teind seheves of Wolmett. fol. 133.

The tak of the teind schevis of Edmiestoun to Jo" edmiestoun of yat ilk.
fol. 133.

Alex' hayis assedatioun of ye teinds of Monktoun. eodem.

The lettre of tak and assedatio maid to Margarate haldane and James foullis
hir sone of ye teind schevis of wester haillis. fol. 134.

The tak of ye teind schevis of ye barronye of Clunye. eodem.

The laird of pitfirranes assedatioun of ye teinds of ye same. fol. 135.

Assedatio Andree rouche in newbirntoun. eodem.

Assedatio Magistrj Georgij halkheid de custuma de Kirkealdy. fol. 136.

Assedatio Joannis broun de fordell ex decimis terrarum de fynmot. fol. 137

Assedatio Jacobj rig et eius sponse de decimo onere carbonarum de Carberrie,
eodem.

Assedativ Joannis swyntoun de decinis garbalibus parochie de Inuerkithing pro
spacio novemdecim annorum. fol. 138.

Assedatio Florentinj auchmouttie de decimis terrarum de halhill et tertia parte
de Melgum et Lawgrenis. eodem.

Assedatio Jacobj Murray de decim

s de perdewis. fol. 138
Ane assedatioun to M'. Thomas Methven of his awin teindis of Craigtoun. eodem.
Assedatioun of M', George halkheid and his spouse of ye greit eustumis of K
caldy for 19 years. fol. 140,
The lady Nauchtanis tak of ye teind of logy. eodem.
The laird of duries assedatioun of ye teindis of Carnebie. fol. 141.
Preceptum sasine He et Jacobj halkheids. eodem.
Assedatio M®, Joannis piteaime de decimis garbalibus de Inueresk. fol. 142.
Assedatio patricij fyldar de dec
Johne Wey: dis of Kingorne wester. fol. 143.
Jo" Murrayis assedatioun of ye teindis of Pittunry. eodem.
Assedatio Adawj durie de decimis garbalibus de pittun wester. codem.
Assedatio Dauidis pitcairne de decimis de cavil, fol. 144,
‘The Assedatioun of ye Kirk of Perthe. eodem.
Assedatio Thome Murray de decimis garbalibus burgj de Kirkcaldy. fol, 145.
Thomas Walwodis tak of the coile and coilheuchis of wester baldrig. eodem.
Instrumentum patricij Murray. fol. 146.
Assedatioun be Patrik commendatar of Dunfermling to Dauid sandilands of ye
teynd sehevis of ye lyfe part landis of Kynnynmout. fol. 147.

is garbalibus de pittravie. eodem.
is assedatioun of ye small tei



--- Dunfermline_page555.png ---
T ALIENATIONUM. 193

+. [Registrum pergamencum cartaram Anne Regine. 1593-1600. ]

Carta confirmationis terrarum de nether Kinnether Alexandre conmendatario de
12" Julij 1594,
de lynmonth, 8" Januari 1594,

Confirmatio Gulielmi Philp de terris de Breryhill. 8" Januarij 1594.

Carta confirmationis Joannis Cowttis de orientalj dimidietate Ville et terrarum
de Pityochir, 15" februarij 1594.

Carta confirmationis Robert} Nicoll de sex ac
) 1594.

Carta Jacobj Richiesone de sinetoune sue spon
toune molendino de Mussilburgh, 20° februari 1594.

culros et Nicholae dundas

© sponse.

Confirmatio dauidis Broune de ter

de Gresumirland. 15! feb-
ruai

» eorum filij ete. de terris de sine-

is terrarum de

Carta confirmationis Alexandr} Orrok et sue sponse octave pa
eo Martij 1594,
feod: Magistri Dauidis Aytoun de balehristie linkis. 24% Mareij 1594.
Carta nove infeodacionis: per r Coluile super prefatis t
Nether Kynnether. 28° Mareij 1595.
Carta nove infeodacionis Andree Meluile de Garvok wode, 28" Mareij 1595.
ae tall: Andree Wardlaw de Torre Andree patricio et Jacobo
de fynglassy facta, 11" Junij 1594.

Waltoune.

Carta nowe

ationem Jc is de

Carta confirmacion

suis filiis super terri

Carta confirmacionis Jacobj Reid de terris

Carta res'
Petleuer et [terrarum] latorum noualium [vulgo voeat’ braid levis.) 17° Junij 1595.

Carta nove infeodacionis Patrieij stewart super carbonariis de Bayth. 29°
Juli} 1595.

de Pittie commune. 11 Jumij 1594

nationis francisei naper et margarete moubray sue sponse molendini de

Carta resignationis Jonete currour ct thome burgan sui filij super tribus 16
partibus de ferrihill, 5... 1595.
Carta Joannis Burgan senioris Elezabethe broune sue sponse ct Jacob burgan

coram filii de tribus decimis sextis partibus tervarum de ferrihill. 2... 1596,
Carta resignationis xvj partis de ferrihill Johanni
ar sue sponse et Johannis bur
Maij 1595.
Carta confirmationis Henrie} Warlaw et Elezabethe Wilsone suc sponse super
inolendino de Balmull. 27° februarij 1596,

burgan junioris Cristiane
tis. 20m°

van corum filij et heredis app

a



--- Dunfermline_page556.png ---
494 REGISTRA INFEODACIONUM

Carta Dauidis lundy de terris de Lathalland, 22 Martij 1596.

Carta Alexandr] Setoun dominj Vrquhart hereditarij balliuatus et Justiciarii
Dominij de Dumfermling ex borealj parte aque de forth. 15" februarij 1596.

Carta Alexandr} domini de Urquhart Constabularie de Dunfermeling. 15" f
1596.

Carta Alexandr} dominj de Wrqubart offic
burgh. 20° februarij 1596,

Carta confirm nis Joannis Dewar de dimidietate ville et terrarum de Baith
nuneupat: swintounes Baith. 20" Aprilis 1593.

Preeeptum sasine Dauidis seytoun de parbroth terrarum de Gelletis. . . . . 1596.

Carta confirmacionis Jacobj kinghome terrarum de morphei
garbalibus earundem, 20"° Julij 1597.

Carta Robert} Ramsay terrarum de Kinglassie.

Carta dauidis fin dimidietatis terrarum de Lymki

Carta Gulielmj Carnes de acris vocatis pittie aik

Carta Danidis boswell ter
terris molendinari

(

hereditarij Balliuatus de Mussil-

auld cum decimis

 Julij 1597.
20"° Jul
20° Julij 1597.
‘arum de mylne daines cum molendino de Kingla
seiusdem. 5" Decembris 1597.

rta Gulielmj Crawen Anglie} quinque acrarmn jacentium apud Kirkcaldie
" Oetobris 1597.

ria Joannis findlay in steantoun deeime partis et dimidictatis
terrarum ville de Balehristie. 4 Angusti 1597.

we partis

Carta Roberti bruce terrarum et ville de south Lethames, 7° februarij 1
Carta Georgij boswell de molendino oecidentali de kirkauldj. 27" Mart
wardlaw terrarumn de balmuill. 19° Maij 1598.
resignationis Willielmj reid de terris de brewlandis in Dollour. 3° Julij 159
Carta Willelmj naper appre: molendini de Petliver et terrarum de braidleyi
3° Julij 1598.

Carta confirmacionis Joanni

597.

1

Ca

fairlie de terris de stauiehill. 3 Jul
Carta resignationis Dauidis fin dimidietatis ville et terraram de Lymekillis
Julij 1598,
Carta confirmacionis Joannis touris de Innerleyth et sue sponse de terris de
lochie. [carta confirmata data est] 12™ septembris 1

Carta resignationis Adamj Walwode de decima sexta parte terrarum de southfoi
22 Junij 1598.

Carta Dauidis Smyth alias huchesone et helene wode sue spouse. 11° Novem-
bris



--- Dunfermline_page557.png ---
T ALIENATIONUM. 15

Carta contirmacionis Georg

ij Brnce quarte partis et dimidietatis vnins quarterc
3 Julij 15!

gistri Edwardj Bruee et ma

terrarum de wester Gelletis cum decimis inelusis.

Carta contirmacionis m:

alone clerk sue sponss

quarte partis ct dimidie vnius q
3° Juli) 1598.

Carta none infeodacionis Robert} Cwnynghame in Gask de totis et integris terrix
de Gask.  #° Angusti 1597.

Carta resignationis terrarum de eister haillis In ti
dmrne junioris de Reidhall mili

terie terrarum de wester gellettis eum decimis in

5S

clus

vorem doting ‘Theme Otter-

is et domine Mariote Cokbume sne sponse. 22"
februa

Carta Arechibaldi Edmonstoune de Wowmet de carbonibus et carbon: einsdent.
[émperfecta, |

Carta confirmationis Alexandr] Orrok de oetava parte terraram de waltoune et
20" Martij 1598.

Carta contirmationis Edwardj Brnee oricntalis quarterie de wester gillettis. 20"
Martij 1598.

Carta Joannis Wey:

decima sexta parte terraruin de onergran:

nies dimidictatis de Kerrizbeith, 20° Martij 1598.

Carta confirmationis Andree bruce quarte partis terrarmm de Newbirne. 20"
Martij 1598.

Carta Robert} Durie de codem de terris de Luscour Eyiot alias Lochend eum pendi-
culis vocatis drumtuithill et Toungis. 20"° Martij 1598.

Carta Henrie) Wardlaw terrarum de Balmuile et molendinorum earuandem nuncn-
patorum Meldrumes milnes. 18% Maij 1599.

Carta Patrieij
Jnnij 1599.

Jare occidentalis dimidietatis terrarum de P:

yorher. 16!

Carta confirmationis quondam Edw:
bris 1599.

Carta Joannis burgan tenement} terre jn north Quenes ferrie, 24° decem-
bis 1599,

Carta Jacob) hammiltoune de tribus oe
decembris 1599

\j Broune erofti lie disch croft. 20° decem-

avis partibus terrarum de dvammetrie 21%

Carta Gilbert] Robertsone et Elizabethe fiddes totins et jntegre quarte partis ter-
31° Januarij 1600 s
s dimidietatis de Petyocher, [ea

rarum de Waltoune alias Nowbiging. ilo nove,
Carta Henrie}

facta est] 2 Jul

clare occidental
D.
¢ terrarum de Carbarrie, 1"° Aprilis 1600,

a conti

ata


--- Dunfermline_page558.png ---
496) REGISTRA INFEODACIONUM

Carta Magistr) Thome hammiltoune sex acrarum in currieflattis. 5% Julij 1600
Carta Robert} Mudie octave partis terrarum de Maistertoun, 18" Julij 1600.
Jarta Richardj dobie et } 1o™
ij 1600.

Carta confirmacionis Dominj de dundas octave partis terrarum de Muirhall et
seottistoune, 16" Julij 1600 stile novo.

Carta Henrie} Wardlaw terrarum de Balmuill. 5° Julij 1600,

ariote Weir sue sponse terraruin de Staniel

Carta confirmacionis Magistrj Edvardj bruce terrarum de Luseoir, 18" Julij 1600.
a coufirmacionis Robert} Orrok terrarum de stanehons et moy hous. 10™°
ij 1600.

a confirmacionis Alex” dominj tyvie de septima parte terrarum de eistharnes.

5. [Registrum cartarum Anne Regine in papyre 1600-1611 ]

Aue tak of the teind scheaves of Keiris Baith Sett to Patrik Stewart of Baith.
1** Februar 1603.

Carta confirmationis Joannis Weymes de Cnthilbill de tribns octa
ville et terrarum de southfoid. 1"° Februarij 1603.

Carta confirmationis Henrie} Wardlaw de Balmuile Terrarum de
waster, 1° februarij 1603.

'spartibus

igduckie

Ane tak of the teind scheaves of Edmonstoune Sett to Andro Edmonstoune of
that Ik. 1% November 1602.

Carta Domini Robert] Melvile de murdocairny militis in vitalj redditu et domini
Roberti Melvile de Brunteland et Joanne hammiltoun
terris de Nether Grange de
ariy 1603.

Carta confirmationis Margarete Murray de toto et integro maneriei loco de tyn-
month et orientali dimidietate de fymmonth. 1™° Januarij 1603.

Gift of Alexander Chalmer his escheit Disponit to Robert Merser. 3" februar 1603.

Gift of escheit of Thomas Dryisdaill James fergus and Williame harrowar Dis-
ponit to James Prymroiss. 1* februar 1603.

ue sponse in fendifirmaria de
ibus. 10° febru-

ome waster cum deci

Tak of the great eustomes of Dumfermeling and of the port and heavin of Lym-
killis Disponit to James Kingorne. 3" februar 1603.


--- Dunfermline_page559.png ---
ET ALTENATIONUM. 497

Carta contirmationis Alexandri Orrok de oetava parte ville et terrarum de over
grange de Kingorne waster. 16" februarij 1603, fol. 10.

Carta Patrieii Stewart de Baith dimidietatis terrarum de Waster Baith vulgo
Baidh cum deeimis garbalibus de Keiris Baith. 8 Martij 1603.
prestoun de Craigmillor de toto et integro australi
einsdem. 10"

Keiris
Carta confirmationis Georg’

prato voeato lie South dolf medow de Edmonstoune et ter
Martij 1603.
Carta henriei Wardlaw de tenendria de Balmule. 8" Marti
Carta Magistri Edwardi Bruee de tota et jntegra quarte
rum de Newlandis et quarta parte de Randellis
Gift of the Chaplanrie of Sanet Leonard grantit to Will
is of hiv Iyftyme, 8¢ Marche 1603.
a contirmationis Georgij Brnee de Carnok de totis et integris terris de Logy,

j 1603.

a sine quarta parte
14" Martij 1603,

me Wardlaw for all the

‘a
16% Martij 1603.

Carta Georgii Brnee de te 20 Julij 1600.

Carta Danidis Dewar de nedder lessodie. 16" Martij 1603.

Carta Dauidis Wyse et sue sponse de salina patella in Kirkealdie. 10% Jann

de Lo

arij 1603.
Inquisitio Alex® thomsoun quarumdem bouatarum de Mounktounhall.
Julij 1601.
Preceptum sasine earundem bouatarum terrarum. 12° Martij 160:
Inquisitio Willielmj Boswell terrarum de quhittinghill. 24° Octobris 1601.
Preceptum sasine eiusdem dimidictatis illius petie terre lie quhittinghill nuneu-

pate. 9... 1608.

Canta Dauidis hay et eins sponse de patella salinaria In Kirkealdie, 10% Martij 1603,

Carta confirmationis pro Andrea et Joaune Setounes terrarum de Eister Gelletis

159...

Tak of the teindscheaves of ane lyf pairt of the toune and landis of Kynnyn-
month Sett to Andro Kynnynmonth. 14% Marche 1603.
ft of escheit of Ving Andro gardner Disponit to George Baleauwell, 14"
Merch 1603,

Retornatus Danidis Rouche de tribus sexdeeim partibus ville et terrarum: de
Newbirneton. 11™° Aprilis 1601.

Preceptum sasine eiusdem terre. 19" Augusti 1601.

Carta eonfirmationis quondam Jacobi gitlert et Margarete home eius sponse terra-
rum de sherrefhall. 1®° Aprilis 1603.

3R



--- Dunfermline_page560.png ---
498 REGISTRA INFEODACIONUM

Carta Joannis commendatarii de halyruidhous terrarum de Blairnbotheis souther
1° febrnarii 1595, fol. 40.
io de vetava parte ter

et norther.

um de Newlandis. 6'° Octobris 1604.
Preeeptum sasine huius Inguisitionis. 9" Martii 1605.
Carta Magistri roberti Ros terrarum de Jakistoun, Logybryde, Rasehley, Bal-
macolie, blalok et Inchstravi gr Martij 1605,
Carta comunitatis de Perth mansionis jn Perth. 20" Nouembris 1604.
Carta confirmationis Johanni:
Carta Thome Cowie. 12"° M:

Inquis

stobie terrarum de waster luscoir.
ij 1607,

Tak of the teindis of Muling and Strathardill Set to Jamis now maister of Ogilvie.
20% februar 1607.

Carta confirmationis Domini Jacobi Scot de Abbottishall militis terrarum de
Abbottishall et Outh. 18° Maij 160:

Carta confirmationis Alexandri comitis de Dumfermeling terrarum de Outh.
20 Junijy 1605

Carta confirm
Augusti 1605.

Carta Roberti Merser de ovientali dimididietate terrarum de magno prato vulge
howum pratum nuncupate, 20°" Maij 1605.

Carta Magi: rum de Kildin, 31™ Januarij 1606.

Carta confirmationis Dauidis forret de deei
drumeldrie, 812° Jannarij 1606.

tionis georgij hutone de erolta vulgo voeata lie a

orme waird. 5”

tri Joannis paip t

na sexta parte ville et terrarnm de

Carta Willielmj caimy de aera terre vulgo vocata lie gerves aiker. 20"° febru-
arij 1603.

Carta confirmationis Jacobi prymrois et Sare coluile eius sponse de quarteria
parte terrarum de newlandis et de terris de lie medowend nuncupatis. 20° feb-
ruarij 1606.

Carta confirmationis Domini Thome Otterburne et sue sponse de quinque bouatis
terrarum de monktounhall. 20° februarij 1606.

Carta Jacobi Johnestoun de decima sexta parte et octava parte terrarum de
‘ing. 3° Martij 1606.

Carta Domini Roberti Meluill de Brunteland militis et domine Joanne hammil-
toun domine Ross sue sponse terrarum de never grange de Kingorne wester. 15"
Martij 1606.

Carta Joannis M‘Kenzie apparentis de apileroce terrarnm de Kildin cum molen-
dino ejusdem. 19° Martij 1606,

Weltoun alias Newbi



--- Dunfermline_page561.png ---
ET ALIENATIONUM. 149

Carta confirmationis Jacobi Reid de quatuor acris eum dimidi
mun de Dunfermeling, 13% Martij 1606. fol. 81.

Carta Jacobi Reid acrarum de eroftis de Dunfermelin. 18" Martij 1606,

Tak of the Teindscheaves of the landis of Monktonnhall to Sir Thomas Otter-
burne of Reidhall knicht, 18" Mareh 1606,

Carta confirmationis Magistri Thome Wardlaw octave partis terra
landis. 29° Maij 1606,

Carta contirmationis henriei Wardlaw et Eli

were terre avabilis

jacentibus prope be

mi de ew-

bethe Wilsone sae sponse de quarta
um de Pitbaueblie. 19% Junij 1606.
Carta Jacobi halyburtoune et Margarete Serymgeour eins eoujugis tervaram de

parte ter

um de gaitmylk neenon ville et ter

Coupermeultie, 20° Junij 1606.

Carta confirmationis Joannis Buchannane et margarete hartsyde sue sponse de lie
um de eauldeottis. 12° Junij 1606.
arta Nicolai Kellok tertie parti > Junij 1606.
Carta Williclnj Kellok tertie partis molendinj de Lassody, 20° Junij 1606,

Maynes dv cdinonstoun et te)

< molendinj de Lassudie, 2

Confirmation to Mé Alext Hay of the few fermes and Dewteis of the landis ot
Drone and Ardett. 5% Junij 1606,

Gift of escheat and Lyverent of deame Essobell hepburne and Sir Robert halket to
Patrik Stewart of Baith. 14 August 1606,

Carta contirmationis Joannis Ros terrarum de Jaekstoum Logybryde Rasehley
Balmacolie Blalok and Inchstrevie. 5° Decembris 1606.

Proceptumm sasine Jacobj Hunter, 6" decembris 1606,

Carta Jacobj halybnrtoun et Ma
1606.
Bill for henrie Wardlaw his securitie anent ye compositionne of petenrris intett-
iment inmediatlie foirsaid. 8° Januari) 1607.
Tak of the teindseheaves of the landis of

rete Seryingeour eius sponse terrarium de Cupar

méeulty. 10% Septembri

jvamonth Set to Danid Browne ot

fynmonth. 20 Januar 1607.

Carta confir

ationis Patrieij ogilvie Terrarum de Bennathie.

febrn-
arij 1607.
Carta Domini Roberti halket Molendini de Petlever.  81"° Julij 1606,

Carta magistri henriei Meluill Terrarum nuneupataram lie Smyddylandi= et
Walkerlaud 2% Aprilis 1607.

Carta Thome dowgall aere terre jacentis intra lie ¢
aldie. 1" Aprilis 1607.

Carta Joann:

ter Loue dyk burgi de Kirk-

tewart terrarium eccle ‘arum de Muling., 15% Maij 1607


--- Dunfermline_page562.png ---
500 REGISTRA INFEODACIONUM

Carta confirmationis Roberti bruce tenementi terre in Dunfermeling. 20"
Maij 1607. fol. 119,

Regres Patrik lord glammes To the landis of Schanwill. 15" Junij 1607.

Preceptum sasine Bessete home vnius octave partis terrarum de Coklaw, 17™°
Tunij 1607.

Inquisitio ciusdem precepti antedicti. 10 Maij 1606.
ij Ramsay terrarum de Abbottishall. 26"

Carta eontirmationis Dominj geor,
Junij 1607.

Proceptum sasine dominj Jacobj Seot terrarum de Balwerie, 24 Junij 1607.

Varta confirmationis Agnete Joanne helene Dauidis Roberti mariote et geo

vdinonstounes. 1° februari) 1607.
Escheit of Williame Mure Disponit to Dauid ‘Touch, 1 Junij 1607.

andr] comitis de Dunfermel

zee Septembris 1606.
Inquisitio Domini J
Gift of escheit of Sir James Scott disponit to ye July 1607.
Charta Recognitionis domini Jacobj Gunnyghame de Glengarnock militis terra-

rum de Balwerie, 9° Julij 1607.

Jacobi Cumingham terraram de Balv

¢ de carbonariis dominij de Dunfermlin.

cobj Scot terrarum de balwerie. 6% Martij 1602.

9° Julij 1607.
stri Joannis Edmestoun dimidietatis terrarum de

Carta don

Charta contirmationis M.
Natoun. 24° Junij 1607.

Ane of the teind seheaueis of Pettinereif petdinneis Sett to Eduard bruce
Mr‘ of Kinlos. 20" Junij 1607.

Carta confirmationis Allani Couttis de dimidietate terrarum de Lymekyllis. 22%
Novembris 1606.

Carta confirmationis Alexandr] comitis de Dunfermeling de quarta parte Terrarum
de Northfoy 24 Novembris 1606.

Inquisitio Joannis galrig dimidietatis terraram de S' Margarettis stane. 7°
Novembris 1607.

Preceptum sasine hujusmodi inqnisitionis de ciusdem terris. 19" Novembris 1607.

Carta Joannis lenrysone decime octaue partis terrarum de Arlarie. 1™° Deeem-
bris 1607.
a confirmationis Dauidis coventrie quarundem partium de Arla

Deecembris 1607.
Carta henviei Wardlaw terrarum de pitbauchlie. 30"° Septembris 1607.
Carta confirmationis Thome Alexander Andree finlaw Jamis finlaw Joannis


--- Dunfermline_page563.png ---
ET ALIFNATIONUM. 5Ol

Warrander Andree Corfuit Dauidis Wilsoune Williame mitehell Jacobi beiburne
de Balehristie linkis. 11" Decembris 160t. fol. 150,

Procuratorie maid to hir maiestie of

ye aduoeatioun of

personae and viecarage

of Oruell ju fauor of Dauid Lord Seone, . . . November 1604.

> To Sir Danid Murray for xis .. » Funij 1608,
jo Jacobi Stewart de Rossyth super quarteriam partem tei
5% Noucmbris 1603.

k of the teindis of 5

rum de oner

Proceptum s 24° febr
tio Jacobj Seott de Abbottishall, 22% Junij 1605.
*° Funij 160:
ie Disponit to Mt James Sandelandis, 20

ne super ujusmodi juquisitionem.

Tngni
Pre
Gift of the Adyoeatschip to

Vebruar 1608,

Carta confirmationis Roberti Mei
partis de Newlandis. 1° Martij 1608.

Gift of escheit and lyverent of Williame and Margaret Mowbreyis Disponit to
Robert Merser of salene, 18" Merch 1608.
Carta Joannis Durie et Jonete Marioribanki:
parte ville de Murehall alias Southquenesferrie. 4° aprilis 1608.

Carta Dauidis Kinloch Doctoris medicine Duorum tenementorum in Kirkealdic
Maij 1608.

Tnquisitio Joannis Prestoun de Valafeild dimidietatis terrarum de Nateuwn. 13"
Aprilis 1608.

Preceptum sa

Escheit of, Dauid Prestoun Disponit To M

Tak of the teindscheaves of the manes of pittin
ter of Kinloss. 14 Julij 1608.

Inquisitio henrici Orrok terrarum de Orrok. 1" Maij 1602.

Preceptum s jonem. 10° Augusti 1608,

Carta Joaunis chrystie de dimidictate ville de baith bonalay et baith vnder the
hill. 10"? Novembris 1608,

Tak of the Vo henrie wardlaw. 12 September 1608.

Carta henriei Wardlaw, —5'° Novembris 1608.

Gift of [the escheit of] vmq! Robert wauchop of niddrie Disponit To Sir Robert
hepburne of aulderstoun Knyt. 20" October 1608,

Gift of Advocatschip to oure Soucrane lady Disponit to Mr. James Sandelandis,
12 September 1608.

eptim sasine eiusdem,

mai

er et Rebeece Carmiehell sue spouse qnarterie

sue sponse octave partis eum xxxij

ne super hujusmodi Inquisitionem, 21 Janij 1608,
r. Robert Criehtoun, 30% Junij 1608.

eif Pitdimnei Edward Bruce

sine super eandem Inquisi

eindseheaves of Pittravie



--- Dunfermline_page564.png ---
502 REGISTRA [INFEODACIONUM

Carta Domini Joannis Prestoun de valafeild et grisilide Coluill sue sponse Dimi-
dietatis terrarum de Natoun. 7" Januarij 1609. fol. 187.

Escheit of Johne Cusigue Disponit to George halkh 12" Januar 1609.

Carta Magistri Jacobi Aytoun et sue spouse quarterie ville et terrarum de ouir
de K 20" Maij 1600.
Inquisitio Joannis Stevinsone terrarum de Stevinsones baith, 25" Junij 1608.
2° februari 1609.

Gift of Pensioun To Sir Robert Stewart of j° viij" xviijt viij’, 12" August 1608.

Tak of the teindscheaves of the paroch kirk of waster haillis To James loullis of
Collingtoun for xix zeiris, It May 1604.

Carta confirmationis Domini patricij halket de petfirrane terrarum de eister gellettis.
1° Decembris 1609.
jo Jacobi Bosuell decime sex
per eandem Inqui

\gorne Wester.

Preceptum sasine super eiusdem Inquisitione

© partis terrarum de Weltoun, 20 Junij 1601,
tionem. 10° Septembris 1608.
Apprile 1609.
Carta vonfirmationis Roberti Merser terrarum orientalis partis ville de le i
anv, 20° Maj 1605.

Carta Geor ij

Tak of the teindseheaves of Braidley

August 1605,

Tak of the greit custumes of Dumfermeling

Carta Willielhnj Durie terrarum de medowend, 1"° Junij 1605
1m Suni] 16

Inquis
Pri
Exeheit of Alesone Edmonstonn To Mt Patrik Edmonstoun. +"

piuin sasine +

janderum

e de Wingl: . 1" Janmarij 1
To Sir Robert halket of Pitfirrane. I

To James Kingorne. 20 June L605.

Carta Willielmj Durie terrarum de Newlane 7
hird de duabus nonis partibus terrarum de Arlarie. 3 Novem

Inquisitio heuric
bris 1604,

Carta Roberti Merser quarte partis terraram de Randellis 20" Maij 1605,
ine henriei hird de dictis Duobus nonis partibus terraruin de Arlarie

Preceptum
14° Maij 1605.

Carta Alexandr) Orrok terrarum de har!

Gift of Wedowsehip To Bessie Dewar. 16" Apryle 1608,

Carta Dominj Jacobj Erskene Terrarum de Blairnbotheis, 13% Junij 1605,
vtonne terrarum de Kinglassie, oa Julij 1605,

chot. 1" Juni 1605.

Magistri Dauidis
Danidis Crystie de quibnsdam terris de stentoun, 1° Augusti 1605.
callit peticommiounes to Robert ged. 1%

k of the teind schawes of certane akeris
Mairch 1609.
Inquisitio Robert] Ged Molendinj de geddis milne. 25

% Junij 1608,


--- Dunfermline_page565.png ---
ET ALIENATIONUM. 503

Preeeptum sasine eiusdem, 2#° Maij 1609. fol
ft of Widowsehipp to Bessie Stewart. 7 June 1609,

236.

rta Richardj dobie terrarum de stanichill, 30% Septembris 1608.
Carta Jacobj finlaw terrarum de Balehri

ie, 5° Angusti 1608,

Carta Dominj Thome Hammiltown 8 partis eum x
Xvi ct Xxxij aque passagij super aqua de forth. 5° Augusti 1609.

Carta Pat sone de quibusdam terris de Muirhall, 24° Augusti 1609.

Carta Alexandr) orrok tertie partis de Orrok. 12™ Augusti 16
0 August 1609,
illis, 10™ Julij 1608.

Tak of the teindsehawes of Natoune to sir Jhone Prestoune of Walayfeild. 21°
September 1609.

Presentatioune Mt Johne Dykis minister to ye kirk of Newbirne. 28" Januar 1606.
a Richardj et Robert} Dobicis terrarum de staniehill, S* august} 1609.
andersone ti

ij parte ville de amuirchall et

(iift of eseheit of george martene To Alext Orrok.

Carta Alex fermeloduni eomitis terraram de lym

rum de auld

metoune, 20" Januarij 1607,
jandis. 1° augusti 1609.
Inquisitio georgij martene terrarum de Orvok. 15% Julij 1609.
Preceptum sasine eiusdem. 1 August} 1609.

Carta thome stewinsone terrarum de New

‘Tak of teind sehawes of caskicberian of ye landis of easkicberian. 1° Merehe 160.
Tnqnisitio rob rum de Inueresk. 13” Aprilis 1603.
Januarij 1604,
stie terrarmn ville de stentoune. 17° Sulij 1605
htoun of ye tcindsehawes of ye Landis of Chinie. 10 October 1608.
Inquisitio Johannis hill terrarum de hill. 18" Januarij 1604.
Preceptum sasine eiusdem., 22" Januarij 1607.
Inquisitio Jacob} Ox ‘arum de Bennothie. 18" Junij 1603.
usdem. 1° Aprilis 1603.
Robert} Peirsone de terris de nether Beith. 25% Januarij 1606.
Preeeptum sasine einsdem., 20° febrnarij 1606.
Tak of teindsehawes of elie to marione erichtoune. 10 October 1608,
{nquisitio elizabethe margarete et Joanne Dundass veto acrarwm de sehirriffhall,
12"° August) 1609.
Preceptum sasine earundem. 20° Deeembris 1609.
Gift of escheit of Jolme and Dauid Melvillis to Nieolas Ehner. 22 feb: 1610.
Carta

‘Ss quarumdem tet

Preceptum sasine einsdem, 2"

Preceptum sasine Johannis e

Tak marione ¢

je terr

ronfirmationis domine aguetis Keir terrarum de Inveresk. 1"° Martij 1610.
Carta Willielmj Murray terrarum de Stanehous moyhous et Orrok, 4° feb: 1610,


--- Dunfermline_page566.png ---
504 REGISTRA ALIENATIONUM.

Carta Robert} Orrok duarum partium de Orrok. 4° februarij 1610. fol, 280.
Carta Jacob! Barroune de Petyocher. 10" Aprilis 1610.

Inquisitio capitane) Allanj Cowtes. 31° Januarij 1610.

Preceptum sasine cinsdem. 16" februarij 1610.

‘orgij Seytoune de Parbroth terrarum de gellettis, 31" Julij 1610.
Inquisitio georgij toures de Inverleyth de lathalmound. 13 Maij 1609.
Preeeptum ne eiusdem. 2" Deeembris 1609,

Carta Joamnis syme terrarum de ower lessoddic, 9° Maij 1610.

Inquistio Jacobj forrester de garden terrarum de southteild.
Preeeptum sasine eiusdem, 22" Maij 1610.

Carta Joannis Pontoune de e

Carta

11™ Martij 1609.

fia terrarum de Muirhall, 24" Maij 1610.
Inquisitio Willielmj Syme, 25% Junij 160s.
Preeeptum

ne elusdem inquisition

[imperfecta]
Tacohj raith et

Carta magisty) fouller terrarum de milhillis, 20° Maiy 1610.
Tak to M' James Raith and his spous of ye teind: is of Mulhill, 20% May 1610.
Inquisitio Elizabethe Barroune de pityocher,  7™ August 1610,

Preceptum sasine eiusdem. 6! Septembris 1610.

Inquisitio Issobelle Barromne tu
Preeeptum sa

um de Petyoeher. 7% August) 1610.

sine eiusdem, 6" Septembris 1610,

Inquisitio Patricij Murray terraram de Perdeweis. 16% Junij 1610.

Preceptun sasine eiusdem. 1" August) 1610.

Inquisitio Jacohj Murray Molendinj de Colyerraw. 16" Junij 1610.

Preceptum sasine eiusdem. 1° August} 1610,

Inquisitio Willielmj Smith terrarum de Northfoyd. 28" Aprilis 1610.
Preceptum sasine eiusdem. 17™° Decembris 1610.
Ratificatioune of ye porterschipof Duntermeling tosir Robert Melhwell. 12" Nov: L610,
Carta confirmationis Margarete Seott terraruin de abbotishall.
Carta Thome Michell oetaue partis terrarum de Muirtoune.

28" febrnarij
Inquisitio Wilbelmj sehaw de Lathangyie. 24 Nouembris 1610.
Preceptum sasine eiusdem, 28" februarij 1611.

Carta Laurentij adiesone terrarum de Pennielandis.  Limpenfecte.}

fol, S14.

FINIS.


--- Dunfermline_page567.png ---
INDEX

Abererumbin, (Abirerumby,) David, 375.

—— R. de, 107.

Thom an

Aberdonensis, (de Aberdon,) episeopus, Ed-
wardus, 8, 24.

episcopus, M.

episcopus, Wilelmus, 375.
Abernethin, (Abimethin,) Henricus de, 83.
140,
Laurentius de, 45.
Abirbrothwie,(Abyrbrothwie,) abbas de, Ber-
nardus, 229, 232, 233.
abbas de, G., 128.
—— abbas de, Henricus, 66; (H.) 85.
abbas de, R., 136,
—— abbas de, Willelmus,

Abirdouer, Salon capellanus de, 96.
Abraham, clerieus, 89.

—— dominus, legum professor, 121.
—— Magister, 57, 58, 418.

—— (parvus,) 419.

A,, eapellanus, 57, 418.
Achinlek, Willelmus de, 5

A., comitissa,

2

Acuneins, subdiaconus, 166.

Ada, comiti

a, Norhumbrie, mater regis, 88.

NOMINUM.

38

Adam, eapellanus episcopi,

—— filius Patricij de Crebarrin, 102, 103.
—— filius Simonis, 267.

— filius Thome, 39.

—— frater Radulphi Cowe, 267.

serviens abbatis, 116.

Adamesoun, Catherina, sponsa Domini Ro-
berti Melvill, +83.

Adami, D. filius

— Duncanus

Johannes filius, 224.

—— Petrus filius, 216.

A,, dapifer regis, 31.

, 565; (Aigulfus, Aiulfus,) 56,

A., decanus,
5ST, 418.

Ade, Cristinus filius, 220.

Adesoun, Joannes, +78, 481

— Laurencius, filius Joannis, +81, 504.

Admulti, Dauid de, 355.

éKdelredus, (Ethelredus,) eid. Ethelredus.

Edgarus, vid. Edgarus.

‘Elricus, Magister, (cementarins,) 21, 30,
RL

A,, filius Eduersi, 192.

Agneta, sponsa Thome Thar’, 371.

Aissoun, Joannes, 489.

Alane, Willelmus, 474.


--- Dunfermline_page568.png ---
506 INDEX NOMIN

Alani, Walterus filius, 8, 9, 23, 24, 27; (dapi-
fer) 81, 33-37 ; (Seneseallus) 43, 44, 93.

Alanus, capellanus, 110, 127.

— filius dapiferi, 39.

—— filius Symonis, 90, 94.

liostiarius, 43.

seneseallus, 214,

—— serviens abbatis, 116.
Albanie, Murdaens dux, eomes de fyi et

menteth, 378.
Albinus, eapellanus, 89.
Albus, Dauid, (de hadingtun,) 92.
—— Vnyet, (Vniet,) £, 12, 13.
Aldanus cocus, 58.
Aldevambis, R. de, 107.
Aldineraw, James of, 358.
Aldri, Willelmus de,
Alexander capellanus episeopi, 58-60, 2.

filius Gospatricij, 94.

—— filius Johannis Thane, 324.

— filins W., filii Thoraldi, 34, 94.

— niles, 86.

Papa 1IL.,151,153, 154, 156, 161, 187,

188, 41

Papa 1V., 421.

— 1, Rex, 3, 5, 8, 19, 28, 30, 40, 42, 46,
48, 176, 821, 322

—— IL, Rex, 40, 43-45, 48, 54, 3

—— IIL, Rex, 46, 49-54, 108, 109, 125,
148, 154, 157, 176, 217, 285.

—— senescallus Seocie, 49, 50, 198, 238,

—— Thomas, 478, 491, 500.

Alfwynus, 11.

Alicia, filia Johannis, filii Ranulphi, 115, 116,

Allan, W

Alli
SH,

—— Dauid, de Strathoquhy, 87.

illelmus, 489
(Allerdes,) Alexander, de Seazoehy.

M.

Allirdas, Margreta, sponsa Andree Boswell,
471.

Alun, 25.
Alwynns, filivs Arkil, 4, 7, 8, T4, 16, 1S.
23,

Alys, soror Galfridi epi
Anandia, Dauid de, 26:
Andirsone, (Andersone,) Johannes, 371.
a, 472.

scopi, 80,

—— Ma
Matheus, 503,

Andr s regis, #2; 136, 14s.
—— episcopus, 18, 23.

eleriey

—— frater episcopi, 59, 60, 92.

Anegus, comes de, 22.

comes de, Gillebertns, 24.

comes de, M.,

— b., deeauns de, 133.

Araldus comes, 417.

Argadie, Colinns comes, 480.

xldus senescallus, 280.

Ankil, (Arebil,) Alwynns filius, 4, 7,8, 14.
16, 18, 22, 23.

Arnaldi, Robertus filius, 114.

Arnoth’, Henrieus de, 301.

Johannes de, 301, 303.

Michael de, 22.

Arois, Jobaunes, (archidiacouus Glaszuen-
sis,) 314, 316, 824, 329.

Arrane, Lord, 456.

Aseer, Alanus, 94.

Astinus, serviens abbatis, 116, 120, 140,

Atholie, (de Atholia,) comes Henrieus, 85.

comes, M., 33, 84; Maleolmus, 85.

ST.
—— comes, Thomas de Gulwethia, s6,
, Isabella, 84.
—— couiitissa, Margareta, 86.

— comili


--- Dunfermline_page569.png ---
INDEX

Atholie, Gillemur seucseallus, 86.

Malisius frater comitis, 86.
Atun, Danid de, 83, 484, 499.
Magister Thomas de,
Aubeni, W
Auchtmowthye, (Auchmowthye,) Al
477, 480.

— Dauid de est Ferny, 399.
—— Florentinus, filius Dauidis, 399, 492.
John, 488.

Audri, Willehuus de, 23.

Avenel, Geruasi

lelmus de, 8.

Robertus, 7, 8, 22
Tius,) 39,

Robertus, persona de Durimanin, 94,
Willelmus, 96.

Aula, Jacobus de, 240.

Austyn,
Aytonia, Matheus de, 2

26, 365 (justicia-

ndreas, pri

Ayton, Jacobus
Robertus, 446, 477, #86, £58.

lard, (Baalard,) Petrus, eleriens episeopi,
66. 69,

Baillole, (Baillol,) Heuriens de, camerarius

Scocie, +2.

— Ingelramus, 96,

Se

—— Willielmus de, 101,
Baily, W., 239.
Bakster. Adam, 359.
Balbrenin, Johannes de, 118, 116, 140,

Baleancolle, (Balcancole, Baleanquell, Bal-

canwell,) Catherina, +83,

Georgins, 168, 497.
— Henriens, 482, 491.
— Isobella, 48:

Margareta, #83.

NOMINUM.

507

Baleancolle, Thomas de, 3¢

Walterus de, clerieus Sancti Andree,

297.

Baleasky, Thomas de, 234.
Balerestin, Johannes de, 267.
Balfour, David, de Balledmonth,
Jacobus, 474, 476.

— Johannes, de Dovin, 377.
Balhathy, Ruthricus de, 148.
Balinferth, TH
Robertus, 2:

de, 222.
2

Sector de, 222.

Ballic, Alexander, 383.

Ballinbreth, R. de, 229,

Balliolus, 221.

Balmacmol, Rogerus de, 98.

Balmyle, Nicholaus de, 241.

Balram, Nicholaus de, 96.

Balweri, (Balwery,) Ricardus de, miles, 92.
118, 139, 140, 145, 216, #

Banarman, Jolin, 358.

Baneburg’, dominus Willems de, eanonicus
Sancti Andree, 121.

Bannawis, Henricus, 385, 886.

Barear, Christiana, spousa Joannis Burgan,
493.

Barone, (Barroun, Barroune,) Elizabetha.
504.

— Isabella, 504,

Jacobus, 504.
Joannes, de Spittalfield, 489.

—— Margareta, spousa Patrieii, 370.

Patricius, de Edinburgh, 870.

Bartane, Joneta, 4
Bartolomeus, Magister, 57, 418.
Barynton, Willelmus de, 267.

Beel, Henricus, 122.

Willelmus, canonicus Glasguensis, 2



--- Dunfermline_page570.png ---
508 INDEX NOMINUM.

Beeth, Edmundus de, 108.

Bel, Normallius, (Normannus,) 219.

Bell, Dauid, notarius publicus, 311.

Bell, Johannes, 305, 306,

Belle, Normannus, 97.

Benaly, Johannes de, prior de Pluscardyn.
333, 337, 339.

—— Walterus de, 235.

Benauchin, Nicholaus de, 86.

Benedictns, Papa, 280.

Benigwirthe, 92.

Benis, Agnes, spousa Dauidis Mitchell,
478.

Benne, Magister Jacobus, archydiaconus
Sancti Andree, 242.

Bennet, Thomas, 469, 458.

Bereley, (Berelay, Berkelai,) dominus Dauid
de, 237-239; (de Culerny,) 346; (de
Towch,) 877.

Robertus de, 341, 34.

Walterus de, 30,31, 33, 35, 30, eame-

regis, 83.

fT

Bernardi, Areumbaldus filins, 110.
Thomas filius, 216.

Bernardus, filins Briani, 31, 38.

—— lilius Patricii, 9 +.

Bernham, Danid de, 64.

Bertane, Jacobus, £90.

Bertram, Elyzabeth, spousa Walteri, 373.

Wate, 373.

Berwich, Walterus, cleriens de, 75.

Betheref, Thomas de, 214; (filins Alani de
Betherf,) 215.

Betoun, (Betone, Beton, Betoune,) Arehi-
haldus, 379, 384; (de Capildra,) 386,
388.

— Johannes, filius Archibaldi de Capildra,
BOG, BIS, LET. ATH.

Betonn, Joncta, sponsa Jacobi Crechtoun de
Cranstonriddall, 391.

—— Magister Jacobus, de Creich, 480.

WwW. u.

Bidon, Waltcrus de, cancellarins, 3

Bik’, Thomas, 97, 110,

Bilter, Robertus de, 90.

Biskel’, Willelmus de, 90.

Blacader, (Blaikeader, Blakeader,) Joneta,
ISL.

Normanns, +84.

jus, 472, 490.

Blak, Willelmus, £69, 488.

Blakloche, dominus Willelmus, 372.

lar, (Blair, Blare,) Ada de, 212.

Alesander de, 83, 213.

— Dauid de, 330, 867, 873.

—— Georgius, filius Dauidis, 373; (de
Pethy,) 392.

— Willelmus de

2, 314

Blatho, Petrus, 377.

Blundus, Johannes, #8, 50.

—— Patri

senescallus de Fif,)

Boilest’, Radulphus de,

Bolinus, anus, 86.

Bonare, Margareta, domina de Raith. 41.

Laurencius, 479.

lehnus, 470, 488.

Bordy, Thomas de, 368, 369.

Boscho, (Bosco.) dominus Galfridus de
D8.

dominus W. de, archidiaconus Laodonic
136.

Radulphus de, 117, 120.

— Thomas de, 44.

—— W., 69, 96, 106.

Willelmus de, cancellavius regis, 32:

(clerieus reg!


--- Dunfermline_page571.png ---
INDEX NOMINUM. 50g

Boswell, (Bosuell, Bossucll,) Agnes, spousa
Thome Peirsoun, 181.

—— Andreas, 400, 471.

—— Archibaldus, 393.

—— Christina, 486,

(de Glasmonthe,) £66,
IGS, 475, 482, 485, 489, £94,

—— Ewidia, +74.

Georgius, 400, £66, 44.
—— Hel xii, 400.
—— Jacobus, 470, 471, 502.

—— Danid, 3:

a, xponsa Ged

Johannes, in Stentoun, 466, 471, £75.
488, 491,

—— Margreta sponsa Andree, +00.

Patricius, 481,

—— Willehuus, 497.

Bothnel, (Bothyell, Bothwell.) Alexander
son of John of, 341.

Dauid, 381.

domitius Pat a

Johannes, 288, 290, 305, 306, 31s,
DAL, 342, B44,

—— Hicardns, 311, :

clus de, é

2; (Abbas de Dun-
fermlyn,) 313.

Boulthone, Willeluus domiuus de,

Boy, Ale:

Boyd, Jou
471

Boyis, Alexander de, 305, 306.

ander, 240.

. sponsa Jacobi Boswell, 470,

Danid de, viearius de Cless, 318.

—— Henricus de, 306,

— Wil
lyn, 29.
339, 353.

Boyuil, Willelmns, clericus Glasguensis, 2

303, 806, 325,

Imus de, monachus de Dunferm-
97, 299, 800, 309, 334, 338,

Bra, Thomas de, 288,

Brae, Henrieus de, §

Joncta, sponsa Willelmi Robertsone, 470,

Brade, Radultus de, eleriens, 86, 117, 120.
Thomas de, 120,

Brechinensis, (de Brechin, Breichin, Brey-

hyne,) abbas, Leod, 8.

opus Pawieins, 269-271.

—— episeopus, Radulphus, 124.

cpiseopus, T., 85.

Breyheyne, Willelmns de, miles, 115.
Bret, (Brit,) Hugo, 10, 107.

Briani, Bernardns filius, 31, 38.
Bridi, a
Brinstour, Dominus de, 48 #.

Brog, Robertus, subprior, 300.

Brown, (Brone, Broun, Browne, Brun,
Prwne,) Adamus, 470, 489.

—— Catherina, sponsa Alexandri Maister-
toun, 483.

— Danid, de Fynmounthe, 484, 493, 4%

—— Edwardus, 389, 49

—— Elizabetha, sponsa Joannis Burgan, 193.

—— Isobella, sponsa Georgii Fleming, +68.

—— Johannes, #67-469,472, 473, 488-190,
402.

Patricius, 479.

Sancti Andre
—— Willehnus, 86, 107, 108 ; (de Sanely
200; (de Coustone.) 346, 855, 476

Brnus, (Brus, Bruce.) Andreas, #79.

— Thomas, eler

Domina Maria de, 250.

wardus de, comes de Can
$2, 495-497, 500, 501,
Georgius, #95, 4)

Robertus de, 10, 17, 243 (comes de
Carryk,) 217, 483-485, 496, 500,

Brwnhill, Adam de, 289,

Buchannane, Joannes, 499.

Buchard, Petrus, canonieus, 62

Buily, dominus Thomas.


--- Dunfermline_page572.png ---
510 {INDEX NOMINUM.

Banch, Johannes, 297.
Bure, clerieus de, Radulphus, 4.

monachus de, Alexander, 94.
Burgane, (Burgan,) Elizabetha, 489.
Jacobus, 493.

Joamnes, 493, 495.

—— Thomas, 403.
Burgeis, Robertus, 13.
Burg’, Robertus, 4.

Burguillan, Robertus, 10.

Borne, Margareta, sponsa Henrici Thomsone,
veo

Burrell, dominus Thomas, 394, 486.

Budler, Thomas, de Ramgally. 877.

Buuenel, Petrus

Ray, Gylys, 148.

rton’, Johannes de,

eth, Willelmus d

. 867.

vset, Texate, Besetl,) Christiana

264.
Maleolmus, #3.

—— Petrus, 86,
—— Walterus, 43, +4
—— Willelums, +8, 5:

Cairny, Willehnus, 495.
Caldor, Johannes de, 367.

thanus de, dominns Willelmus, 366.

Caledoure,

Cambell, Johannes, filius domini Nigelli
Cambii, Johaunes, 236.
Cambow, dominus W. de, 409.

Cambrun, A us, 220,

Cambrun, Eugenius, filins Alwini.

Robertus, de Balgligernanh, miles, 145.

Robertus, de Siphalan, 128, 130.

Cambuskenctht, (Cambuskineth,) abbas de.
Alexander, 382,

abbas de, Dauid, 875.

P., 70.

abbas de, Rieardus, 49, 50.

Cambusnathane, Alanus de, 368, 369.

— abbas de,

Camera, Adam de, 267,
Alanus de, 5:
—— Herhertus di

—— Thomas de, 335.

Campania, Radulphus de, 45.

Candide case, dominus Henrieus eleetus, 117.
120,

Capella, Alexander de, 92.

Capet, Seetor de, 222.

Capeth, Robertus de, 222.

Caramund, Willelinus de, clerieus,

Cardenn, Laird of, 433; (dominu:
487.

Carkettill, Adam, 890.

Elizabeth, sponsa Adam, 390.

Carlele, dominus Johannes, 314.

Carmiehell, Rebecca, spousa Roberti Merser.
501,

Carnes, Gulielmus, 494.

Carpentarius, Robertns, 113,

Carrich, comes de, Robertus.

Nigellus de, 2

Carwod, Margrat, 490.
Case, (Cass,) Johannes, #65. 479.
Cassi, uxor Rogeri, 11.

Castro terri, Magister Petrus de, 7

Catenes, vid. Katen

Chalmer, Catherina, sponsa Thome Smyt.
471.


--- Dunfermline_page573.png ---
INDEX NOMINUM. ait

Chamund, W. de, 91,

Chepman, Johannes, balliuus, 305, 806.
Chimpethin, (Chimbethin,) Gilleeolm mae,
Christesoun, Alexander, 482.

Christie, (Crystie,) Danid, 502.

Guillelmus 469,

—— Henriens, 4
Joann 1,

atricius, 469, 489, (in Hoill,) 489.
—— Willelmus, 488.

Cissor, Johannes, 236,
Clacmanayn, Willelmus de, 236.

Clappam, (Clapehame,) Alanus de, 236.
Rieardus, canoniens Gla

Claypolle, Magister Symon de, 120.
Clemens, Papa IIL, 159, 160, 412.
Clenhill, Thomas de, miles, +8, ¢
Cler, Radulphus de, 30.

Clerk, Dauid, 475.

—— Magdalena, sponsa Edwardi Brace,

Cles, dominus Stephanus viearins de, 260.
—— Gilbertus de, 100, 108, 111, 140.
—— Thomas de, 99.

Cloni, Willelmus tilius Rogeri de,

Clyne, Willelmus, de Kildone,
Cocus, Herueus, 1.
Ricardus,

Coilyear, Andreas, #82

Cok, Alexander, 484.

—— Georgins, nota B85, BS6.

Coktum, (Cokburne,) Alexander, in Tempil-
hill, 486.

domina Mariota, sponsa Thome Ottir-

burne, 495.
Cokburn, John of, of ‘Torry, 285.
SAS.

330, 340,

Colbain, Mereuin, filius, 7.

cholaus de, 2.

Coldingham, N

prior de, #21.

—— prior de, dominus Michael, 2

—— prior de, G,, 123, 13

— prior de, H., 9

—— prior de, Niniane, 875.

prior de 8., 55.
Coleuille, (Colvill, Coluile, Colville.) Alex-
ander, 476.

—— Girisilis, sponsa Joannis Prestoun. 502.

—— Joannes, 4%

‘ara, spousa Jacobi prymrois, #98.
Colini, Gilbertus, fii
Willem
Colins, Maurici

Colme, Robertas, de
Co
Congi, Malbrida mac,

ertun, Ricardus filin:

Congiltoune, George of,
Henry of, 358.
Constantinns, comes, +,

—— filins Philippi, 116,

ter Neis,
Corbet, (Corbeth,) Nicholaus, 41
Roberts, 4 16.

Walters, 31.
Corfuit, Andreas, 501.

Cornal, Willelmus de, 236.

Cornefutt, Alexander, #
Corneth, Milo, 91.
Correbrige, Alexander de, #9, 50.
Cospatricius, cid. Gospatricins.

Coupar, (Cowper, Coopar,) Alexander, 352.
—— Danid, aldirman, 361.
—- James, 476.

— Johannes, 398.


--- Dunfermline_page574.png ---
512 INDEX NOMINUM.

Cousing, (Cusigne.) Johne, 502.
Robertus, $77. +
Cousland, Randulphus de, 103,

Couttis, (Cowtes, Cutis, Coutis,) Alanus,
396, 899, 400, 444, 456, 468-470, 473,
475, 479, 486, 487, 489, 490, 491, 500,
304,

5

—— Enuphamia, 481, 485.

—— Helena, sponsa Rieardi Prestoun, 47:
Joannes, filius Alani, 479, 403.

Coventry, Dauid, 500,
Cowe, (Cowie,) Adam, frater Radulphi, 267.

Radulphus, 267.
Thomas, +98.

Coxwele, Robertus, 314.

Crafurd, (Craufurd, Crawford.) Edwardus,
, 284.

—— comes de, +83.

notarins,

R. de, (eapellanus,) 107.

Crafurdic, Alexander, dominus, 38

Crag. (Craig,) Thomas, seeretarius, 386, 485.

Cragamund Willelmus, filius Symonis, de,
219,

parry, Rieardus de,

, Magota de, 216.

nilor, Duneanus
—— Henrieus de, 114.

—— Laird of, 430,

— Willelmus filius Henrici de, 114.
ie, Laird of, 433.

Crembeth, (Crambeeth, Crambyth,Crambeet.)

Duncanus de, 118, 213, 216.
—— Giibert jus Rotheri de, 108, 111.
Patrieius de, 148.

Willelmus de, 148.
Cramund, Laurentins de, 220,

Thomas de, 219.

Cranistun, Thomas de, 113.

Cranstone, dominus Willelmus de, de Conshy
327, 348.

Joannes, in Monktounhall, 465, 477.

7),

Cras, Ricardus le, 99.
Crassi, Isabella sponsa Johiannis, 118.
Johannes filius Ricardi, 113.

— Rieardus filius Rieardi, 112.

Crassus, Rieardus, 98.

Crawen, Guliclmns, 494.

Crebarrin, Arcombaldus de, 103.

—— Adamus filius Patrieii de, 102, 103,
105, 106, 112.

Johannes de, 103-105, 112.

——- Petrus frater Arcombaldi de, 103.

Creiclitun, (Crichton,) Abraham, officialis
Andree, 397, 468.

—— Alanus persona de, 68.

—— Danid, 465, 476.

dominus Willelmus de, 287, 288, 312-
BIS, 824, 327, 829, 872; (de Dryden.)
473.

—— Edwardns de, 288, 290.

Georgius, 468.

—— Jacobus, de Cranstoneriddale, 380, 386,
391,

Johannes de, de Burnistoune, 356,
357, 468.

—— Joneta, sponsa Johannis Cwmyng de
Cultirmakeultie, 888, 398.

Mariona, 503.

— Patricins, de Sandfurde, 377.

Patr filius Danidis de Cranstoun-
riddell, 377, 378, 465.

—— Robertus, 372, 501.

Cribletheued, Niebolaus, 103.

Crispus, Willielmus, 104.



--- Dunfermline_page575.png ---
Cristine, Willelmus filius, 114.
Cristinus, clerieus, 126, 127.
filius Ade,
Cropermel’, Gilberts
Cryne, Willelmus, de Abirdene, 353.
Cul de, 148.
Culenros, abbas de, dominus H. 102, (Hu
126,
Culenro
Culnedi,

ny, Kes

monachi de, 168.
2

sector de, 2

Culross, Alexander commendatarius de. #84,
493

Cumberlaches, (Cumerlaches,
Cumelahe,) 17, 29, 87, 41,

Cumin, (Cumyn, Cwmyn:

Cumelache.
le
) Alexander, comes

de Buchan, Justiciarius Scocic, 9-51
280,

— Johannes, de Cultirmakeultic, 388, 398,
W, 473.

—— Ricardus de, 33, 38.

Dauid, 45,

—— Walterns, +3; (eomes de Menteth,) 43,
49-51,

—— Willelmus, de Kylbrid, 53.

—— Willelmus, (eomes de Buchan, Justicia-

rins Seocie,) 31, 32,
Cuncueth, Duncans, persona de, #5.
Cunnand, Thomas, 481.

Cunnit

gham, (Cunninghame, Cwnyngham

Catherina, sponsa Willelmi Bonaylay, +70.
—- Jacobus, de Glengarnock, 50),

Joumes, 471.

Robertus, in Gask, 495.
Cupre, (Capro,) abbas de, 64.
abbas de, R., 85.

—— abbas de, W., 187.
— 30.
— prior de, W , 137

Thomas de, 3+:

30,

Johannes ¢

Bad.

DEX NOMINUM.

Currour, Dauid, 476.

—— Johannes, 297.

—— Joneta, 493.

Iehnus, 313, 314.
Cuthhbertus, 101.

D., abbas de, D., 402.
Dauid, f
frater Maleolmi eomitis, 83.

us Jacobi comitis Aranie, 346.

—— frater Regis, 30, 35, 90.

— ho:

jarius, 11,

Rex. 8, 5, 8-28,
#6, 48, 49, 74, 91,
157, 178, 176, 192,
310, 321, 322.

Dauidsone, Elizabetha, sponsa Jacobi Mou-
bray, 483.

Joannes, 477, 481, #85.

—— Robertus, 476.

Dauling, (Dawling,) Jacobus, 474, 490.

Robertns, 47-4, 490,

30, 33, Bb, $042,
24, 186, 154, 155,

Dawsone, (Dansoun,) Georgius, 474, #89.

—— Joneta, +90.

Dempstartone, Henricus de, 346, 355.

Denone, Andreas, dominus de Kildone, 3.

Denynstoun, Elizabetha, sponsa

bray, 476.
—— Margrat, sponsa Roberti Fraser, 476.
Dereongal, abbas de, 173.

Dereth, Symon dictus, 150.

— Thomas, de Kynglassy, 1
Dernlce, dominus Jobannes, 348.

Dewar, Bessie, 502.

—— Danil, 497.
Jacobus, 469, 47
oannes, 44.

47.5, 483, 487-489,

Marioria, sponsa Henrici peirsoun, 478.


--- Dunfermline_page576.png ---
S14 INDEX NOMINUM.

Dewar, Nicolaus, #72, 489.
2

Petrus, 4
—— Willelmus. 481.
D,, filins Adami, 111,
Dik, Elizabetha, 481.
Dingvaille, (Ding
de, 353, 854,
~ Thomas de, subdeeanus Rossensi
354; (of Kildun,) 374, 383.
— Willelmus, 374.

Dionisins cleriens, G1

ile, Dingwell,) Johames

Dispenser, Alums de, 262.

Dissington, (Di
hannes de, de Ardrosse, 346.

—— Martins, 478, #79, 486, LOT.

W. de, 239; (Willelmus,) 472, #86,

Dobie, Richardus, 496, 503.

ingtonn, Disehintone,) Jo-

Robertus, 4

Dodde, Wiles, de Inuirkethin, 116
Doler, Mathens de, 2

Donyn, Christinus de,
— Johannes de, viearius de Perth, 297
Dory, (Douery, Doure,) Andreas, 355.
—~ Malisins de, 239.

1

Doway, Willelnms de, 72.

rdus de, 67.

Dowgall, Thomas, 9.

Dowlill, dominus de,
Drieburg, abbas de, #21.
abbas de, HL, 182, 183.

Droeh, Symon de, 10

Dryisdaill, Agnes, 486,

—— Alexander, +79.

—— Thomas, 416,

Dudingstoun, Helena, sponsa Joanuis Lundy.
47a,

Duffons, dominus Johannes de, 267.

Dufilas, (Duglas, Dwglas, Douglas,) Arehi-
haldus de, 270, 271.

—— dominus Andreas de, 97.

—— dominus Willelmus de, 97, 190, 269-

71, 816.

— Henricus de, de Lochlevin, 346, 482.

232 BSS, 406, 4

—— Joneta, sponsa Willelmi Trombill, 471.

503,

—— Jacobus de, 2:

—— Hobertus, iu Inveresk, 465.
h, (Duttach,)
erdos, 74.

nius filins, 75.

—— sa

Dulmerloch, Seetor de,
Dumberauch, Galfridus de, 226.
Dunbar, A. de, 55.

——- domina Joneta de, 350,

—~ dominus Georgius de, 2

—— Gawinus, arehidiaconus de Saneto Anu-

drea, 375, 876.

ricius comes de, 13,

—~— Robertus, de Durris,

Dunblunensis, (de Dimblain,) ¢
raham, 66, 68; (A.) 1
—— episeopns, Clemens,

opus Ab-

— episcopus, Laurentius, 24.

—— cpiseopus, 8, 85.

— cpiseopns, Willelmus, 265, 266,
Dunbretan, Magister Rieardus de, 102.
Daneane, Danid, 383,

Duneani comitis, Malcolmus filius, 31.
Duneansone, Johannes, 342, 344,
Duneanus, cleriens regis, 96.

—— comes, 7-11, 14, 1

7, 30, 33.

3h, 865 (justiciarius,) 39, 55, 85. 89. 93.
Ob, AIT.

— filius Ad’, 83, 96, 102.

—— filius Ranulphi de ffyf, 233.

frater Maleolmi comitis, 83.



--- Dunfermline_page577.png ---
INDEX NOMINUM. OS

Duneanus, heres Michaelis Seoti, +5.

medicus, 6+.
Duncanus, (Duneat.) Rex, 3, 5, 19, 28, 30,
40, 42, 46, 48, 321, 3:
Dundas, dominus de, 477, #91, #96.
—— Elizabetha, 503.
—— Georgins de, 382.
—— Helias de, 91, 9
262.

—— Joanna, 503.

—J.de,

—— Margareta,
Nichola, #
Dundemor, Hi
Dunfermelyn, abbas de,
abbas de, Adam, :

rieus de, #8. 54,

412,
—— abbas de, Andre:
J3, 295, 301-304.

—— abbas de, Erehenbaldus, (Erk? “Erele-
baldus, Archombaldus,) 36, 90, 153, 156,
173.

— abbas de, G., 8.

abbas de, Galfridus, 15

—— abbasde, Georgin
mendatarius,) 387, 391-396, 3

84,3865 (come
98-400.

jeus, 354

—— abbas de, Hugo, 14
abbas de, J., 264.
—— abbas de, Jacobus, 361, 374.
BOT. ADA, 421.
—— abbas de, Johannes,
— abbas de, N., 405.
—— abbas de, P., 123, 193.

—— abbas de, Patricius, 116, 161, 4
—— abbas de, Radulphus, 145, 216, 217,

210, #22
abl

le, Rigardus, 304-310, 314-316.

323, B24, 327-333,
347, 348, 350, 353,

369.

Dunfermelyn, abbas de, Robertus, 148, 195.
239, 241, 248, 397; (Re) 404 405,
415.

abbas de, Symon, 97, 21

—— abbas de, W., 86, 136, 140,

—— abbas de, Willelmus, 62, 126, 135,
249,

abbas ecelesie Christi de, A., 190,

—— abbas ecelesie Cliisti wy LT.
abbas Sancte Trinitatis de, Giffridus.
418,

apellanus de, Duncanus, 120.

apellanus de, Willelmus, 120.

comes de, Alexander, 498, 500,
— homo de, Constantinus, 220.
homo de, Johannes, 220.

—— janitor de, Alanus, 120.
—— monachus de, Adam, 97.
—— monachus de, Rieardus, 97, 102.

— prior monasterij de, Maleolmus, 22
—— Robertus de, 240; (R.) 46
de Dunkeld.)

Dunkeldensis, (Dunchelder

‘onus, Jocelinus, 59, 60.

acouus, Magister W..
eanonicus, Abraham, 74.

decanus, A, de prebenda.

decanns, Robertus, 199.

— episcopus,
episcopus, Cormaceus, +, 16.

—— cpiscopus, Galfridus, 79, 11s.

—— episcopus, Gilbertus, 76-78.
rius, 7-9, 11, 12, 15
57, 74, 93, B75, 3S,

— episcopus, Gi
24, 26; (G)
418.

—— episcopus, Hugo, 78, 185, 136.


--- Dunfermline_page578.png ---
5G INDEX NOMINUM.

Dunkeldensis, episeopns, J., 34.

obus, 865.

episcopus,

episcopns, Johannes, 75, 85.

— episeopus, Rieardus, 74, 95, 199, 200,
+19,

—— cpiscopus, Willelmus, 232, 283, 404.

Dunmanin, persona de, Robertus Auencl, 94.

persona de, \Willelmus, 94.
Dunoun, Walterus de, 120,

Dory, (Dwrie, Durye, Durie,) Adamus, #
3,480, 484.

470,

—— Dauid, 475, 483. 487.

—— dominus de, 470, 476, 481, 492.

Georgius, 380.

—— Henricus, #67, 470, 478, 480, 181,
ESS, £89.
—— Jacobus, 476.

—— Janeta, 490.

Joannes, 186, 501,

Margareta, sponsa Florentini de Aucht-
niowthye, 399,

Petrus, 399, 456, 168, 483, 487-489.
. B98, B99, 4
400, 466, 472, 475.

—— Robertus. 3

—— Villelmus, 381,
489, £90, 502,
Duuoe’, Willelmns filins, 83.

Dykis, Mr. Joline, 503.

ancellarius, 9.

Keford, Magister Willelmus de, 227, 233.
Eeh », (Echlin,) Henricus, de Pitadro, 484
—— Willelmns, de Pettadro, 346,

Eda, uxor Elwini Renner, 25

come:

Exenham, W. de, 1
Edgarus, (Eadgarus, Edgarns,) Rex, 3, 5, 6.

17, 19, 28-30, 40-42, 47, 48, 154, 157,
173, 821, 322.

Edilblac, 226.

Edinburgh, (Edenbure, Edenburgh,) abbas
de, Alwynus, 8.

abbas de, Archibaldus, 348.

——- Alexander de, 70, 71.

—— fratres Saneti Leonardi de, 1

vicecomes de, Robertus, 26.

—— vieecomes de, Willelmus de Sancto

53.

Edmundiston, (Edmonston, Edmestoun, Ed-
miestoun,) Agnes, 500.

claro, 52,

Alesona, 502.

— Andreas, 496.

—— Archibaldus, 466; (de Wowmet,) 495.
Danid de, 284, 373 ; (rector de Fawlo,)
37-4, 500.

—— Georgius, 500,

Helena, 500.

—— Henricus de, 97, 110, 113, 114, 267
284, 287, BSS,

—— Joanna, 500,

Johannes, 467, 492, 500,

Lady, +91.

—— Mariota, 500.

Patricius, #77, 502.

Robertus, 500.

Eduersi, A. filius, 192.

Edwald, Sithane filius, 222.

Edwardus, cancellarius, 13.

Jacobus de,

apellanus, 13, 61.
constabularius, 11, 12, (4, 16.
—— lilius Siwardi, 4.

Rex, confessor, 142, 217.
Egok, Johannes filius, 148.
Elfinstona, homines de, 148.
Elistoun, (Elisoun,) Henricus, 478.


--- Dunfermline_page579.png ---
INDEX NOMINUM. 57

Elistoun, Jamis, 491.
Elmer, Nicolas, 503.
Elmeth, Symon, #01.

Elysabeth, sponsa Walteri Bertram, #
Emma, filia Gilberti de Smythetun, #4, 50,
109, 110,

is, Db

WilleImus, 94.

wile, (Argyll,) episeopus de, David,

56.

Ennerg’, (Ermingardis, Ermengarda,) Regina
Seocie, 95, 128, 124.

Errole, Willelmus comes de, dominus de

Lord,

Argath’, 382.
yne, (Erskin, Erskyn,) Jacobus, 502.

—— Jolm, 462.

271.
—— Thomas, dominus le, 3+,
Eskendy, (Eskendi,) Simon de, 52,
Ethelredus, (.Edelredus,) frater Regis,
19, 28, 80, 40, #2, 46, 48, 321,
Ethenbroc, Alexander de, 116.
Etholia, comes de, ed. Atholia,

—— Robertus de, 269.

Enerwieh, Robertus de, 60.
Eugenius, cancellarius, 2
— iilias Dafthach, 75.
Papa, 295, 300; (IV.,) 365.
ven, (Ewin,) mareseallus, 7, 8.

E

Faber, Thomas, 148.
Fairlie, Joannes, 494.
Fairny, Audreas, 382.
Farnly, Willelmus, 3
dc,) Alanus de, 98, 102,103,
105, 106, 112.

Dauid de, 103, 105, 112.

Pauside, Lard, 430.
Thomas, 488.
Fayrntoun, Johannes, 433.

Feldew, (Felden,) Johannes, notarius publi-

cus,

Ferendrach, (fferenderahi,) LH. de,

Malcolmus, filius Maleolmi de, 217,
218.

Fergus, James, 496.

Ferguson, Johannes, 367.

Fermeloduni, Alexander comes, 5

Ferteth, comes, 22, 24.

fenton, Johaunes de, 326, 484.

fleg, Patricius, 367.

flore, J. de, 409.

Hythkyl, Johannes de, 268,

Fiddes, Elizabetha, #95.

Fif, (Fyff,) comes de, Dominus Colbanus,
235.

comes de, Duneanus, 90, 235, 256, 261,

409.

comes de, Gillemiehel, 16.

comes de, Malcolmus, 32, 75, 83, 84,

96, 126, 127, 198, 235.

eomes de, Mordacus, 286.

comitissa de, Ela, 89.

—— decanus de, Michael, 137.

decanus de, Patricius, 92.

—— Duneanus, filius Ranulphi de, 233.
—— Justicia, de, 23.

— Patricius de, 367,

—— Thomas, filius Ranulphi de, 233.
—— vicecomes de, #4.

Findlay, (Finlaw,) Andreas, 500.

—— Jamis, 500, 503,

Joannes, in Stentoun, 494.

Fisiens, Hugo, 93.

Flandrensis, Michael filius Jordani, 26+.



--- Dunfermline_page580.png ---
518 INDEX NOMINUM.

Flandrensis, Thomas, 105.

Michael, 112.

Fleming, (le Flamang,) Georgius, 468, 488.

Johannes, 309, 330, 340.

—— Jordanus, 88.

—— Thomas, 309,

Willelmus, 220.

Flokker, Johannes, 216,

Florentinus, filius Dauidis Auchtmowthye,
B09.

Flokar, Michael, viearius de Kirkaldy, 306,
Foetli,(Foet,) dominus Walterus de, 117, 120.
—— Johannes de, 101.

—— Michael de, 104.

—— Ricardus de, 103.

Simon de, 116,

Fontibus, Willehuus de,
Forbes, Johannes, de Bern
Forate, (Forrett, Poret,) Dauid, 495.
Johannes,

—— Symon de, 97.
Thomas, 478.
Forestare, (Forster, Forrester.) Alexander, of

Garden, 465.

Georgius, de Stratheury, 384.
Jacobus, 504.

—— Mathon, 369, 871.

—— Thomas, de Strathenry, filius Duncani

de Torwode, 379, 476,
Forether, Douenaldus de, 35.

Forman, Georgius, 465.

John, 359.
Magister Willelmus,

Forn, Edmuudus avus Willelmi de, 191.

Willelmus, filius Ingeram filii Edunondi
filii, 191.

Forsyth, Henrieus, rector de Monymusk,392.
B92,

Forsyth, Margareta, sponsa Joannis Adesonn
478.

Foulis, (Foullis,) James, 492, 502.

Mr. Henry, 483 ; (of Colingtoun.) 488.

Fouller, Eliza, 504.

Fraser, (th

dominus Jacobus, de flerendrach, 278.

—— Robertus, 470, 473, 470, 482, 490.

—— Symon, 53.

er,) Bernardus, 43,

—— Willelmus, eancellarius regis, 48, 55.

Freburn, (Freberne,) Robertus, 10. 87, 92.
11, 249.

Fresselei, Galiridus de, 100.

Henriens de, 236.

Frissall, Robertus, de Newlandis, 486.
Froge, Bessy, #30.

Fada, Jacobus, in Inchtervy, 484.

Furnj, 222.

Futhes, Johannes de, 311.
Futhic, Patricius, 484.
Fyldar, Patricius, 4/2.

Fyn, Agnes, 471

—— Joannes, 475, HH

Marioria, sponsa Joammis, 475, #11

che, Gilbertu:
ie, Alexander dominus, #16.

Gaillard, (Gaillart, Galart,) Johanes, 98.
OT.

— Reginaldus, 106,

Galbrath, Gilbertus de, 300.

Willelus de,

Galtridi episeopi, Aly

soror, 50.
—— episcopi, Henricus nepos, 79, St.

—— Hngo filius, 92.

—— Ricardus filiu 5

Robertus filius, #2.


--- Dunfermline_page581.png ---
INDEX

filius, 92.
Waltcrus filins, 92.
2, 249,

Galfridi, Thoma

Galfridus, clericu

dapifer cpiscopi, 58.

—— filius Gilberti.

Sannolf, 94.

—— minister, 194.

Gallelach, Andreas, 148,

Galrik, Alexander, +70, 488.

Joannes, 500.

Galterus, rid. Walterns.

Galway, Johannes, 366.

229, 316.

us, 100, 111, 112

Gamellinus, Magister, 49, 50; (hostiarius,)
58, 59, 198,

Garduar, Audro, 497.

Joannes, filius Jonete Orrok, 482,
491,

Garuad, comes, 8.

—— filiu:

Galwidie, dominu:

Gamel’, Walterns

Gatemyle, Johannes de, 262.
230, 260,

Maleolmus de, 227

Gawie, Thomas, 478.
Gayelach, Cristimus, 148.
G., comes, justi
Ged, Joannes, 476, 486.
Robert, 502.

Georgius, filius Dauidis Blare, §
frater Jacobi Giffard de Schirrefhall,
Bt.

Gerardus, 108.

Geri’, dapifer, 94.

Gib, Jacobus, in Stentounes, 466.
—— Joline, 485.
Gibsone, Christina, 473.
Giffard, (Gyffard, Gifhart,) Dauid, 91.
Georgius, frater Jacobi de schirrifhall,
St, 400.

JM. 519

Gillard, Hugo, 39, 88, 93, 94.

Jacobus, de Sherrefhall, 3872, 473,
476-497.

—— Joneta, sponsa Willelmi, +00.

—— Ricardus, 44.

— Thomas, 37

—— Willelmus, 37; (cleriens,) 88.

Gilberti, (Gillberti, Gilleberti,) Galfridus
filins, 252.

—— Walterus filins, 2!
Gilbertus, (Gillbertus, Gillebertus,) clericus
regis, 66, 70, 98.

comes, 85.

—— filins Colini, 222.
filius Rotheri de Crambeth, 108.
Gilgrewer, Alanns,

21,
Gillandreas mae suthen, 36.
Gillandres, 111.

Gillecostentin, 111,

Gillecrist, (Gilerist,) mac Samnel, 30,

Malethny filius, 2

pater Engenii, 222,
Gillemartin.

Gillemichel, comes, 13, 17.
— Hugo filius, 25.

Gillemon, 222.

Gillemur, canonieus, 74.

Gillenef, senescallus de Strathem, S6.

Gillepatrie, 13.

Gillethomas, 111.

Gilmclonoe, 22

Glames, (Glammis, Glammys,) dominus Jo-
hannes de, 387.

dominus Patricins, 316, 324, 329,477,
500,

—— Thomas, Mr. of, +49.

Glasclon, Matheus Marus de, 222.

Glasmonth, Alexander de, 25+.



--- Dunfermline_page582.png ---
520 INDEX NOMINUM.

Glasguensis, (de Glesgu, Glasgu,) archidia-
conus L., 68.

episcopus, dominus Willelmus, 198, 313+
315, 324, 827, 329.

—— episcopus, Engelramus, 93.

p

— cpiscopus, Jocelinus, 34.

iscopus, Herbertus, 8, 22, 23, 26.

— opi

‘opus, Joharmes, 4, 14, 85.
—— episcopus, Robertus, 3:

episeopus, Walterus, 124,
Gleghorn, Williame, 485.
Glen, Willyhame of,

Gley, Radulphus, 2
Godemamnistof, 103.

Golin, Willelmus de, 67, 95, 142.
Gord’, Willelmus, 254.
Gospatricii, (Cospatricii,) Ale:
Waldenus fi
Gospatricins, (Cospatricius.) comes, ‘

26, 27
—— filius Waldef, 22.

Gothewait, Robertus, |

Wer filius, 94.

24,

105,
Gourlay, Jean, sponsa Willelmi Dury, 47
ISS.

Johannes, de Kynerag, 346, |

—— Joneta, +
—~ Thomas, 393, 4
Gowry, decanus de, 383.
Graham, Dauid de, #9, 50.
dominus Henricns de,

—— domiuns Johannes de, 236, 2.
—— Patrieius de, 53.

Robertus de, 103, 104.
Willelmus de, 101.
Grauseruise, Andreas, 109,

Granth, Joannes, 240.

Robertns, capellanus, :
Thomas, 367.

Gray, Andreas dominus le, 316.

Gray, Mergareta, 468.
Patrick Master of, 444.
3,

Gregorius, capellanus,

clericus, 42.

—— Papa 76, 139; (IX.) 168-174. 177.
Iss, 189.

Grene, Johannes.
366.

Grenlau, Willelmus de

neellarius | Moraviensis.

7, 142,
Grevesone, Willelmus, 358.

Griffinus, Magister, cleriens, 126, 1
Guareino, Magis

er Bartholomens de, 403.

Gudswan, Andreas, 280, 341, 4

—— Johannes, 28)

Gugy, Willelmus, viearius de Inuerkethin.
5, 226, 230.

Gylleny, 254.
Gymok’, Johannes, 406.

Hi

we, (Hacet. Hacheid, Halkheid. Haket.
Andreas, 468.

herine, 482, 487, 490,

id, of hunfermen, 285. 20,

—— Henriens, 492.

Jacobus, de Ochtirtyre. 3
iurane,) 330, 466, 475, 492.
— Johannes, de Pet

(de Pere

rane,

Magister Georgius, 39%, 4
—— Patricins de, 467, #87 ; (de Pettirrane
2.

Robertus, 366, 485, 499, 502.

Hadingtun, Jordanus de, 103,
0.

Haig, dominns Andreas,
Haldane, Margarate, 492.
Haliburton, H. de, 108.
Jacobus, 499,

Halis, Ricardus persona de. 1

136.



--- Dunfermline_page583.png ---
INDE

Halkerstoun, George, 491,

—— Joannes, 482.

Halyrnidhous, Joannes commendatarius de,
498.

Hamiltoune, (Hamniilton,  Manmiltow,)

Danid, (filius Jacobi comitis Aranie,) 396,

486,

—— dominus Thom:

—— Javobus, dominus, 348, 467, +!
—— Joanna, sponsa Roberti Melvile,

£98.
—— Magister Thomas, #96.

Hongaldesyde, Patone of, §
26, 127,

lanus.

Hanselin,
Harears, dominus I, 40-4,
li
Harloth, Eva filia Johannis, 216,
2G, 899,

vase, Danid, 309,

Harper, Jacobn
iliame, 496,

Harrowar, W

Hartsyde, Margareta, sponsa Joannis Buchan-
nane, #9

Harwar, Robertus, 292,

Hasting, (Hastings, Hastinghis,) Dauid de,
BS, 86, 118, 194, 248, 249,

Hawsone, Moris, 358.

Haya, (Hain, Hai, Hay.) Alexander, 492,
499,

Archibald, (cleriens,) 386;  (reetor
ecelesie de Mailuile,) 394.
Danid de, 86, 45, 497.

— domimus Roberts del, 42, 2:

—— Gilbertus de, miles, 51.

—— Jobannes de, 101, 142, 108, 266 ; (J)
409,

——— Joncta, sponsa
Kildwne, 383.

—— Robertus de, 66, 183, 485.

—— Thomas de, 38.

home Dingwall de

X NOMINUM. 521

Haya, Willelmus, de Mayne, 385.
Willelmus de la, 30, 81, 34, 37, 93.
Naylbotyl, Johannes, 193.

Head, comes, 16,

Heibnrne, (Hepburne,) Isobella, &
Jacobus, 501,

san.

Patricius de, dominus de Halis, 327.

Sir Robert, of Aulderstoun, 501.
Helein, spouse of George Boswell, 100.
as, 111.

Henderson, (Hendersoune.) Jacobus, 376.

Helias, el

Robertns, 476.

Henricus, canonicns, 61.

clericus episcopi. 75.
—— comes, 3, 5, 8, 10, 88.

—— filius comitis, 15.

— filius E., 140,

—— filius Swani, 9.

—— nepos Galfridi episcopi, 79, $v.

senescallus, 59,

Henrisone, (Henrysone,) Jacobus, de For-
dells, 484.

—— Joannes, 500,

Robertus, 481.

—— Thomas, 470, 490.

Herberti, Rodo filins, 94.

—— Willelmus filins, 27.

Herbertus. cancellarius, 4; (camerarius,
12, 14-18, 23, 34, 36.

Magister, 55, 57, 58, 418.

Heris, (Heryce,) Johannes, 270, 271.
Herteford, Willelmus de, 96.
Herth, Johannes de, 2

Heruicus mareseallus, 107.
Hervy, dominus Danid, 386.
t, Robertus, 31-4.
seltun, Rogerus de, 94.
Hidda, 10.



--- Dunfermline_page584.png ---
522 INDEX NOMINUM.

Hill, Johannes, clerics
Robertus, 474.
Hird, Henricus, 502.

s, 318, 503.

H., Magister,
Hog, Patricius, 484, 485.

Home, Archibaldus de, 359.

soddy, 488.

sponsa Jacobi Giffert, 97.
5 68, 124, 131, 133, 134,

Laurence, of La

Home, Margare'

Honorins, Papa, 6
141, 166-168.
Honyman, Thomas, #83.
Horne, Besseta, 500.
David,
—— Helena, 4
—— Robertus, 48:
—— Thomas, +75, 490.
—— Willelmus, 469, 47
Horsbrak, Robertus, tereius prior, 8. Andree.
300.
Host
Hoppar, Joneta, sponsa Hugonis Rige, 391-2.
Hucheoun, (Hutcbeone,) Danid, 468, 471,
475, 483, 486, 487.
Huetirganen, Warinus de.

489.

s, Alanus, 238.

Sector de, 222.

Hugo, cancellarius Regis, 31, 37.

eapellanus, 35.
elericus, 83, 89, 186.
filius Gillemichel, 25.
—— filius Galfridi, 92.
—— filius Leuing, 212, 213.
—— filius Willelmi, 95, 114.
—— magister, medicus, 82.

pincerna, 58.

Hugonis, Ricardus filius,
Hul, Robertus de la, 150.

Hume, dominus Danid, 348.

—— Elizabetha, de Maistertoun, +87.

Hume, Margarita, sponsa Jacobi Crechtoune
de Cranstoneriddale, 380.

Hunter, Jacobus, £99.

Huntlie, Erle of, 484, 486.

Hunyeth, Alexander, 198.

Dauid de, dominus de Klerkinton, 263,
264,

Haure, Sector de, 222.

Hutone, (Hutoun,) Georgius, 498.

Thomas, 475.

—— Willelmus, 467, 471.

Inchemartyne, (Inchmartyn,) Alexander de,
144.
Andreas de, 297.

—— Johannes de, 144, 145, 239.
Inchethythyl, Gilbe
Ingilbi, Willelmus de, 1
Inneis, (Innes,) Alexander, filius Alexandri,

385.

lius Sectoris de, 222.

Alanus, £79.

Walterus, de touchis, 385.

Innocencius, Papa, 123; (III) 128,129, 161-
16,

Papa IIL, 177-186, 200, 202, 420.

Papa VIL, 266.

Insula Missarum, abbas de, Christinus, 242.

—— prior de, Brieius, 75, 419.
— prior de, H., 257, 258.

—— prior de, Rogerus, 61.

Rieardus de, 9)

Invcrhesk, Radulphus de, 267.

Inuernes, Johannes de, cancellarius, 267.

Invertule, 145.

Inuirkethin, (Inuerketbin,) dominus Richar-
dus de, monachus de Dunfermlyne, 117,
120.


--- Dunfermline_page585.png ---
INDEX NOMINUM. 523

lnuerkethin, dominus Willelmus, curatus

sie de, 227, 2

eee

—— Michael de, 207.
Willehnns de, 65,

Inuirkunglas, G. de, 91; (Galftidus,) 96.
e, EKdmundus, 100.

Jacobi, Jacobus fi

— Willelmus filius, 116.

, 284, 26, 313, 320,
330, B48, 351, 358, 408, 449,
IL, 311, 312, 814, 328, 345.
ox, IIL, 355.
— filius Jobannis Ogilw)
filius Jacobi, 474.
Jacsone, Willelmus, 342.

Jacobus, res , 326,

Jameson, Robertus, 474.

Jeddeurth, abbas de, H., 68.

abbas de, Osbertus, 93.

prior de, O., 9; (Osbertus,) 23, 2
216.

Johannes armiger

Uraciator

— capullanus, 59.

— cpiscopus, 9,10; (ct cancellarins,) 11~
13, 16.

— filius Adami, 221.

rehibaldi Betoune de Capildra,

— iilius A
36.
—— filius E,

sok.

—— filius Thor’, 103.
—— filius Willelni constabularii, 220.
—— frater Mathei, 74, 75, 419.

5 8, 418.
—— Ozilvy, filius Jacobi de Cukiston, 392.

callus, 90.

—— nepos episeopi,

Johannis armigeri, Susanna sponsa, 216,
—— Malhenny filius, 221.
—— Willelmus filius, 107.

Johnestoun, (Jonstoun, Joniston,) Agnes.

spousa Jacobi Dewar, 4
—— Heruicus de, 107.
Jacobus, 498.
Joannes, 478.
Jokelei, Willelmus de,
Joneta, spousa Willelmi Giffard, 400,
Jopson, Thomas, 345,

Kaldelech’, Robertus de, abbas de Dunterm-
lyn, 235.

Kalenterach, Willelmus, 22

Kambuskineth, cide Cambuskineth.

Karal, (Karall, Kraol,) Dominus Robertus
de, 236, 253,

Radulphus de, 235.

aramund, Agnes filia Johanuis filij Ranul-

phi de, 98,

—— Heruicus vicarius de, 98.

Karwour, Symon, 361,

Katenensis (de Katenes, Katines,) episcopus,
Andreas, 7, 8, 14, 22, 23, 24, 26, 30, 31,
35, 42, 48, 55, 58, T4, 89, 93, 151, 374,
B75, 419.

Kay, Dauid, Presbiter Sancti Andree, 311.

Ker, Henricus, 280.

Keir, Domina Agnes, 503.

Kelan, 222.

Keledei, (Cheledei,) 5, 8, 19, 28, 34, 40, 46,

Kelledeorum, Ivus Abas, #17.

Kello, Dauid, 459.

Kellok, (Kellock,) Catherina, 472.

Dauid, 470,

James, of Maistertoun, +87.



--- Dunfermline_page586.png ---
524 INDEX

Kellok, Johannes, 470, 481, 483, 489.
Nicolaus, 499.

-— Willielmus, 499,
Kelso, (Kelcho,) abbas de, Armaldus, 8, 24.
abbas de, H., 123, 132, 15
abbas de, Johannes, 24, 93,
—— abbas de, Robertus, 72.
—— Adamus de, 140.

—— Clericus de, Johannes, 92.
Monachus de, W.,
—— Prior de, R., 123.

—— Ricardus de, 6:

Kendeloch, Sector de,

Kent, W

—— Willelmus, 481.

Kenyll, Malisius, 148.

Kernec, Johannes de, 98.

Ker, Henricus, 280.

—— Hugo, de Dene, Cleriens Sancti Andree,
B30, B41, 342, BH B45, 359,

Keth, Robertus de, Mar 2

iam, 487.

Kileonchath, W. rector ec

Kilmare, Thomas de,

Kilgoure, Andreas, #82.

Kineaid, (Kyneade.) Thomas, de Jonsone.
3t7.

Catharina, 474,

King, (Kyng,) Jobannes de, 112.

Kingorne, (Kyngorue,) Danid de, 348, 349.
134, $8

—— Dominus Adamus, vicarii
892, 393, (de Lyntoune) 398,

—— J. de, 409,

—— Jacobus, $83, 485, 186, 494, 496, 502.

—— Johannes de, 300,

s de Fogo,
9, $53.

—— Thomas, 46.

—— Willelmus de,
Kinloche, Dauid, 501.

OMINUM.

Kinloche, Willelmus, 472, 486.

Kinmont,(Kyninmonth, Kynnynmond, Kinin-
mund,) Adam de, 409.

—— Andro, 497.

—— Cristiana, filia Johannis de, 277.

— DominusRobertus de, viearius deCupro.
S00,

—— Helias de, 126, 127,

—— Johannes de, 277, 355.
—— Mergareta de, 277.
Thomas de, 306.
Aaeth’ de, 148.
Gilbertus, frater Aacth’ de, 148.
Johannes de, 256, 405.
Kireald
387, 389, 398.

Kinross, (Kynr:

yrkeally) Jacobus, de Grange.

—— Johannes de, 305, 306.
—— Mergrata, 467.

Willelmns de, 210, 325, 348, 349, (de

Kynere, (Kynnere.) Alexander, de Straburn.

B84, 473.

Jobannes de, 346.

Kynet, Johannes, fii

ng, Jacobus, 358,

Lacu, Gillecrist de, t11.
Laicestria, Robertus de, 78.

Lamb, Thomas, 484, +85.
William, 485.



--- Dunfermline_page587.png ---
INDEX NOMINUM.

Lambertun,(Lambertonia, Lambirtone, Lam-
byrtone,) Alexander de, 239.

Johannes de, #8, 54.
—— Willelmus de, 10; (E
735 CW. de.) £10, 413,
Laudlaud’, Rogerus, 72.

copus,) 72,

Wonit, Lundonia,) arehidia-
7; (Andreas) 58, 418.

javonus de, Johannes, 66.

Laodonia, (La

conus de, A.

archidiaconus ce, Thorns, 36, 58.

—— archidiaconus de, W. de Boscho, GY.

Gecanus de, Andreas, 5.
Lasecles’, (Lassalis,) Walterus de,
Willelmus, de Tnuerdoyat, 355.

Lastalric, (Lestaltie, Lastalrich,) dominus Jo-
hannes de, 147.

Sacerdos de, Edwardas, 1

Symon, filius Johannis de, 147.

—— Thomas de, 106, 107. 135.

—— Thomas de, vieceomes de Edenburgh,
OL,

Thomas, filius Edumardi de, 190,

Latheris, Johannes, 383.

Lauder, (Lauwedyre, Laweder,) Johannes,
archidiaconus Tenidalie, 398.

Mariota, 476.

Robertus de, 237+

copi, 129.
Law, Joneta, Sponsa Jacobi Dewar, #59.
473,

Lawsoune, Richart, 375.
—— Ma
Lemetone, Patricius, elerieus de Liberacione,

52, 53.

Lesly, (Le:

dominus de, 316, 324, 345.

— Joncta, 465.

Thoma

garcta, 469.

ie, Leseelye, Lesellyn,) Georgius,
348,

Lesly, Normanus, pater Georgii de, 316,

—— Symon de, 52, 53.
Lesswade, G. de,
Lethanland, W
Leuenaneh, tlolanus de,
Lewif, H., 13.
Leuing, Hugo filin
Lidel, (Ledale,) Ricardus de, 67, 112.
Roberts de, 327, 348.
Lillisselive, Stephanus de,
132, 141.
Lindesay, (Lindesy, Lindiss

lelmns de, 220,

235

212,

67, 95,

Lyndesay).

ay, 482,

—— Danid, de Logy, 846; (de Mout),
377.

dominusFohannes de, Camerarius Regis.

Agnes, sponsa Jacobi Mun

dominus Johannes, de Byvi

—— Joannes, de Logy, 490.

Johaunes, de Lundor, 318.

— Magister Jacobus, prepositus ceclesie de
827, 477.

36.

lelmus de, 34.

Lyncloudane,

—— Master of,

— VV

Linlithgow. (Linlytynw), Decanns de, Domi«
nus Robertus, 117, 120,
Listona, (Listun,) Robertus de, 63.

Rogerns de, 59.
Lisurs, Willelmns de, 114.
Litil, (Lytill), Joamnes,
Ricardus, 240,
Liuer, (Livers), Willelmus de, 97, 98, 101.
109.
Livingston (Leui
bus de, 348.

— Johannes, 393.

£90,

gstone, Leucuston), Jaco-

—— Robert, of Drumry, 285, 310, 311,
— Willelmus de, 259.


--- Dunfermline_page588.png ---
526 INDEX NOMINUM.

Llothreisk, (Lothresk,) Alexander de, 277,
Bt.

Georgius de, filius Alexandti de, 370.

62.

Lochilencne, (Lochlevin), dominus de, 475.

Laday of, 433.

— Prior de, Rogerus, 75.

Tochilde, Johannes de, 2!

Lochmabane, Magi

er Nicholayus de, 226.

Loelnidi, Seetor de,

Loebmalowny, Alanus Lochmalowny de, 335.

Lochor, (Louchor, Lochour), Andreas, avun-
culus Constantini de, 102..

—— Constantinus de, 92, 98, 100, 101, 109,
111, 116.

Dauid de, 48, 51; (vicecomes dePerth,)

3, 34, 108, 118.

Dauid, tilius Ha;

——- Hngo de, 148, 236, 257, 239,

zonis de,

annes, 474,

—— Philippus de, 98, 100-102, 109, 111,
140,

Login, (Logane, Logyne), dominus Robertus.
de Restalrik, 287, 288.

Ewen de, 83.

—— Michael de, 1

— Thomas de, 52, 53, 240.
—— Walt de, 98,99, 100, 101, 102.
111, 112, 122, 236, 240.
Logy, (Logie,) Petrus, 467.
Robertus, in Crawmund, 478, 476, 490.
Loktone, (Longetonia,) John of, 341.
Symon de, 23.
Londoniis, (Lundoniis,) Robertus de, 27, 80;
(ilins regis,) 82, 33, 35, 42, 48, 85, 95,
96, 98, 322.

Lonfordy, dominus Willelmas de, canonicus

Moraviensis, 267.
Long, Rogerus filius Hugonis, 222.

Longforti, Sector de,

Longfortun, Johannes de, 222.

Lorn, Robertus senescallus de, 282.

Loudoun, (Lowdoun,) Joannes, 481.

—— Danid, 482.

Lowthiane, Willelmus, 476,

Lucius Papa, 153, 155, 156, 161.

Lugtoun, Thomas, 489,

Lumisdayne, (Lumisden, Lumisdeyn, Lum-
misdene, Lummysdene, Lumisdane,) Ali-
son, 379.

Christina, filia Johannis in Colding-

hame, 379.
— Dauid, (de Condolane,) 346.
dominus Willelmus, 467, 474; (per-
soune of Cleishe,) 491.
—— Elena, filie Johannis, in Culdiughame,

—— Johannes, (de Ardry,) 355, 358, 859,
377, 379.

— Magister Henricus, camerarius Sancti
andree, 38-4,

Robertus, 386, 472, 473, 487, 489.

5.

—— Thomas, (de Condlane,)
Lundin’, Walterus de, 90, 92.
— Thomas de, vicecomes de Fif, 91.

— Philippus de, 95.

— Johannes de, 101.

Lundors, abbas de, 64.

—— abbas de, G., 128.

abbas de, J., 136, 139 ; (Jacobus,) 365.

Lundy, (Lundye, Lunde, bondy,) Andreas de,
848, 349; (de Balgony.) 377, 393, 477.

Christiana, 487.

— Danid de, #2, 107.

—— Dauid, 390, 479, 494.

—— Elizabethe, 476.

—— Georgius, £87.



--- Dunfermline_page589.png ---
INDEX NOMINUM.

Lundy, Grissel, 468, 471
Johaunes, 346,
lie,) 479.
Katharina, sponsa Roberti Dury, 393,
399,
——~ Margeria de, 107.

486, 487.
3 (de Strawthar-

—— Symon de, (eanonicus,) 131.

—— Robertus, 481.

—— Walterus, 38: 3 (We de,) 409. 473,

—— Willelmus, 27, 85; (lilius Walteri,)
395, 479.

Lybirton, Alanus de, 260-262.

Lyn, Thomas de, 2

Lyndesei, (Lyndescia, Lindesci,) Walterus
de, 7; (Galterus,) 8, 22; (W.) 23, 27,
236-238,

Lyon, (Lyoun,) Johannes, de tlothros
365.

—— Patricius, dominus de Glammys, 301-
303, 331, 332.

—— Ysabella, sponsa domini Patricii. 331,
332.

Lytlejohne, Jacobus, 480.

Lwnes, Jamis, 485.

M. archidiaconus, 55. 57, 415.

Macalpin, 222.

Mae Arkil, Alwyn, vid. Arkil.

Macbanhyl, Makbeth, 222.

Macbeth,

Mac chimpethin, (Chimbethin,) Gillecohue,
78

Mae congi, Malbrida, 12.

Mac dut, Gillemichel, 4.

Maceroht, 222.

Maceth, Melcolmus, 24.

Mackdutfe, comes, 417.

Mae Impethin, Gillepatrie, +.
Mackindoyr, Colin, 2

Macinduly, Johannes, 148.
Mace lood, Seth, 111.
Mae mancehin, Gillepatrie, 111.

Mae melg, Gillecolm, 111.

Mae ocbeth, Maldoueni, +.

Mac Rolf, Gilleserf, 111.

Mae Samuel, Gilleerist, 30.

Mac sloclae, @., 25.

Mae suthen, Gillandreas, 336.

Mace torfin, Macbeth, 7.

Maddoe, comes, 10.

Madeth, comes, 4, 16.

Madianus, eapellanus, 89.

Maison, (Masoune, Masone,) Danid, 345.
Thomas, 488.

—— Willelmus, de Clakmanan, 336.

Maistertoun,(Maistertone, Maysterton, Alex:
ander, 483.
—— Duneanus de, 235, 236.

Grisilis, 47.5.
—— Hugo de, 9s.
—— Robertus, #82, 485.

Symon de, 260.

—— Willelmus de, 52, 5:
(lilius Hugonis,) 215, 216, 281,

Maitland, dominus Joannes, de Thi
484,

Makeartnay, Jacobus, 466.

Makeswelle, Johannes de, camerarins,

Makkie, Willelmus, 469, 480, 489.

Mal ehacl, Radulphus,

3,87, 90,109, 112:

Malaherba, Eustachius

Malearnestun, A., 71.

Malcolmi, comitis de fif, Duneanus frater, 83.

— — comitis Atholie, E. comitissa sponsa.
85.


--- Dunfermline_page590.png ---
528 INDEX NOMINUM.

Maleolmi, comitis Atholie, H. filins.

comitis, Dauid frater, 88.

Maleolmus, comes Atholie, vid. Atholia.

comes de fif, vid. Fit.

— rex, 19, 21-28, 30, 81, 40, 42, 46, 48,
TH, 88, 91, 93, 153, 154, 157, 168, 176,

321, 417, 419,
vex IL, 176, 322.

Maleum, dominus ‘Thomas, 363,

Maldoneni, index, 18.
Malethny, filius Gilgrewer, 221.

Johannes, 221.

Maleuille, (Malauille, Mala villa, Melvill,)
Andreas, 4

—— Danid, 503.

alfridus de, 30, 34, 35, 87.

—— Gregorins, ilinsW illelmi de, 92,116,119,

—— Henriens, #99.

- Jacobus, 481.

—— Johannes, de Raith, 386, 396.

Jolie, 503.

—— Joucta, sponsa Jacobi Kyrealdy de

Grange, 398.
—— Mal
—— Rie:

olmus de, 83.

dus, dominus de, 98.

—— Roberius de, 91, 218, 483 ; (dominus,)
185, 496, 498, 504,

—— Stephanus de, clericus, 120.

—— Willelmus de, 235.

Maleuine, (Mailvyne,) Alexander, de Ken-
nochy, 346.

Gallridus de, 91, 190.

—— Henriens, de Carubee, 346,

—— Robertus, de Carnbee, 346, 387.

Willelmus, (de Rath,) 870.

Malise, comes, 4, 16

5.

Malisius, frater comitis Atholie, 86.

Malisius, marescallus, 14,

Mallehny, Willelmus filins, 221.

—— filius Johannis, 221.

Malleurer, Symon, 96.

Man, dominus Johannes, notarius publieus,
327.

Robertus, 342, 344,

Mancine, Johannes, 166.

Manderstonne, (Manderstoun.) Archibald of,
358.
— W.
—— Wat of, 358,

Mansell, Ranulphus, 23.

Mantanch, Gileristinus, filins gilgrewer, 221.
Manuel, Dauid de, 22
Mar, comes de,

G., 85.

comes de, Willelmus, (eatuerarins,) 49,
50, 198.

Mareseallus, Willelmus, 58.

Gwydon, 58.

Margareta, sponsa Andree Bosucll, 400,

sponsa Patrieii Barone, 870.
Margareta, sponsa Roberti de Meygners, 268.
Margarete, Ricardus filius, 254.
Margarita, regina, 14, 28, 30, 40, 42,46, 48,
110, 115, 123, 181, 183, 185, 214, 215,
ye 5, 243, 352, 268, 284,
315, 821, sh.

—— sponsa Michaelis Seoti, 45, 99.

Marioribankis, Joneta, sponsa Joannis Durie,
501.

Marshell, (Mersckale,) Maleolmus, 341.

Ricardus, 486.

Martene, (Martyne,) Alexander, de Gyble-

stoune,
—— Danid, de Cardvene, 398.
—— Johannes, de Cardwane, 355.
Martin, 222.



--- Dunfermline_page591.png ---
INDEX

Martinus, Magister, medicus, 38.

arty

org

Lbs,

Johannes frater, 7

rus, Herveus,
Math

Matheus, arehidinconus, 2

— cancellarius

— eanonicus, 61,

vlericus, 3

—— Magister, 7- His,

‘huthie, Robertus filins, 96.

Matilda, regina Scovie, 3, 5.
Maugenach’, Cuben, 148.

Maunduet, Robertus, 101,

di, 221

Rica :
Maxwell, Herbertus, 1N6

—- fil

5 prior de, Johannes, #

—— prior de, Radulphus, 138.
MGill, Jacobus, 465. 478. 476
MW Kenzie, Joamnes, de Apileroee, His.
Megdubyl, Colinus, 222

Mesten, Rogerus de, miles, Lbs.

ES, HO,

Mekoluus, comes, 22.

Meldrum, (Melgedrome,)

Arehibaldus, de Clesse. 346,

Thomas, de Tuverkeithin, 324
SO, 191,

Melleburne, H. de, 62,

Melros, abbas de, Andrea
3h.

330,

Menemane, Joannes, 472.
Meneteth, (Menteyth.) comes de, Manrivins,
34 11M

—— Isobella, 479.
— Johannes de,
Menyheis, (Menzeis,)

Weme,

Danid, dominus de
280, 289, 34

NOMINUM.

529

Johannes de, 289.

nstoun, Willehnns, in Inueresk, 165.

Mereuin, filius Colbain, 7.
M swams,) 24-26, 93, HIT.
Merser, Robertus, #98, 501, 502.

swain, (M

Mersiztnne, Robertus de, 92.
Mertun, (Mertyn,) Galfridus de, 98.
—— Henriens, de Cardyane, 377.

Methfen, (Methven,) dominus Robertus de,
OL

—— Robertus de, capellanns, 70, 72.

—— Thomas, 492.

Methkil, Johaunes de, Wi.

M

—— Margareta sponsa Roberti de, 2

vgners, (Meyners,) Johannes de.

— Thomas de,
Michael, elerieus, 75, 89, 419.
—— tins Jordani Flandrensis, 26
filiuy Walteri, 116.

83.

magister, 66, 67, 142.

Johannes filiu:

Robertus, de Hyrni:mston’, 288.

Michell, ( Mitehell,) Danid, £78.

—— Thomas, 472, 54

—— Williame, 50

Millare, Heury, 358,

Jon,

Moford’, Willelmus de, 142.

as, 148,

Moneretl, (Muncreif,) Johannes dominns, de,
269, 383.

—— Matilda, sponsa Johannis Ros de Cragy:
387, 301,

Moncur’, Johannes, de Balluny. 880,

Momenanch’ med:

Monte aento, Robertus de, +.
Monte fino, dominus D. de, 410.
Montgomery, Alexander dominus, 3

Monypenny, Dauid, de Kynkell, 3:



--- Dunfermline_page592.png ---
530 INDEX NOMINUM.

Monypenny, dominus Willelmus, 314; (de
Petmuly,) 355.

—J., 409.

Mora, Alanus de, 104.

M as, 239 ; (Adam,) 242.

—— Alexander de, miles, 54, 121, 122.

—— Andreas de, 61, 62, 66.

—— Edwardus de, 62, 64.

jalcolmus de, miles, 54, 120-1

s, filias Murdacj filii Ale

de, 195, 196.

A. de, cle

—— Willelmus de, 52, 53.
Moraviensis, (de Morauia, Muref,) clerieus,
86.

—— decanus, magister Walterus, 2

—— episeopus, Andreas, 375.

—— episcopus, Columba, 282,
— episcopus, Dauid, 366,

—— episcopus, Gregorius, +.

—— episcopus, Johannes

— episeopus, R., 34.
——— episcopus, Willelmus,

More, dominus W., mile: Ndi
196, 197.

Moreuille, (Moreuilla,) Hugo de, 4, 7,9, 10,
12.17, 3, 26,

—— Ricardus de, 24,
34, 35, 39.

Morgund, comes, 8, 2

27.

; (constabnlarins,)

Morham, Gillbertus de, 103.
Morison, Willelmus, #16.

Mortelly, Adam de, 2
Mortheli,
Mortimer, Willetmus de, 35.

rviens de, 222,

Mortoun, (Mortoune, Mortun,) comes de,
477.

— Elezabet, sponsa Johannis Shaw. 465.

—— Elezabet. sponsa Roberti Dauling. 47-4.

Mortoun, Jacobus comes de. dominus de De
ketht et Abirdour, 882. 480.
—— Willelmus de, 96,

Mortuo mari, dominus Huo de. #2

——- Magister Hugo de. s\

—— — Walters d.
TH, 107, 108, 137.
Moubray, (Mubray, Mubrei.) Galiens user
Philippi de, 94, 95, 128, 124, 187, 139.

168, 228,

G, de, 412.

GA: (WO. 70,

— Jacobus,
—
= Maryareta, spousa Fraucised Nape
Md.

—— Philippus de. #3. 61. 9

6.

47

(coustalu-
larius Edenburgi.) 107. 123. 124. 137.
138, 168.

—— Rogerus de, 15, 148: (miles.) 282
—— Williame, 501.

Mowss, dominus Johann

B98,
Mowteray, Mr. James, 454.

Muccard, Willelmus dictus de. clenens, 62
Mudie, Robertus, 496.

Multrar, Johannes. de Markineh
Multray.
Munemus

Johannes, de Sefeilid, 3:
3.
Munfort, Willelmus de. 67.

prior de, 1

Munketun, Adamus gener Johanne de. 142.

Johannes de, 1

—~ Radulphns de, 103

—— Reginaldus frater Roberti de. 105, 104.
106,

Robertus de, 103-104,

Muoek,

Murdacus, seneseallus. 2

, Robertus de ly

Murdansg, clericus, £13).
Mure, Willelmus, 540


--- Dunfermline_page593.png ---
INDEX

oun, Jacobus, 182.

ae, clerieus episeopi: Katenensis, 7.
Muriel, Rozerus de, 254.
s. de Blakbarony, £
HOT, 501.

Murray, Andres
Dauid, de B:
Henricus, £75, 478, 47.

76, 481-483, 485, 480,

aird, 4

—— Jacobus, 381,
S04,

—— Johaimes, 492.

reta, 496,
Pair

—— Thomas, 492.
Willehnus, thesaurarius Dunblanensis,
BYS- 100, 487, 488, 503.
Murysone, Johannes. 305, 306.
Muskillurg, (Musilburge,) ballinus de, Pe-
tras, 102-103,
balliuus de, Robertus, 102, 105.

—— clerieus de, Johannes, 52, 53, |

elericus de, Robertus, 105.
iearius de, Ricardus
arins de, Walterus. 105.
Myre, Elizabeth, sponsa Alani Inneis. 479.
Robertus, 367.

—-v

iar, (Naper,) Alesander, de Phild

-— Franciscus, #93.
Robertus, 314.
Willelmus, 404
Naprest’, Andreas, 2
Narn, Alexander, de Sandfurde, 310, 384.
Willchuus, 290.

Nauehtane, Lady, 492.

r’, filius Ysaae.

. (Niatf’,) Gernasius de, 62. 4

NOMINUM. 53)

are

Neshit, (Nesbyt,) Edmundus de, 338.

—— Elizabet, sponsa Johaunis Launmys-
deyn, 380,

—— Johannes de, 358.

—— Robertus de, 3.

Nesi, Patricius filius, 91,

Neubottic, (Neubotyl, Newhotill,) abbas de.
131; (Adamus,) 90, 332, 430,

abbot of, James, 362, 363,

monachus de, Willelmus filius Archi
baldi, 192,

Nicholaus, (Nyeholaus,) eamerarius,

2

cancellarius, 26, 30, 33-37, 93.

= 99. 99

7, 22, 23,

clericus,

—— filins Gilberti de Smithetun, 102, 105.
papa. 305, 310, 318, 319,

sacerdos, 17.

Nicoll, Robertus, 493.

‘olson, Robertus, 468, 488,

Ivn.) Hugo de. 67, 142.
Willelmus de, 87, 141, 249.
apellanus, 53
us, 6S, 69,

» Radulphus, decanus Laudonie, 136.

iyellus,

ch

Nithbren, Thomas de, 99.

Nodrif, Robertus braciator de, 114.

Noisiaco, (Nnisi,) Symon de, rector ecelesie
de Disard, 61, 66, 67, 141.

Norens’, Willelmus, 83.

Norham, Henricus de, 140.

Jomon de, 72.

Normanuill, Thomas de, 198.
North Berwieh, Alicia suppriorissa de 132.
Moniales de, 131, 133,
—— Willelmus, Magister Monialium de, 70.



--- Dunfermline_page594.png ---
532 INDEX NOMINUM.

Oberuile, (Obirwill,) Johannes de, 99. 108,
1, a2

—~ Willelmns de, dominus de Pethynereff,
218,

Octohonus legatus, 202,

Odo, dapifer,

serviens regis, 128.
On
Ouiluy, ¢

i, Rozerns filins, 39.

—-~ Javobns, frater Johannis,
Bennathy,) 4

5, MOS, 498, 508.

Johamnes, tilins Jacobi deCukiston, 392.

—— Patricins, 499.

——~ Walterus de, 350; (de Oures,) 367.

Olifurd, Dauid, 9, 22, 24, 26, 80. 31: (jus-
tiviarius,) 34

— Philippus, 27.

— Walterus,
donie,) 43,
Oliphant, Catherina, domina de Dundas, 479.

3 (justiciarius Lan

—— Henriens, notarius, 385.

Joneta, filia Catherine, 479.

—— Lilie, sponsa Danidis

Oliphare, Johannes, de Kell
Otineras,
Onyoth, Ma
268.
Orehadia, Reinwaldus comes de, 14.
Orford, Willelmus de, 243.
Onn, Willelmus filius, 3
Ormestun, Walterus de, 107.
Oroe, (Orok, Ortok,) Alexas
balbe, 380, 475, 484, 493,
503.

Alisona, sponsa Roberti Hay.

ler, de Sylle-

483,
anid de, 347; (tilius Danidis Orok

de 3

alie,)

Oroe, Fresekinus de, 117.

$82. 490, 501

Henricus, 475,
—— Jonetu, 482.
—- Marioria, filia Alexandvi de Selybalic.

BNO.
Ricardus de, 330, 3.4),
—— Robertus de, 117,
), BA, S42. B84, 396.
504,

—— Symon de, 97, 105, 112

ymon, filius Roberti de, 235, 2
‘mon, filius Simonis de, 117

—- Willelmus de, 347,
Orseburg, Willelmus de,
Ottirburn, (Ottirburne,) dominas ‘Thomas.

de Reidhall, £91, 495,

—— Joh

nnes, filius Ade, 384.

ister Ada, de Aldham, 364.

Pacok, dominus Andreas, uotarins publiens.
251, 380.

Page, Isobella, spousa Dauidis Horne. 78
Pagebrech’, Michael, M48.
Paip, Magister Joannes, 498.

Palframan, Johames,

Pannter, (Panteir,) Magister Patrieis,
W., 36.

Papedi, Eustachius, 34,

Parele, Jamis.

Pareur, Hugo,

Paruus, Abraham.

Patersone, Jacobus, minister sv
Peibles, 38

te ernets de

— Patricia
— Willelnu

Patonsone, Johu,



--- Dunfermline_page595.png ---
Patricii, Bernardus filing, 94.

Vatricins

eames,
—— deeanus, 60,

—— filius Danid Creiehtonn de Cranstoun-
viddell, 377.

—— filius Nesi, 91.

—— filius Petri de
Peblis, Dauid, 872.
Peirsoun, (Persoune.) Andreas, HST, FS.
-— Danid, 190, 191.

—— Ele

—— Henriens, +78.

inelyn, 1!

—— Javobus, 479.

— Roberts, 503,

——~ Thomas, #81, 4

oles 25 10L TL

Peneathls

Verth, Duncanus de, 83.

—— Duneanus, tilius Jacobi de, #5.

—— Henriens, filius Gal!ridi de, 86.

—— Magister Alauus de. 87, 96, Lan,
249.

—— prior de, Andre:

——~ HRobertus, filius Seolfi d

~~ vieecomes de, Dauid de Louchor,

Vethachly, Marjory of, 840, 3

obus.

Petblatho,
Potearne, (Piteairne,) Barbara, #87.

—— Danid, 49

—— Hlizabet,

Georgins,

—— Johanne: HRS, ba. ESB, RAZ.
—— Robertns, 3:1,
n, (Pety

—— Patricins de, 10s.

sin) Eduardus de, ts.

petkaran, Willelmus de, 222.

DEX NOMINUM.

abetha, sponsa Joannis Nellok. 483.

105, FE

Pethuer, Willehius de, 98,
Pecsain, Willelius de, 100,

Petrus, eapellanns, 61, 62, 165

laa.
— ilins Adam, 216.
— filius Poti, 97. 98.
~ senescullus, 106.

Philippi, Constantius filins, 116.

ins, 16.

Philippus, eame

-— mareseallus, 4

Philp, Agne cubi presto. EN

Guhelmus,

—— Joneta, 475.
Phin, Dauid, #84, #94.

Pictor, Willelimus, 9s.

Pitirraine, dominus dey 476, #8 +. 2.
Polliswrth, Adamus de, 100,

Pohuuse, Welandus de,
Pont, (Kilpont.] Helene, 48s.
Pontel

Thomas de, 112.

Pontonne, Joannes, 504.

Portar, Thomas, 367.
Potanach, Bridin, 111.

Prebenda, Ricardus dle,

5 (clenens +

Prebern’, Ocnenus, 220.

Patricins, frater Ocneni,
Proston, (Prestonia, Prestom, Prestinn,) Ate

naldus,

——- Christianus de, 110.
Dauid, 501.

—- Georgius, de Craigmillor, 197

— Jacobus, #80.

Johannes de, 97, 110, 265,
Id,) 501-503.
——~ Richart, 454,

afi

Robertus de, 192

— Symon, filins Symonis de

sinus ce

Gourto


--- Dunfermline_page596.png ---
534 INDEX NOMINUM.

ston. Willelmus
Gourtone,) 332.

(dominns de

Priour, Rieardus, subprior de Dunfernmily

309,

Prymrviss. James, BG, 498.

Puddynge, Bridinas,

Pulter’, dominus Johannes, (rector de Cultyr,)

26

Pot, Henriens. de Pyotstoune. 355.

Quhite. James. #85

—— Joannes,

— Robert, #85.

wtsonin, (Qwhitsone,) Johannes, 311.

(R.) 85

—— W. de. 00,

Ra, Alexauder, 368, 3

Raburn’, Andreas, prior de Vrehard, 283.

Radulphus, 55.

—— capellanus regi

—— clerics, 262

—— mal chal, 30.
—— vieeeomes, 39.
Radin:
Ragewin, 13.

Raith, (Reaith,) Laird of, 457, 475.

Ob.

Ramesay, (Ramesia, Ramesy, Ramsay.) Adam

abbas et conventus de, 421

—— Magister Jacobus,

filius Malcolmus de, 236.
—— Danid, de Brekmont. 355,

Ramesay, Elisabetha, uxor W. de, 204
as, de Chatty, 855, 500.

- Henrieus de, 236; (de Culuthiy

—-—- Georg

) B46.

Johannes de. 5

= (de Corstoun,)

BSB.
—- M

ister Petrus de, #2, 136, 140,

-—— Nesus de, 83, 100, 126,
140,

—— Robertus, +94.

—— Willelmus de, 52; (W.) 264.

Ramkelo, Dauid. de Nethire Ramkelo,

Randulphi, Thomas filius, 45, 198; (comes
Moravie,) 245, 244.

——— Alicia filia Johannis

Raperclawe. Robertus de, 78.

Rath’, Sector de, 222.

Rathen, dominus W. de, prior de Vreban
re

Redoche, (Reidluche,) Andreas
Danid, 372.

Refeetorio, Robertus de,

Reginaldi, Stephanus frater, 75.

Kezinaldus, capellanus episcopi

—— frater Roberti de Munketun, 103.
Reid, Henricus, in Craigheid, 466. 466
—~ Jacobus, £93, 49:

—— Willelmus, 493.

Reidhall, dominus de, 454.

Rendaliston, W. de, 409.

Renner, (Rennerius,) Eda, uxor Elwwius.

—— Elwinus, 25, 55.
Gillex’, 36.

Reuel, Rieardus, 32, 38.
Rieardi, Maurieius films. 221.

Ricardus,

camerarius, 61, ¢



--- Dunfermline_page597.png ---
INDEN NOMINUM.

SEI TOD, Robertus, Rex

Rieardus, eapellanus, 31

9,0, Le 24k,

— clerics,

— filius Galtridi, 92.

anus episeopi. 75
— filius Herberti, 4.
Hilius Odonis,

ssi, 112. Roger

— filins Willelnd Serismouer, 262. —— Presbyter, 5, 19. Mk MS I
—— seruiens, 108. Rokesburgia, Magister Walterus de. 3s
Riehartsone, (Riehiesone,) dominus Robertas, Rolandi, Willelmus filius, 62.
Miz. Rolland, Nieolans, in Bandrum, +85
— Jacobus, de Smetoun, iti, 17S, IN2, Rose, Johamnes, de Nistrane, 466,

Roscusis, (de Ros.) episeopns dobaunes

370

—— Symeon. 5.

Bosmarkensis, episeopus, Macbeth. +

Hoss, comes de, Maleolmus, 25.
de, Willelmus, 24

—— Walters, - con

tig, (Rige,) Hugo, - —— Jobannes, de Crazy ST.SUL ASS
—— James, #87, 492, 4
Quintigernus, H5. — Patrik, 48s.
Rippeley. Bernardus de. 44. —— Robertns de, 49-51, bs.
Riscoloe, 111. Rossiue, (Rossyne,) Robertus de. 100, i 11
Robertson, (Robertsone,) Gilbertu 143, 11S.
HSER, ATT. ATS. Rotheri, 109,
oannes, 186, —— eumes, b
Willelmus, #70, ES4, ENS. Roneh, (Ronehe,) Andreas, 478. #92.
Robertns, eamerarius episcopi, 75. --— Dauid, #78, 497.
eapellanus re 1 36,98, Rowan, (Rowane,) Andreas, #53.
— carpentarius, 115. —— Georgius, #79.
rieus de Mushilburgh, 105. —— Henrieus, 466
pifer episeopi, 419. —— Johannes, in Craighouse, Hits

us Arnaldi, 114, —— Nieolans, 459.

—— filius Galfridi, #2. Rotfus, Radulphus, 94.
filius Mathie
tilins Reginaldi, 14

Hh. Rupe, Petrus filius Petri de. 219.

Russel, Johannes,

—— filius Seolfi de Perth, 5s. Rustinot, prior de, G., 1235

filins Sawali, 57. #IS Rutherturd, Antonius. #71

—— filius Sauli, 31. Ruthven, dominus de, Patri


--- Dunfermline_page598.png ---
IND

Ruthven

Jownna, domiua de Awdie, 479.
Walterns, 381, 3

Ryngane,

Sahyt, W
Saint Liz’, Mahald de, 89.

lterus, filins, 111.

Salna

, Johannes, 49, 50,

auete cracis, (de saneta eruec,) abbas, A. 9.

——~ —— abbas, Henri

Ss. 198.

eanoniens,domitus Henrieus.117,
P20,

—— —— eanoniens, dominns Hugo, 117.
120,

= prior 0.9.

— —~ prior, P.. 117.

—— — Willeluns, 24; (W.) 5

Aud

57. 4IS.
2) abbas.

Sancti Andree, (de 5

Georgins Dury,

—— arehidiaconus,
—— —— archidiacouns,

390, BUT.

Georgins Dury,

3S

- —— arehidiaconus, Laurcneius, 62,64,

1, 186, 141.

1

hidiacouns, Matheus, 32,

; QL)

arehidiaconus, Ranulphus, 6

archidiaconus, Walterns, 58-60.

—— —— archicpiseopns, Alexander,

—— —- archiepiscopus, Jacobus, 380
——. —- archiepiseopns, Johames, 34
- —— canonicus, Andreas, 61.
—~~- —— cunonicns, Helias, 117, 120.

is, J.
— — dominus W

133.
clus de,

cleri

—— — cleetus, dominus Gamelinus. 117,

electus, Robertus, 15,
——--—- episcopus, 226.

NOMINUM.

Saneti Andree, cpiscopns, A rnaldu
65 (A) 408.

—— ——- episcopus, Danid, 70, 71, 82.

naldus,) 25, 26,

episcopus, dominus Abel. 198.

cpiscopns, Jacobus, 304,3
2; (J) 404.

episeopus, Rieardns, 57. 38.

93

EIS,
— episcopus, Robertus, 4, 7, 8 11.
16, 21, 23, 55.
episcops, Willehaus, 53, G1 -b4 :
(W.) 85, 67-69; (de Lambertona,) 7
73, 81, 82, 90, 91, 95, 96 3.125, 133.
14d, 5 24h, 251,
269-271, 401, 4 (de Lambir-
thone,) #

— — J. rector seolarum, 138,

ricinus, 67, 142.

prior, Henrieus, 62; (H.) 63.
8,81, 136, 282.

prior, Jacobus, 248-300.
45 (J.) 63>

prior, Johannes. #8,
70, 73, 81, 82% 109,

prior, R., 56.

—— —~ prior, Symon, 61; (S.) 63.

—— — prior, T., 66; (Thomas,) 96.

~ ——- prior, Walterus, 60.

—— —— prior, Willeimus, 24; (W.) 57.
BOG, 418.

Sancto claro, Willelmus de, v

inburgh, 52, 53, 147.
Sane
1 .
neti Columbe, abbas de insula, Willelmus,
216,

bine, H., presbiter eardinalis tituli,

prior de insula, Bricius, 7-4.
— prior de insula, Walterus, 7:



--- Dunfermline_page599.png ---
INDEX NOMINUM.

Saneto clero, Robertus de, 103, 106.

Thomas de, 367.

Sancto Germano, Radulphus, prior de, 90,
Robertus de, 61, 95.

Saacto Martino, Alexander de, 89, 62, 65,

TO, 88,
, Clemens, 470, 490, #9 L.
Willelmus, 470, 490.
Sandilandis, David, 492.

Mr, James, 501.

—— Patrik, parsonue of Caldore, 3 #4.
li, Robertus filius, 31.

Sealtord, Willelmus de, seneseallus, 1.

Sande

Schaw, (Shaw,) dominus Johannes,
0, 465.

(de Grenok,) ‘
—— Jacobus, 326.

Margareta, mater Patricii Creichtoun de

Cranstounriddell, 3

Willelmus, 50-4.

Schellis, Willelmus de, presbiter glasguen-
sis, 309.

Sehevas, (Scheves, Schewes,) Lssobella, sponsa
Roberti Orrok, 471.

Johannes, elerieus,

2,310; (de Kil-
quhouss,) 377.

oriswood, Georgins, rector de Cultre, 314,
7, 829.

Jacobus, viearius de Lyntone, 392.

B18, 324, 3:

schort, dominus Robertus, (notarius publi-
cus,) 300,
Schorthous, Walterus, 383.

Scoloe, Adam filius Johannis,
—— Bel filius Johannis, 221.
—— Joliannes filius Johannis, 221.

Johannes, 221,

Seona, abbas de, P., 139.
abbas de, R., 85.

abbas de, Reinbaldus, 66.

537

29

Seona, abbas de, Robertus, BA, A Th
abbas de, Willelmus, 66, 68; (W.) 141.
abbas ct conuentus de, 118, 139, 14,

195,

— canonicus de, Michael, 86.
de, Robertus, 86.
—— dominus de, Dauid, 501.

~~ eanonicus

—— Gillandres de, 15.
——— Maldoueni de, +.
—— Malotheni, vicecomes de, 16.
— prior de, H., 139.
~ prior de, Isaac, 24.
Seot, (Scott,) Audreas, filius Willelmi, 2
dominus Jacobus, eapellanus, 385, 498,
500, 501,
-—— Issobella, 467, 479.

Joannes filius Willelmi, 480,

—-- Margareta, 504.

Stephanus,

—— Thomas, de Petgorno, 388.

—— Willelmus, 235, 275; (de Balw

373, 382; (de Inuertele,) 382, £73, 480,
483,

Scotus, (Scottus,) Michael, 45, 9
111, 140, 145; (miles,)

Serismouer, Rieardus filius Willelmi,

1, 100, 102,

Scrymgcour, Margareta, 499,

Sengall, Wilyam of, 858,
Seurfaraueh’, Patrieius, 221.

Seneseallus, Johannes, reetor de Flysk, 2

Setun, (Setone, Setouue, Seytoun, de Sete
tonia,) Agnes, sponsa Willelmi Disching-
toun, 472.

Alexander, 91, 100, 101, 196; (de Par-
broth,) 346; (dominus Urquhart,) 494.
Andreas, 497.

—— Danid, 393; (de Parbroth,) 404.
—— Ema soror Alexaudri de, 100, 101,

y



--- Dunfermline_page600.png ---
538 INDEX NOMINUM.

Setun, Georgius dominus, 348 ; (de Parbroth,)
504,

Helena, 466,

—— Joannes, 497.

—— Ph. de, 39.

rus de, 198.

Thomas de, 101, 103, 106.

Sewali, Robertus filus, 57, +18.

Sibbald, Andreas, de Lathame, 380.

Catharina, 470, 475, 486, 488, 490.

Sibjlla. (Sybilla,) Regina, 3, 5, 19, 28, 30,
40, 42, 46, 4 1, 32

Sieling, Thomas, 114.

Simonis, Adam filins, 267.
Sinclare, Henrieus, 45.
Patricius, 495.
Sithane, filins Edwald, 222.
Skirling, Willelmus, 380.
Skraveling, Willelmus, £87.

Smeithton, (Smithetun, Smythetun,) Emma
filia Gilberti de, 49, 50, 109, 110,

—— Gillebertus de, 109, 110, 193.

—— Henrieus de, 267.

—— Nieholaus filius Gilberti de, 102, 105,
109, 112.

Robertus pater Willelmi de, 193.

—— Willelmus de, 103, 104, 106, 109,
193.

Smith, (Smyt,) Andreas filins Joannis, 479,
£91.

Danid, aliuxs Huchesone, 4b.

—— Joannes, $79, 491,

—— Lowry, 358.

— Thomas, 471; (de Northfoid,) 489,
—— Willelmus, 504.

Soulis, (Sulis, Sulys,) Nicholaus de, 49, 5,
Willelmus de, 53.

Spalding, Robertus de, 297.

Spens, (de Spensa,) Danid, de Welmerstoune.
377.

Johannes, 385 ; (of Condie,) 15.5.

Petrns, 473.

—— Roberins de, 297.

Spey, Walterus de, 366.

Spitale, (Spetell,) Johannes de, de Kinyu-
monde, 277.

—-W

lelmus, de Lochalde, 346,

Spot, Ninianus, capellanus, 314, 348.

Squier, (Squiere, Squyer,) Michael, 260,
26

—— Willehnus, 235, 236, 240.

S., Ricardus de, notarius, 258.

Stalcar’, John, 358.

Stanehous, (Steinhous, Stenhous,) Alexan-
der, 490,

Dauid, 473.

——- Guillehaus, 473, 488, 489.

—— Robertus, 46

Stapilgortoune, Willelmus de, 311.

Steinson, Johannes, 490.

Stephanus, eamcrarins. 60, 61

—— clericus, 166.

— frater Reginaldi, 75.

—— Magister, 66.

Steuart, (Steuard, Stewart, Stuart,) Andreas.
dominus de Awandale, 373.

—— Archibald, 361.

—— Danid, doniinns de Hertschaw, 301.
—— Danid, dominus de Rossith, 286

—— Elizabetha, sponsa Jacobi Ogi
476.
—— Helena, filia Ade de Brerebill, 390.

— Javobus, decanus Moraviensis, 4

—— Jacobs, de Rossyth, 501.

Joannes, 499.


--- Dunfermline_page601.png ---
INDEX }

Stenurt, Joneta, sponsa Patrieii Domini de
Ruthven, 48

igillus, 466, 468.

—— Patricius, de Baith, 493, 496, 497,
Bi,

Robertus, junior, domiuns de Rossyth,

308,

76,3
—— Willelmus, 374.
Stevins, Alexander, 483.

Stevinsoun, (Stevinsoune, Stephansone,) Jo-
472, 473, 477, 487, 489, 502.
Patricius, 383.

03.
—~ Willelmus filins Joannis, +72.
Adam de,
Joannes, #78, 498,

Dauid, 359,

Strang, Georgius, de Baleasky, 377.

ann

—— Thomas, 5

Stobbi:

Stobie,

Story.

—— Thomas, de Petcorthy, 5
Willelmus, de Baleasky, 346, 355.
Strathanery, (Strathanry,) Herveus de, 259.

—— Johannes de, 239.
Willelmus de, 346,
Strathurd, Cristinus Sector de, 2:

55.

22

Strathechen, (Strathechyne,) dominns Wal-
deuns, 116.

—— Johames de,

Ranulphus de,

Strathern, (Stratherue,) comes de. dontinns
Malisins, 198.

comes de, Gillebertns, 34, 39, 86.

comes de, Robertus, (senescallus Sotie,)

A.

enescallus de, Gillenef, 86,

Willelmus de, 297.

Stratoun, (Stratun,) dominus Ricardus de,
33.

—— Helena, sponsa Joliaunis Young. 3:14.

,OMINUM. 529
Strivelin, (Strivelyn,) abbas de, Aluredas,
(Alfredus) 22, 89,

—— abbas de, Willehnus, 8,
—— Alexander de, 43,
——- Henrieus de, 108.
de, 44.

—— Patricius filius Petri de, 192.
Petrus de, 39, 136.
arius de, dominus Alanns, 2:

—~ Johanne:

—

3, 234.
vicecomes de, Alexander, 33, 96.
ricecomes de, Gilbertus, 10.

vicecomes de, Radulphus, 39,

—— vieecomes de, Willelmns, 9.

Sturi, (Stury,) Alicia vxor Simonis, 150.
Johannes, 149.

Symon, 149,
Suuteuill’, M:
Suanns, presbyter, 53.
Sudy, Ricardus de, 235.
Randulphus de, 9,

ister Robertus de, 198.

Sumerled, sacerdos, 74.

Sameruile, (Somervile,) Johannes {ilius do-
mini Willelmi, 327.

W. de, 9; (Willelmus,) 12, 24, 324,

Sunnolf, 94,

Galitidus filius, 94,

Sutherland, Alexander, dominus Castri de
Duffois, 366.

—— Willelmus, 367.

Sutherline, Mauricius, 220,

Suuenns, prepositns regis, 13.

Swain, 15,

filius,

—~ Thorus filius, 12.

Swyne, Willelmus, #68, 471, 489.

Swyntonn, (Swintona, Swithinton.) Alans
de, 102, 104, 103, 111, 147.

—— Joannes, 480, £82, 488, 44

Swani, Henrieu



--- Dunfermline_page602.png ---
540 INDEX NOMINUM.

ntoun, Mareus, #84.

Sym, (Syme,) Joannes, 504.
Willelmus, 396, 504.

on, eapellanus archidiaconj, 57, 141, 418.

capellanus episcopi, 62, 67.

—— eleri

— dapifer episcopi, 75.

filins Roberti Oroe, 2:

Symonis, Alanus filius, 90, 94.

ymson, Elizabetha, 491.
Syreis, A. de, 31; (Adam,) 89.
—— Duneanns de, 83, 101.
—— Margareta de, 100.

Margareta, filia Duneani de, 99.
— M. ‘itus Margarete de, 99.
P., filius Margarete de, 99.
Syues, Robertns de, 111.

‘T., archidiaconus, 55.
ilyor, (Talzoure,) Phynlaw, 485.
— Willelmn

Taiizefeir, Mariore, 487.
‘T., eancellarius, 16.

‘Temp’, Magister,
Yerwerac, Robe

us, 253,

‘Tenidalia, archidiaconus de, Symon, 31.

Thane, Alexander filins Johannis, 324, 3825,
827-330; (de Thanisland,) 3446,

—— Johannes, de flordalle,

Thomas, cancellarius, 136.
—— filius Bernard.

~ filius Galfridi, 9
filius Randulphi, 45. 198; (de fyf,)233.
—— filius Willelmi, 96.

—— Magister, 56; (medicus,) 5s.

Presbyter, $5, 419.

—— sacerdos, 99.

Thomas, seneseallus, 75, 106.

Thome, Adam filins, 39.

Johannes, 318.

Thomsone, (Thomsonn,) Alexander, 497.
Danid, #72, 474, 4775 (in sonthe
quenis fery,) 479, 490.

465,

—— Henricus, 474, 483.

Eduardus

—— Joannes, #71.

Joneta, sponsa Roberti stanehous, 469.
Thoraldi, Alexander filius W. filii, 34, 4.
—— Willelmus, 36 ; (filius,) 94.

‘Thor’, archidiacomus, 56.

Johannes filius, 103,
Therus, filius Swani, 12.

comes, 11,

Tinctor, Willelmus,

Viningham, Andreas de, 60,

Galtridus, clericus de,
‘Tod, (Tode,) Georgius, 502.
Jacobus, 478, 481.

Joannes, 4

Thomas, 3

Tony, dominus Radulphus, de, 42.

Torphehyn in Scocia, dominus de, 198.

Torrentine, Joneta, sponsa Patricii Christie
169,

Torrin, Gillanders de, 111.

Torry, Johannes de, abbas de Dunfermlyny,

79,

Tort’ collus, H., 56,

‘Toscheaueht, Thomas,

Touch, Dauid, 500.

Toures, (Touris,) Georgius,
504.

Joannes, de Innerleyth, 494.

Traill, Barbara,
479,

- Innerleyth.

spousa Joannis Betoun


--- Dunfermline_page603.png ---
‘Trimbill, (Crombill, Trumbill.) Andreas, #72,
189,

—— Georgins, 480, 491,

Laureneius, 469.

— Maister Jhone, viear of Cleigh Sehir,
B61

—— Willelmus, 471, 487, 489.

odi, Johannes, 11.

Trotter, Johannes filias Niniani,
Trmmpetun, Euerardas de, 91.

Yullibardin, dominus de, #467.
Tullow, Danid, de Kilkarnay,

Turnetow, Robertus, 415.
Turp’, Mag
edal, homines de, Edmundus, Michael

ter, $18,

filius Edmundi, Marcormi, Meruyne, Gyl

myeacl, Malnuren, Gyllecriste, et Gyhu

hagu, 1

'p
Tw
Tynemue, (Tinemu,) Thomas de, 67. 142.

*, Thomas, notarius publicus, 280,
>

ord, Ricardus de,

Ueteri ponte, Willelmas de, 36.
Urbanus, Papa, 158, 165.

Valibus, (Vallibus,) Johannes de, 92.
—— Willelmus de, 36,
Valloniis, Andreas de, 260.
—— Henricus de, 260.
—— Philippus de, 30,31; (eamerarins rezis,)
32, 33, 37, 39, 85, 106, 107.
— Rogerus de,
——— Willelmns, filins Philippi de. 107.
Valoins, Andreas de. 109.

Vannand, Andreas, 486,
Vaus, (Waus, Wausse,) Johannes de. 43.

DEX NOMINUM. 541

Vaus, Thomas, 342. 344.
W. de, 405.

Vetertule, Willehnus, eapellanus de, 74.
Veddale, Robertus, 3
Ventoun, Eli:
Vidue, Henrieus filius, 267.
Villa Magistri, Hugo de, eid.
Viehil, 13.
Vunframuille, (Vmfrauille.) Gillebertus de

22, 24.
Robertus de, 10.

betha,

Maistertou.

Vimtray, Andreas, clericns Sancti Andree:
297.

Vnict, (Vayet, Vuyeth, Vuyoth.) 17

3.

—— Alexander filins Rieardi, 114, 115, +09.

Vuspac, 128.

Vrehard, (Vrquhard,) Galbert, 87-4.

——— prior de, dominus Johannes, 97.

— Alexander,

Walehope, Alauus de, 5:

Walelinus, capellanus, 4.
Waldale, Willelmus, 267.
Waldef, Gospatricius filius, 22
Waldeuus, 36, 90,

—— filins Gospatricii, 94.
—— frater Dolfin, 13.
Walker, Alexander, 474.
Joannes, 487.

lace, Johannes, 5
Walteri, Michacl filius. 116.
Wahterns, eamerarins, 94.

eancellarius, 7, 8, EL.

26.

— capellanns

cardinalis

—— cleriens, 70.


--- Dunfermline_page604.png ---
54g INDEX NOMINUM.

Walterus, dapifer regis, 30, #2, 18.
—— filius Alani, 8, 9, 23, 24, 275 (dapifer,)
lns,) 43, 44, 93,

—— filins Galfridi, 92.

—— filins Gamel’, 100, 111, 112.

—~ filius Gilleberti, 22.

—— filius Saliyf, 111.

—— nepos archidiaconi de saneto Andrea,

dos, 1.

—— seneseallus Seotie, 2

—— viearius, 10.3.

Walwod, (Walwode, Welwod, Weluod,) Ab-
raham, 468, 488,

—— Adam, 494.

—— Andreas, +81.

Catherina, 471.

Je

anes, 468, 475. 480. $81,
488,

—— Laurentius, £73, 189.

—- Thomas, 49

—— Willyhame of, 285, 287-290, 480, 4

Warderoba, Randinus de, 52, 53.

Wardlaw, (Wairdlaw, Warlaw,) Andreas, dc
Torre, 493,

—— Andreas, flius Andree Wardlaw. #!

—— Helena, sponsa Johannis Weluod, 4468,
ESO,

—— Henrieus, 493-497, 499

Jacobus, filins Andree W:

a1.

rdlaw, 493,

—— Johannes, in Burntoon, 377; (de Torry,)
382,

Magister Thomas, 499.

— Patrieius, filius Andree Wardlaw, 493,

——— Willelmus, 497.

Warewich, Ricardus de, 30.

Warno, Johannes, in Inueresk, 415.
Warrander, Joamnes, 501.

Warrander, Petrus, #72; (of Baleristie,) 485
489,
Willelmus, #72, 484, 486.

Wuatsone, Margareta, sponsa Joaunis Smyt
479,

Wanchope, (Wawehope,) Adam, 47-4, 487
—— Ewfame, 467.

Robert, of Niddrie, 501.

—— Thomas, 476.

Willelmus, #91.

«, capellanus, 56.

V
Wemis, (Wemys, Wemyss,) dominus Dauid
de, 236, 237, 239, 259, 261, 264.
—— Jacobus, de Lathokker, +80; (de

kybarriane,) $81, 491,
Johannes, de Cuthilhill, +96
Johannes, de Rerasse, $46, 473.

—— Johannes, de Pittinereife,)
oe
—— Thomas, de Rerasse, 3465 (Wathauk,)

EST

— Michael, filius Danid de, 23

Weyr, (Weir, Veyr,) Danid, 318,
B42, Bd, B45,

——— Mariota, sponsa Richardi dobic, 496,

a,
340.

Willelmi, constabularii, Johannes fil
—- Hugo filius, 95, 114,
— Neis, (Nesins,) filius, 23
93, 417,

—— Thomas filius, 96.

Willelmus, camerarius, 58.

eapellanus, 49, 50,

——~ eapellanus episeopi,

eapellanus regis, 92.

~~ cementarius, 98.

-—— elericus, 90,

clerieus constabularii castri: de Edi

urgh, 5:



--- Dunfermline_page605.png ---
INDEX NOMINUM. DAS

Willelmus, clerieus episeop!, 60.

——- filins Archibald: monachus de N:

hotyle, t
——tilins Colini, 2
c

— filins Dunoe’, 83.

— filiu:

— filins Henrici de Cragmilor, 1 bb

filius Herherti,
—— lilius Jacobi, 116.

—— filius Johannis, 107.

-— filins Maliclny, 221.
—— filius Orm, 38.

——— filius Rolandi, 62.
~— lilius Thoraldi, 94.
—-— filins Walteri Landy, 395
-— Rex, 28, 31-39, #2, 48,

176,

—— senescallus, 105.

Williamsoune, Jacobus, +82.

Wilsone, (Wilsoun,) Dauid, 501.

— Elizabetha, sponsa Henrici Wariaw,
493, 499.

—— Johaunes, 358, $72. 474, 481.

—— Joneta, 490.

Petrns, 476, 478, 485.

—— Willelmns, 174, #90.

Wimcet, (Wymet, Wymeth,) Michael de, 90,

‘dos de, Dauid. 12.

Witernensis episeopus, Christianus, 22.

vicarius de, dominus Gilbertus. 117, 120.

Witheear, Robertus de, 112.

Withoyemur, Willelmus, #15
Wod, (Wode, Wood,) Andro, of Largo. £19.
—— Helena, sponsa Dauidis Smyth, 14
—~ Henricus, de Largo, #
Wricht, (Wryt,) Adam,
—— Magister Johannes, 304-306.
Woynnerstane, Magister R. de, H+.
Wynrame, Mr. Joln, #62.

Wyse, Dauid, £97.

Ww
Wyth, Henriens, 236.
Wyuill’, WilleImus de,

yssard, Johannes

Yetam, Willelmus de, 146; (archidiaconus

Dumblanensis,) 236, 239.

Yhar, Agnes sponsa Thome,
I.

Ysaac, Nazar’ filius,

—— Thomas, 3

Yung, (Yonng, Zong, Zang.) Georgius, #76
Cristini
1; (Serybe.)

—— Johannes, filius Johannis

de Dynguale, 26
155, 480.

—— Magister Dauid, 3x3.

—— Magister ‘Thomas

—— Robertns, 262.

—— Symon, 394.
-— Willelmus, :



--- Dunfermline_page606.png ---
INDEX

Abberbrothick, eeclesia de, eum eapella, 210.

Abbethayn, 144.

Abbotishall, (Abitishall,) 388, #28, 441.
500, 504.

Aberbuthenot, ecclesia de. 211.

Abererumbin, (Abirerumbi,) 1
—— capella de, 24, 30, 42, 48, 153, 158,

ecclesia de, 3:
127, 165, 168, 17
Aberellot, ecclesia de, 209.

7, 63, 66,
175, 41a.

Aberlemenache, ecclesia de, 210.

Aberluthenot, ecclesia de. 211.

Abernethy, (Abernithi,) 14.

Abirdouir, (Abirdour,) 244, #29.

Accorne waird, (Ackorne warde,) 438. 173,
498.

Adel, ecclesia de, 2
Admor, 238.
Admulthy, 238, 355.
Adthangy, (Authangy,) 148.
Ergaithel,
Aldbar, ecclesia de, 210.
Albethy, 132.
Aldecambus, 272.

vid. Exgaithel.

5.
ia de, 204

—— ecclesia de,

Aldecathyne, ecele

LOCORUM.

Aldendeich, 10s.

Aldestelle, 6, 10, 20, 20, 41, 47, 152.
Aldham, 204.

Alhamestoc’, ceclesia de, 204.
Altencreche, 222.

Alun, 132.

Aly, 149.

Amund, 78, 124,

Anagnia, 187, Iss.

Anegus, Decanatus de, 200,

Anglia, 3.

Ardenny, 308.

Ardett, 499.

Ardlather, 112; (que voeatur milnetun,) 115.
Ardlory, (Arlarie, Arlory,) 313-315, 323,
476, #81, 500, 502,

grose, 207,

s croft, 38-4,

Athera, (Atherai, Atherey,) 10, 131-1
241, 265.

Atyne, ecclesia de, cum capella, 210.

Aynestrothyre, ecelesia de, 207.

Bagraw, 264, 265.
Baith, (Baithe, Bayth, Beeth,) 3, 5, 19, 28,
36, 40, 46, 90, 321, 441, 477, 492



--- Dunfermline_page607.png ---
INDEX

Baith Bell, 436, 438.

Bonala, +36, 438, 170, £79, 488, 501.

Cowdennyes, 488.

Danyell, #36, 438.

— Dewars, 472.

—— fleming, 100, 101,

—— Keir, (Kerrisheith,) 436, 438, 495-
497.

Maistertoun, 483.

—— Murtoune,
—— Nethe, +:
occiden!
476, 478, 479, HST.

parsone, 436, 438, 490,

—— Stenestoun, #36, 438, 472, 487, 490,

—— Stewart, 436, 438.

—— Swintounes, 494.

— Trumbill, 436, 438, 471, 487,
—— Waldef, 52,

489,

wnder the bill,

Baithis, 254,

Balbard, (Balbaird,) 212
B21, £10, 428, 48

Balbertaue, (estir,) 3:

Baleherin, (Balecherin, Balekerin, Beleche-
rin,) 3, 5, 19, 28, 40, 46, 152.

Balchouene, (Balconne, Baleennene,) 34, 85,
86, 249,

Balcristie, (Baleristine, Balecristine, Belacris-
tin.) 5, 8, 19, 28, 34, 40, 46, :
428, 461, 442, 471, 472, 483, 184, 486,
487, 193, 494, 501, 503,

Baldrig, (Baldrige, Bawdrick, Bawdrik, Bawe-
tick,) Ester, 475, £86, 488.

—— Middle, 425, 437, 439, £68, 479, 480,
485, 484,

Baldrig, Wester, 425, 473, 489,

3, 316,

250.

, 492,

LOCORUM.

Baldrome, #10,

Baleblarin

Balegillurs, 24.

Balegl

Baleglinen, (Balmacglinen,) 24, 152, 156,
eid, Glinen.

Balendrum, 245.

Balmackennedi, 24.
almacmol, 96,

Balmacolie, 887, 391, 41

Bahnane, 223, 224,
Balmule, (Balmull,) 480, #87, 493-497.
Balnegonencre, 22
Baluer’, 220.

Balquharge, 38:

Balquhenry, 384.

Balssusuic, (Balsusny,) 475, 483-485.

Balulsi, 78.

Balwaird, 442.

Balweri, (Balwery,) 139, 145, 275, 373, 382,
422, 429, 441, 473, 488, 500,

Bandrum, 429, 469, 470, 479.

Banef, 18.

Banevyn, ecclesia de, 209,

Bank, +:

Bavnoc, 128.

Barnes, Hist, 425, 435,
480, 486, 487, 496,

ade, 209

Barwe, ecclesia de, 204.

436, 438, 468, 469,

Barry,

Bathketh, ecclesia de, 203.

Bawmill, 426, 436, 438.

Bedgall, 415.

Bendachim, (Bendachin, Bendachtin, Bend-
acthin, Bendanchin, Beudauchty, Bend-
auhtin, Bennaehtin, Bennanchtin,) 51, 74,
134, 151, 156, 175, 214, 215, 873, 419.

Bendachim, eeclesia de, 76, 133-135.

32


--- Dunfermline_page608.png ---
546 INDEX LOCORUM.

Bennathy, (Bennothie,) 394, 395, 468, 499,
508.

Bennoquhy, +67.

Bennum, ecelesia de, 241.

Berwie, (Berwich, Berwyk, Berwyenm) 3,
5, 6, 10, 19, 28, 40, 41, 44, 46, 72, 152.
154, (57, 175, 176, 243, 321, 358.

ade, 205.

jairrathie, Blarothye,) 426, 436,

ceel

Blairathie, (B
438, 491.

Blairbothiv, (Blarnebothic,) 427, #36, 438,
483, $87, 498, 502.

norther, £36, 438,

sonther, 438.

Blaklaw, 321, 426, 436, 458, 468, #85.

Blalak, (Blalok,) 387, 391, 498, 199.

Blare, 134.

sia de, 200,

in, (Bolgy,) 8, 5,19, 28, 40, 46, 321,

417, 421.
Bolhill, 410.
Bothannis, «4

sia de, 204.

Bonyltnn, ecelesia de, 204.

Braidleyis, 490, 493, 44, 502.

Brearyhill, 487, #93.

Brewister land, (Browsterlandis,) 428, 475.

Brewland, 430, 443, 468, 490, 494.

Bri

Brixwald, terra de, 10.

Bruges, 246.

Brumbill, +3:

Bruntiland, #76, 477, 485.

Bure, 94.

Burgrenisflat, 132.

Burnemonth, 425, 436, 438, 473, 474, 484,
485, 190.

ham, capella de, 206.

Butheatheroc, 130.
Buthkenner, ecclesia de, 204.
Bynyn’, ecclesia de, 203.

Caldeoittis, (Caldeottis,) 430, 434, 435, 448.
449, 460, 491, 499.

Caledor comitis, ecclesia de, 203.

Caledouer, vid. Kaledouer.

Caltin, Lo.

Cambrun, 265.

fambus de, 2

Cambusbarou, (Cambusbarun,) 39, 128, 240.
410, 411,

Cambuskinel, 10, 128.

abbacia de, 130.

n, 240,

Se

Cambuskyneth,
Cs ikel, ecclesia de, 209,
Carbarrin, (Crebarrin, Crefbarri, Crefbarrin, )
1, 28, 40, 46, 102-106, 157, 176.

arrye, (Carberry, Carberrie,)
430, 432, 483, 447, 448, 4)
459, 460, 492, 495,

Caredyne, ecclesia de, 203.

Carlowry, (nether,) in Linlytqw, 382.
Carebeg, 223.

Carnihole, 411.

Carmbie, 442, 444, 445, 451, 452, 458, 4!
Cars, (Carse,) 430, 465, 466, 476, 490.
Caskybarian, vid, Kaskybarian.
Cassebarrene, 428.

Castellum, (Castrum) puellarum, eid. Edin
burgh.

Castilstank, 223.

‘astilsted, 2

Cavil, (Cawill.) 436, 438, 492.

Causland, (Coukesland, Cousland, Covslande, )



--- Dunfermline_page609.png ---
INDEX LOCORUM. BAT

capella de, 36, 57, 59, 63, 66, 81, 152,
154, 157, 418, 493, 447, 452, 456, 459,

EST, 491.

Chaneee, ta, 133.
Chet, eid. Keeth,
Childenkyrehe, ecclesia de
(Chymesyde,)

de, 205,

206,

(Clakmanan, Clamanan,) 7, 15,
29, BO, ATH, IT AS, 54, 152,
B89, 393,

ceclesia de, 207,
Cleische, (Cles, Cleth.) 14%, 108,

ceelesia de

Clerbaldistona, (Cler

ia de, 205,

. Chinyis, Clunys.) 2
380, 386, 890, B91,

8, 136, 3S, 445, 488. 492, 593,

B88.

nudistun,) 97,

Clerkyntone, ¢
Clony, (Chin

+ BUS,

Cnocenlein, 108.
Cnokduny. 117.
Cob’neti
Cocpen, ec
Coilyeraw, 480, #81, 504,
Coitt, (Cott,) #28, 481, $41, 442, 480.
Coittunflat, 394.
Coklaw, (Koklaw,
72. 480, 500,

4, 420. 436, 438, 469,

Coldyngham, (Coldinghame,) ecclesia de, 205.

prioratus de, 879.
Cornethon, (Cornetun, Coruntnn,) 132,
241, 265.
Corneueth, (Conenthe.) 2.
ib

26,

ecclesia de.

Corsburne, #10.

Sostertoune, 430, FTG,

Coupermakeoutty, (Cowpermaculty, Cupir-
macenlim, Capermacultin, Cupremaculty,)

Sl, TH UB, 151, 156, 175, 217, 278,
8, 419, 473, 482, 499.

gfode, V1.

. (Craigenky,) 410 5 (cister et wes-

Craggineat, 345, 3-44,
Craggis, (Craigis,) 136, 482.

Cragmedu, 410,

Cragmilor, (Craigmiller.) 11, 114, 491.
Cragorth, 125
vbnrne, 368,
uky, 48-4

cist, 156, 438, 470.
st, 436, 45
Craighom, 488.
Craigluseer, (Craighuseoure,) 426

481.

Craig:
Crai

vd, H2,

toun, 492.

mbeth, 1¢

Cramund, {Karamund,) 98, 11
ade, 205.

Cranessawys, &

de, 203,
tun, Creytune,) 372.

lesia de, 68, 205.

Cranystun, eccles
Creclitome, (Cre

Creyeh, ecclesia de, (eum capella,) 208,
Crikwell, 410.

Crocketleeche, 112.

Crofleebe, #11, 412.

Crosmire, 411.

Crownarland, 436. 438.
Ord

Crommye

Cuiltedouenald, 39.

Culase, (Culessy,) ecelesia de, 208, 209.
Cuibyne, 122.
Culenros, 126, 127.
Culleloneh, 243,



--- Dunfermline_page610.png ---
548 INDEX LOCORUM.

Cultirmakeulte, 385.

Cunnyngarland, (Cwnyngerlandis,) nane Brune
teland, 393, 399.

Cupir (Cupre, Cupyr.) in fyf, 48, 54, 183,
134, 2

ecele:

Currieflatti

de, 208.
496,

De
Dernesin, 64.

aqua de, 382.

ne, ecclesia de, 208.

sia de, 366.

in Rossia, 1!
Disard, (Disart, Dy

141, 207.
Discheeroft, 83°, 5

ia de, 66-68,

Dodyngstone, ecclesia :
Dolar, (Dolour, Doloures) 43,
328, 836, 431-483, 444-446, 4. 454,
480, 48)
—— maynis de, 486.

mylne of, 427.
Dolorheg, (Dolourebeig,) 393, 427, 490.

mylne of,

yre, (Dolonresehyre.) 322. 447. 450.

Douely.

Dreg

Drone, 499.

Drumbernin, 5, 5, 19, 28, 40, 46, 152.

Drumelry,( Drammelerie, Drammeldrie,) £28,
482, $41, 442, 472, 478, 486, 495, 498.

450,

Drumkeppic, (Dromkyppy.)
Drumlaw, 389.
Drumthuthill, 436, 438, 475, 495.
Dulbrodoe, ecelesia de, 210.
Dulmade, ecclesia de, 211.

Dulmernak, 278.
Dumberach, 220.

Dumghereloihe, 108.

Dumnmeniech, (Dummerneth, Dunmernach.
Dunmernee,) 51, 74, 156, 175, 218, 419.
Dunbar, ecclesia de, 204,

ia de, 208,

8, 367.

Dunbulg, eccles

Dunde, 247, 27

— ceelesia de Lozyn, 209.
Dunduff, 111, #36, 438, 467.
Dan’, ecelesia de, 210.
Dunenauche, ecclesia de, 208,
Dunfermelitane. (de Dunfermlyn,) eeclesin
sancte Trinitatis, passim.

Daunfermelyn, (Dunfermling,) passin.

#0, AO.
—— ecclesia christi de, 83,90, 91, 5

— citra aquam, 3, 5, 19,

sia de, 207,

The thrie mylnes of, 426,

slo, 18.

Dunhair, +40.

Dunherne, (Dunkerne,) 347, 372. 380,

Duniker, (Dunnieker, Dwnyker,) 90,91,
479.

Dunipast, (Dunypast,) capella de, 128-130,
152, 157

—— eeclesia de, 204.

Dunkeld, 200,

Dunkcldensis, (de Dunkeld, Dukeldyu,) ab-
bacia, 6, 20, 29, 41, 47.

—— ceclesia sancte Trinitatis,
48, 74, 119, 151, 152, 156,
195, 322, 419.

Dunlopyne, ecele:

30, 42.
75, 104,

ia de, 210.
Dunmanyn, eeclesia de, 203.

Donninet, (Duninad, Dunynade,

—— ecelesia de, 210,


--- Dunfermline_page611.png ---
INDEX LOCORUM. 5Ag

Dunotyre, ecelesia de, (enm capella,) 211,

Duuse, ceclesia de, 205.
Durnach, 14,

Durrys, ceelesia de, 211.

Eceles, (Eclyse, Eggles,) ecelesia de, 8, 129,
206,
Edenbroc, (Edenburge, Edenebure, Edenes-
burg, Edinburgh,) 8, 11-13, 15, 19, 24,
28, 30, 31 40, 42, 4, +8, 95, 123,
5, 176, 198, 265, 270,
22, 324,
362, 368,
369, 375-377, 382, 417, 430, 447, 459.
—eastrum pucllarum de, 23, 4
92.

152, 154, 157, 1

Sf, 287, ST1-313,

—— ceelesia beati Eyidij de, 203.
ecelesia sancti Cuthberti de,
ia de, 205.

Edeucyne, ecelesia de, 214).

136, 203.

Ederhame, ce

Edmistoune, (Edionstoun, Edmmndistun,)
140, 267; (manys de.) 374, 430, 434,
458, 473, 492, 496, 497, 499,

ja de, 206.

Edyuhame, ecel

, ecclesia de, 211.

Exlysmauebyue, cee
Eichiuchuyhevyd, 27
Elbotle, 9, 1
Elfinistun, 112.
Elgin, (Elgyn,) 18, 283.
Eliotshill, 390.
Ellume, ecclesia de, 2

Elstanford, ccelesia de, 204.

Erbentoly, 246,

Ercyldine, ecelesia de, 206,

Eren, 18.

Ergaithel, (Ergaithel, Arregethil, Ergathyl,

Ergeithil.) 7, 18, 21, 80, 42, 47,
175.
Erollyn, cvelesia de, 20!
Ershill, 206,
Erth, ecclesia de, 204.
Eseh, (Es Ky) TUL, 147. 149, 150. 224
Bos,

ecclesia de, 210,

210,

‘k, Es

Ess
Estyrearne,

Paleys, 135.

Falubil, (qui voeatur Croft yneanghynki,)
10.

Faluleeche, 109.

Falumireside, 108.

Fathenechten, 18,
tfaulawe, ecclesia de, 205
ffaulyse, ceclesia de, 209.
Ferdalf, aqua de, 144.
ffarnyholne, 223.
Herifelde, (derylelde,) 25
Herihill, (feryhill,)
fferteuseth, eeelesia de, (eum cap clla,) 208.
ter ia de, 211.

Hetyressache, ecclesia de, (cum eapella,) 211.
sy, (Fynglassy,) 808, 408, 448, 467,

330, $93, 934.

rkerne, co

Hing!

Jesia de, 206,

fithkill, (ffytkyll,) 316.

de, 240.

a de, 208.

flode, (Foct, Foeth, Foid,) 5
40, 46, 152, 321, 482.

shou, ecclesia de. 206.

ffordochy, 350, 351, 367.

fforgrunde, ecclesia de, 208, 209.

19, 28,

ffortyre, eeclesia de, 207.


--- Dunfermline_page612.png ---
550

ffuldene, ecclesia de, 205.

fynmout, (Fynmonth,) 308, 389,
473, 490, $92, 493, £96, 499.

Fit, (fff, fyife,) 6,15, 20, 29, 41, 44, 47.
175, 259, 287, 301, 810, 811, $21, 823,
B24, 327-329, BBL, B43, B45, 355, 389,
BAB, 896, 398-401, 407, 407

ecclesie de, 207,

2.

BOS, 443,

Finen,
Finfans, due, 18.

Fithkil, (Fitkil,) 35, 158 175.
Flemigbrech, 220.

Florentia, 365.

Florys, les, 133.

Flueysland, 149.

Fochoper, 18.
Foderos, (Fotheris, Fotheros, flothros.) 5.
1H, 28, 10, 46. 156, 1 B01

303, B31, B87, 389, B95. 477
Ford, North, 126,
South, 426,

Fordell, 490,
Fordewyne, (fordiu, fordume, Pordenin, For-
156, 175, 218, 278

duuin,) 51,
419.

ecclesia de.

Qu).

Forfar, 3

eccle: 210,
Forth, 4, 6, 20, 23. 80, 12
154, 156, 1.
176, 490,
Fosterland, 478, 47/1.
Fostertoune, 443.
Fotherif, (Foth:
310, 3It,
Fotherif ve:
parochia de, @, 20, 29, 41, 47, 152.

#1, 47, 521
, 417.
a7.

NDEX LOCORUM.

Fuielecches, 130.
Fyunie, 428.

Gaitmilk, (Gatemile, Gaytmylk,) ecelesia de.
152, 156.

schira de, 3, 5, 19, 28, 40, 46, 152,
156, 175, 221, 222, 238, 239, 286, 305
BOR, 321, B54, 855, 428, 443, 466-469,
471-473, 475, 482, 489, 490, 499.

ick, 430, 438.

Strathirewin in, 13, 17.
Gartinker, 290, 291,
Garuald, ecclesia de, 204.

Garuoe, (Garvok,) 113, 214, 493,
ceclesia de, 211.

Garnoter, 227.

Gascinienemfin, (Gaseynienclf, Gaseyniencut.
kinienemf,) 45, 99, 100.
5 127, 436, 438, 49.

Gellald, (Gelland,) grangia de, 270.
—— portus de, 270.
—— sehyra de, 8. 5,19, 28. 40. 46.125

Gelletis, (Gullettis,.) 432, 494, 504,
480, 482, 197, 502,
—— Wester, 435, 438, 480, 482, 495.

e, 336, BST.

Fister, 485-

Gilmoriston, 26,
Girsmurland, (Gresmurland,) 432, 438, 469.
193,

menes, ecclesia de, 210.

Glammys, 301, 302.

Glendovok, 882,

Glenewme, (Glinen,) ecclesia de villa. 37, 63.
66, S1, 418, od. Baleglinen.



--- Dunfermline_page613.png ---
INDEX LOCORUM.

Goger, evelesia de, 2
de, 204.

Gordun, ecclesia de, 206.

Golyn, cee

Gorgin, 136.
Gospatric, (villa, mune Kaldestanis,) 113.
Gourin, (Goucrin,) eapitulum de, 78.
—— Deeanatus de, 208.

Grainge, (Grange,) 483, 487, 489.

8, 432, 4.

483, 484,

Nethir,

496, 408,

manis de, 393, 399.
— (vuer,) 429, 467.
$84, $85, 491, 45, 497,

—— whder, +40.
Wade, 440.
Grefland, 393, 399.

Grenlawe, 97.

veclesia de, 206,

Greynside,

Hadingtune, (Hadyngtone,) 5, 11, 19,
BL, 36, 39, 40, 46, 88, 102, 107, 1
157, 175, 321, 430, 447, +.

evelesia de, 204.

Hala, (Hale, Halef, Halis, Hal
3, 5, 19, 28, 40, 46, 36,
66, 81, 1335, F47, 152, 1
190, 284, 287, 321

476, 48S, 492, 495, 50:

Sancti Cuthberti de, 135, 136,

52, 197, 175, 203, #18, 433, 447,
451, 459, 487.

Halbank, 390.

Haliburtune, ee

Halhill, +

Halyrudbouse, 447.

Hamyr, ecclesia de, 204.

2
32,

‘s, Heallis,)
7, 59, 62, 63,
7.167, 173, 176,
1,872, 879, B84,

ccelesi

Jesia de, 206,

Harlasehot, 54
Harystane, 2
Hasoewell, #1
Hawlull, #34, +.
de Melgum, 309, 42s.

Hawtoune, +43.
Herbertoli,
Hertlautlat, 219,
Heruieroe, (Heruiiseroe,) 78, 79, 118, Eb

Heryeth, ecclesia de, 205.
Hichermakedi, 220.
Hill, 434, 1, HES, 460, 503.
Hoillbawdrick, 436, 438.
Hoctor comon, 14.

Holegath, 188,

ade, 206,

Home, eccles

Horbart, the, +2

Homedene, ecelesia de, 206.

Hoton, ecel
Hoyle, edd. Le
Hucbnis croft, 3

ja de, 206,

Huchterealedouir, ecelesia de, 26.
Hurchard, ed/. Vrehard.

ade, 206,

Hyltone, ce

Inchdrayn, 221.

Inche, #19,

Jnchebryoe, ecclesia de, 210,

Inchedarnie, (Inehderne, Inchderny,) 308,
428, 113, 166, 488,

Inchehoch, 1 #9,

Inchemurthoc, 70.

Inehesturphyne, (Ineheturin,) 2

lesia de, 20:
)387, 391,495,499.

Iuchetore, ee

Inchetrewie, (Iuchstravi
Incheturfin, (Inehturfy,) 51, 151.
246.



--- Dunfermline_page614.png ---
Innernarn,

lntrech, (Infrese, Inneresk, Inuerese, In-
neresck, Inuiresch, Inuirbesehe,) 11, 152,
191, 362, 430, 452, 433, 448, 452, 457,
460, E84, £86. 487, 48S, 492. 503.

4 40, £6, 56,

ecclesia de. 5. 17.

+ 59 6B, fifi, STU
418,

—— major, 8, 5, 19, 28. 40, 46, 154, 157,
175, 321.

—— minor, 3. 5, 19, 28. 40, 46,151, 157.

75, 921, 417.

yra de, 112, 148.

Innerkeithing. (Inuerchethin. Tnacrkethin,)
21, 29, 41, 47, 95. 163, 165,
BERD Ed » EN2, 492.

3, 66, ATS.

sc

247, 256. 277,

capella de, 2

3. 157,

20),

—— ecelesia de, 61, 81
217

138, 156, 168.1
2 58. 451, 188.

Innergoucryne, ecclesia de, 2

Toucrhamnnd, (Iwiramund.) 24.78, 74, 118.
194.

Inuerkiletyre. ecclesia de, (cum eapelle

Inuerhun:

ne, ecclesia de, 210,
Innernysse, 353.

Inuerwye, ceclesia de, 204,

Innirtule,

Jakstoune, 387. 49n,

Kaldestanis, 113,

Kaledouer eter’, ecclesia de, 2

ecclesia de, 55, 60, 88, 12

INDEX LOCORUM.

Kaledouer, Wester, ecclesia de, 57, 64, 66,
SI, 154, 157.

Kambuskinel, ed, Cambuskinel.

Karal, (Karel,) 43, 54, 88, 156, 175.

ecele:

in de, 207.
Karamnnd,
Kasky

Cassabasrean,) 2

id. Crammund.
Dara, (Kaskybarian, Kaskynbariam,

J, 238, 239, 808, 443,

vl, ecelesia de, 261.

Keeth, (Keth, Chet.) 3, 5,19, 2
1, 68. ST, 106, 152, 15
addockis, 68.

40, 56, 57,
6, 418,

—— Siwynis, 68, 96, 97.
Kellin. (Kellyn,) 35, 95, 156, 175.
2H, 80,42, 18, 57. 59-61,

Bo 154, 156, 171, 175.

ecelesia de.
63, 66, SL
£18
Kellohonis Well, 411.
Kellywod, 438,

208

Kelty, 47
Keuhae
Kemahyn, ecclesia de, 2

Kentir, (Kentyr,) 7, 2

156,

1, 30, 42, 48, 152.

(Kernoe,) 129.

ecclesia de, 207,

Nernes

Kerymur, eeclesia de, 210.

Keryngton, ceclesia de, 2¢

Ketenes, ecclesia de, 210.

Kethec, (Kethic, Cethec.)134,151,1
278,350,851, 367; (litil Kethee,)375,419.

Kethekerbeg, 51.

Kethimdeby, ecclesia de, 205.

de, 205.

Kileonebath, ceclesia de, 133, 208.

Kildone, (Kildun, Kildwne,) in Rossia,
BT, 383, 408.

Ketmarisealli, ecel



--- Dunfermline_page615.png ---
INDEX LOCORUM.

Kilglissin, (Kilzlessin, Kinglassie, Kin

sin, Kynglassie, Kynulassy,) 101, 167.
BOS, 425, £31, 133, bh

A, FSG, OTS AGO
ATS, EST, 494, 502,
57, 39, 63, Gb, G6, ST,

Kilgoneryne, evelesia de, 207.
Killarne, #30,

Kilmanyn, cee

HB 47, 5B, 152, 156, 17

34, SE 1-146,

160, 461,

sia de magna, 207.
ecelesia de parua, 60), 71, 82
Estir, (vrientilis,) 345, 346,
oecident
156,171, 1

207.

» veclesia de, 63, 66,

175, 433.

—— que propinquior est Dunfermelyn, 8
19, 28, 40, 46, 521.

—— Wester, (oceidentalis,) 154, 156, 175,
BLS, BAG, BAS, 393, $29, 431-433, 440,
447-453, 4 479,
183, 485, 48

Kinmoclitic, +

Kintullo, 382

Kirealadin, (Kirealadinit, Kirealdin, Nireale-
thin, Kirkaladunt, Nirkaldyn, Nirkaledin,)

0, 305-309, BIS, 318,

400, 416, 431, 153, 134, 441,
HAH, 19, 450, 452-454, 457, 158,
#61, 452, 408. 475, 480-483, 192, 494,
497, 501.

—— Baronia de, 388.

4A

558

jadin, e¢ de, 16, 56, Su, 66.
70,71, 82, DEL, PRY, 152, 154, 156, 169.
2, 175, 207, 240, 383, 422.

hyva de, 3, 5,16, 19, 28, FO, 46, 152,
417, F29.

Kirketun, 39.

Kire: is,

Ku

Knokas,

de, 128, 204,
Ky $26, 436, 438, 401,
#86, BBS, ATG) TT, 187.

Knoklargauch,

Knokmadyr, 223.
Kylmichel, (Kyrebmyhel,) Lt.
Kylrethny, ceclesia de, 207,

Kyneleayn, (Kynclevin,)
3 (in Rox.)

miedder, Kynnedir,

yndun,

neddir, 393, 430, 483, #8 6 490, 493.
—— Vuer, 429.

Kynel, (Kynell, Kynule,) ecclesia de, 203,
209, 210.
erny, (K

Ky iN 3, 3938, 490.
Kyuetles’, ecclesia de, 210,

Kynfaunys’, ecclesia de, 209.

Kynnynmont, (Kyunymuonth,)
Kynross, (Kinross,) 148, 220,
46)

497.
318, 3

ecelesia de, 207,
423, 433, 451, 480, 491.

209,

, BOS, HOE, #12,

Kynspincdy, eeelesia de.
Kyrkhaleh, 190.

Lainale, ecclesia de, 206,

Lambertoue, ecelesia de, 205.

Lambirmor, (Lambremor,) 6, 7, 20, 21, 24.
47, 152, 156, 175.


--- Dunfermline_page616.png ---
Langetun, ecclesia de, 205.

Largauche, ecclesia de, 208.

mons de, 409.
Lassody, (Li

Lessedyn, Lessodie,)

—— Elster, 426, 4

—— Nether, 426, 08-470, 475, 497.
—— Vuer, 426, 469, 472, 479, 502 4
#90,

ecclesia de, 203,

—— Wester, 439, +

Lastalry

Lathalland, (Lathalmond.) 428, 442, 487,
468, AT, Hd, 50-4,

Lathangy, (Lathangyie,) 426, £65, 504,
Lateran’, 77, 128, 129, 131, 134, 139, 161-
166, 168-171, 174

Laudonie, ecclesia de monte, 205.

ceclesie decanatus, 204,

Lauar, (Lauer,) 3, 5,19, 28, 40, 16,1
417.

Lauchamoeht, (Lawthamoch,) £26, 436, 459.

Laweder, ecclesia de, 206.

Lawgreinis, (Lawgrenys,) 399,

Ledmacduuegit, (Lethmachdnnegil,) 21, 23,
BO, 42, 48, 152, 157, 176.
Legattis briv. 30.439: (ali

469.
Leith, (Leth,) 106, 462.
Lerenach, 144.

s Hoyle.)

203,
Lethame, (Letlnmes,) eapella de, 206.
Northe,(Northlathanis, Northelemeis,)
426, 457, 439, 470. -
South, AE,

esia de,

Lessewade, cc

Lethberd, eeeles

Letheni, 126.
Lenyngystone, ecclesia de, 203.
Levyn, (Lewen,)

— agua de, 238,

554 INDEX LOCORUM.

Libertun, ceclesia de, 114.

Liulithyow, (Linchithen, Linliden, Lintitheu,
Linlitqaw, Litheu, Lynlythqy.) 5. 19. 28.
40, 46, 152, 274, 311, 821.

ecclesia de, 203.

Lochend, 475.

Lochglo, 108.

Lochheid, 35

Lochle

Lochorus

vid. Levyn.

re, evele

dle, 205.
Lochrese, (Lo

esch,) ecclesia de, 207

Loganraw, 332.

Login, 131.

—~ eeclesia de, 133, 210, 240,
Logton’, 190, 262
Logy, 875, 426, #
Logybride, (Logybryde,) 887, 301, 498, 499.
Logymurdach, ecclesia de, 208,

Loning, (Lonyng,) 102, 149, 190.
Louthyan, 114.

Louenyn, 264,
Lugdunum, 177-1

180, 420, £21,
Lumifortyne,

Luseer, (Luschar, Lusker,) due ville nomine,
3,5, 19, 28, 40, 4G, 152, 821, 496,
Gocelin, 111.

occidentalis, 426,
482, 48+, 487, 498.
orientalis, 114,
Lauserenyoth, (Luserevyot, Luscureweit, Lis-
kirhunyoth,) 198, 263, 264, 27
313,
Lyf’, ecclesia de, 209.

436, 439, 475, 478,

9, 289, 312,

26, $30, 439, 477, 495,

23,

Lygardwa, ecclesia de, 206.


--- Dunfermline_page617.png ---
INDEN LOCORUAL 555

Lymehilhill, #32, 176, 485, 503.
Lymekill, ree ackillis,) 132, 130, 139,
HET B67, BNO, $82, bE, 498, 500,

Lyntun, ecclesia de, 204.

Lystun, ecelesia de, 203,

480, IS], 487, 4

ceelesia de,

Mailuile, (Mailvyn,
aula de, 190,

de, 60, 64, G6

119, 175, 190, 203, 386.

Maleuyn, Mallenill,)

—— ceelesi

vester, B84.

caroune, qui Vulgariter nineupatur Ky

mearoune, 352.
Malearnystone, ecelesin dey 206,
Mandurpe, (Manturpe,) 4

ige, ceclesia de, 207.

dR,

210,

Mathinlur, eccles

Medow end, 475, 198
Meldrumes mylne, #37, $39, $80, 41, 45.

Melgum HOO, $28, 492.
Hawhill de, 399.

Menicclaw,

Mernys, eeclesic decanatus de, 211.

Merolri, £10.

> deeanatas de, 205.

Mertune, ceelesia de, 2

sia de, cum eapella, 200,
ade, 207.

Methkyl, ece

Midelhope, 13.
Milhillis, (Mylbillis,) 390, 437, 439, 472.
484, 490, 504.

Milnceroft, 135.
Miluctune, (Myltoun.) t
Modirsyke, 3.46,
Moirlaybank, (Me Ik) 437, £39,
Molin, (Mollan, Molyn, Mulen, Malyne.
Mwling,) 86, 175, 248-250, 451, 467,
498, 48

ceclesia de
161, 165, 165
190, 491.

Montlooer, 244,

HFT, TH, 85, LEN,
[9d S86, 133

Moaktounc, (Munetime,
19 4
—— lit. 3
460,
Monktounhall, £50, 432, B33. 447, 451.4
459, 460, 486, G1, 497-400.
Monturpy, #91.

Manketun.) 1

130, $04, 135, HET, 4s,

ia de, 208,
Morauia, (Muref,)
Mordyngtune, ece!

Monymele, ee

Morhame, evelesia de,
Morpheis fanld, £80, 404,
Moyhous, 429, +40, 480, 482, 496, 09%

Muckarde, eeclesia de, 207.

Muirtoune, (Murtoune,) £35, 487. 459, 441,
443, 504.

Mukyrsy, 246,

Munros, 37.

Munyfothe, ecclesia de, (eum eapella,) 209.

209.

Murhall, 473-477, 479. 490, 496, 501, 503,
504

Murheid, 479, 483

Muasckilburg, (Muskelburghe, Muskilburghe.
Mussillpuche, Musilburg,) 4 £, 49, 50, 10:
147, 150, 157, 186, 175, 260,
279, 287, 322, 332,357, 358, 106. 117,

Mureus, eeclesia de,



--- Dunfermline_page618.png ---
556 INDEX LOCORUM.

$50-452, 434, 5 FEETES, 450,

454. 456, 457, 459-461, 467, 470, 478,

80, 484, 489.
Musckilburg, eeelesis

de, 171,10

5, 205, 212.
aria de, 62.
Mayoeh, 117.

Myldanes, (Mylndaneis,) #43, 475, 477, #82.
wa

Neubotil, (Nenbottil, Newhotle,) 102.
$30, 447, $59.

470, 472.
#99, 501-

3.
veelesia de, 236, 404, 4
Nentun, (Nentune.) 466.

3, 8,

ecclesia de.
81, 1538, 158 157,
ALS.

GA, 66,

2 175, 2038,

Neutyle, ecclesia de, 210.

Neuyth’, ecclesia de, 210.

whigy

imme, (Nevbirne, Nubu
$42
£58, 460. 460,

—— ceclesia de, 3%

—— mylne of. 428.
jrueschire, #28, 431, 441,

AGT.

Baronia de. £00,

28, 482

447-449.

Jirnetoune,
486, 492, 407

442, 478, 4

Newbirnetoune, Mureheid of, 491

burn, ed. Nidbren et Newhirne.

309.

Newraw, 340,

Nidbren, (Nithbren, Nithebren,
5, 8

Newhavin.

ythbren,)
19, 28, 40, 46, 131, 1 152.
212, 213, 224, 324, 40H,

22:

5, ST, SM
154, 156, 171, 175, 208.

Nodrit, (Nudreth.) 114, 150,

North Berwie, eeclesia de, 204,

Northehuy. 149.

North eva

, 63, GH. 152

2. IT.

435, 437, 438.

— capella de,

Northilat, 97, 21

Northfode, (Northfoid,) 469-471, 475. 45s
489, 500, 504.

Northlandis, #10.

Nortryge, 219.

Northferry,

Nyg, ecclesia de, 211.

Ocht, (Oueht, Outh, Outht,) 426, 4
482, 498,

Oehterbousse, 351.

Orehardbauk, 190,

Ommystun, ecclesia de, 205.

Oroe, (Orok, Orrok,) 96, 117, 221
347, 380, $40, 473, 490,
504,

manis de,

BN.

Paniseolis, 281.
Parey, 321.
Pardusin, 8, 5, 19, 28, 40, 46, 1

417.



--- Dunfermline_page619.png ---
Parkley, 10,
Passagium Regine, 156, 163, 172, 172

270, 322, 451,

Paulyswrth, ceclesia de,

Peneoc, ecclesia de, 203,

Penneland, (Penuicland,) 390, 504,
ia de, 204.

ul, ecclesia de, 203,

Pert, (Perth) 3, 4 7,
1, 30,2
398, 124. 12.
193, 247, 268, 278, 2
Ble, , 865, BUT, 871, 394,
#12, 415, #87, HIS.

land, eecles

1, 1, 21,

1, 80,

— capella de castello de, 24, 29, 41, 47,
154. 156, 418,
3,4, 19, 24, 29, 40,

66, 81, 130, 156, 171,

37, GB. G6, S1, 152,

IS, #21,

66, 81, 152, 156, 568, 418, 497.
—— Scola de, 56-58, 63, 66, 81, 418,

vicecomitatus de, 31, BMT,
BIG.

Petbachelin, (Petbach

in, Petbachlin, Pet

bachichin, Petbaclachin, Pethhauehly, Pit-

willie.) 3,5, 19, 28, 40, 46, 101, 152.
213, 226, 310-343, 417, $25, 437, 439.
475, #84, 499, 500,

Petelochin, (Petlochy,) 84, 308.

Petconmarehin, (Petconmarthin, Pettonnar-

chin, Peteonmerk,) 8,5, 1. 28. H, 46,

152, 370, 449, BOT, 406, 41, 362.
Petcorthin, (Petheorthin, Pettecorthin, Pit-
. Piteorthie,) 8.5, 19, 28.40, 46,
ALT. #25, 487, 439, 470, 475
p ASU, 485, 486, 491,

Petfuraue, (Pethturen, }
435, 437, 439, 467, 477.

Pethenach, 5, 1h, 1S, 1),

Pethenanreha. (Petnarcha, Potnaureha,
19, 28. 40, 18, 152, 417,

Pethineretf, (Dittinereif.) 218, £87, £39, ST
500, 501,

wre, 220, 221,

Potiocher, (Petioker, Petvhochir, Pitzow-
quhair,) 5.19. 40, 46, 1 , BUS,
321, 428, HB. £66470, 135, 493, 495,
50k,

Petliner, (Petlyuer,) 1
483, 103, £94, 494,

Potmaedufgille, (etmaeduf;
uegile,) 34, 85, 86, 24

Petnaldoic, (Petmalduith,) 3

Hy

le, Petmaedu-
0,

85, 86. 24,

, B36, 390,

Petultin, 24.

Perdew, (Perdewis,) edies Bramhill, 381,
492, 504.

Perusiam, 177. 186, 187.

Pictaui, 150-21.

Pine’ in, (Piukin, Pye

130, 433, 4
47H. 486, 400,

Pitarvy, (Pittrave,) 135, 437, 439

Pitconnoquhy, (Piteonquhy,) #37, 4

Pitduneis, 437 ; (cist and west,) 43

Pitlawguby, (Pitlchie, Pitlouthye,) 428 443.
£67, 494,

Pittie commoun, 470, 493, 502,

Pittinweme, $27.

Pittumry, #92.
Plokylaw, #11.
Pluseardyn, prioratus de, 3



--- Dunfermline_page620.png ---
558

Pofllath, 219.
Polmase Ehvyn, terra de, 150.

Weland, terra de, 150.
Pontekin, (Pontekyn,) 191.
Portmooe, ceelesia de, 207.

Portynerag, passagium de, 273.

Pothyne, 214, 226.

Potwell, 190.

Potyn’, ecclesia de, (eum eapella Dunberny,)
208.

Pyestoun Grange, 3!

B63.
Primros, (Primrosse, Prymrois,) 5,19), 28,40.
46, 152, 821, $25, 435, 437, 439, 48

(Quariour landis, 491.

(Quarter eister, #29, 440,

Queneis ferric, vé/. Passaginin and Southferry.
North, 495.

Quheithill, (Quhytehill,) 434, 435, 447, #45.
(Qubittinghill, 481, 497.

Quhytfeild, 439.

J, #30, 454, 435, 148, 448, 460,

Quhy

rth
(Quichtes, (Quiclitis,)
Quyle’, ecclesia de, 207.

Qwytehestrys, 272.

7

Raitht, (Rath, Rayth,) 370, 396, #29, 406.

tb

Raithtoun, 396.

Randellis craigis, 435, 437, 459, 470, 473,
ATU, 485, 486, 490, 491, £97, 502.

Rankelouch, 220.

Rasehley, 498, 498.

Raseobe. (Rescobe,) 254, 42
480, 482.

. FBT. 189.

LOCORUM.

Rathew, ecelesia de, 21
Keates, 167, 168, 173, 174.
Redeluhewudys,
Reidhall, 484.
Rera
Rentm, 93, 152.
Rodys, Tusula de, 196.
Rokesbure, (Rokesburg, Roxburgh,) 5
28, 40, 46, 53, 152, 157, 175.
Roma, 129, 320.
Ros, ¢:
Roseolbyne, ecclesia de, (enm capells
Ro}
Rossith, Westir. 270.
Rothilie, 887, 391.
Rudrustoune, 4

3. 209,

schira de,

stella de,

) 210.

rauche, ecclesia de, 209.

Rustinot, ecclesia de, 210).
Ruum, 419.
Rynd, ece

ia de, 200.

terra, 12.

Sancti Andree, c 1, 238, BRO, 415
sie decanatus, 203.

3, 81, 22.

episeopatus

Boithani, eccles

Martini, capella, 204,

Sancti Jacobi, capella, 251.

Sanct Jolmstoune, Kirk of, 433, 147. 451,
459, 488.

Sanct Mergarettis stane, 425, 435, 437, 439,
469, 470, 485, 486, 488, 500.

4

Sanet Rynuanis,
Sancti Andree, 27, 36, 87, 57,7

305, 384-397, BUS, 413,
Sandis, North, +39,



--- Dunfermline_page621.png ---
INDEX

Sandis. South, #39.
Ss

auclyn, ceclesia de, 2
5a

wyltune, eceles

uivale,
3BOT-303, 831,
500,
Schirdaill, (Sehyredaill,) 427, 474,
all, (Screflaul, Shirret!/hall,)
BSH, F00, BER $35, HES. dM, 1G
167, 178, 49
Seona, (Seanyn, Seoone,) U1,
125, 167, 168, 2Mi, 249.
—— eceelesia de, 208, 209,
19K
Seottistoun, #91, 96,
3.

Sel

1, B95, FT, AT

Sehirre

insula de, 7

Seotwater,
Segie, 501.

Seleschirehe, (Seleskirehe,) 31, 36.
Selibalbie, Iybaibe, Slebalbe,) 347, 4
80, 120, 160,

Selletoun, (Selletoune, Silliton,) #25, 435,

ster, 177, #84.
—— Halkheid, 437,
—— sandes, 437, 4
— Wester, 85, 40,
now’, EO, 1M,

30.

tun, ceclesia de, 204.
vill’un, 135.

de, 203.

Jesia de, 206,

Smnalhame, ce

Smediland, (Smidicland, Sm
BNO, 428, 448, 609,

Smmetheby, (Smithebi,) 14, 28, 40, 46.

» 430,

yddyland,) 836,

Smetone, (Smetoune,) 3
HST ATS, ESEABG, &

» 4338,

LOCORUM. 559
Smithetun, (Smythetun,) 3,4, 50, 12, Las,

Tad, 157, 170,

Sonddis, +

Soutergate, 2
Southeterric, (Sonthelerrye,) 431, hk 4
ATU, ATS, ATM, ESD.

Sonthfelde, (Sowthfeld,) 821, 5
Southfoid, 15, 480. 181, 194, 4

South vard, +8

B77, 504

Sowilfurd, +

Spe, pise
Spittalefeld, 370, £87.
Spittell.

Spolet’
Stunehill, (Stanyhill,) 4

ABA, 455. fas

HO, 160, HOT, HOS, ASH, 494, 1H8,
30:
Stanchous, (Stanihous.) #61, 480-482. 496,

30)

nton, (Stentounes,) 308, 4
169, 473, 477, 482, 5
Stermonth, 431, hb, 451.
Wester, 592
Stichehill, ecelesia de,
Stirling, (5

3.407.

SO BN.

9,10, 15, 16.
AL, MEAT, 49, 50,
7,175, 283, 240,

1, BUG, 410, 487.

3, 1521

318, B16,

id

capella castelli de, 8, 38, 57, 63, G4.
81, 154, 157, #18,

due eeclesie in, 5, 19, 28, 40,

—— ceelesia de, 36, 57,
154, 157, 1
369, 371, 418, 433,
—— Glebe of, 426,
5M, 63, 6
hardolt,) 144.
3,77, 78, Pe 16

192.

Scola de, J

Straithardell, (8

ecelesia de,

BY, TS.



--- Dunfermline_page622.png ---
580 INDEX LOCORUM.

165, WG ATI ITS, To, Hoa, 483, 450,
90, 401, 488.
raithard

Hl, viearia de, E86

. Suathbroe, ceelesia

Strathechtyne, ceclesia de.

Strathirewin in Galwe:

Strane hous, }10.

Surcthineglo, 382

Swyntune, ecclesia d

balbe,

Sympringh, ecclesia de, 206,

wud

Tandis, the, &

Sreigs, ecclesia de, 09.

Terror

erolt, 45

rlestane, +H.

Thomas a
Thorlothane, mous de, 120.
Threpland, 94,

Tinigham, (Tynin

uun,)
ecelesia de, 204,

‘Tolibrench’,
Toungis, 495.
Torphehyn, 196.

Torry, 230, 240,

Torsoppin, (Torsopin,) 24, 107.
Touche, (Towehe,) ABT. 48H, BOS,

— mylue of, 126, 439, 475

73. 475. 480,

Tourburne, +

‘Tranernenth, (1

wenent.) 191,
—— ceelesia de, 204,

Tuleh, +
Tulibotheuile, 125.
Tullilum, 24,
—— alind, 24.

Tu

ask, (Toumegask, Tuny
OU, ESQ. BSA.

Purbaue, BOG, 896, 410,

Pui

Twedal. 192.

Varia capella, veclesia de, 203.
Veht
Vetermokethin, 137, IDS.
Vertia, 158, 159.

aunoc, 128

Veststarmonth, 887, 381.
Viterbinm, 121,
eth, BB, 38, 15,

126, 163,

(Vueth) Los. 19,

_

Vpsetling
Vrebard, |

6 206.

. 136, 175,

Vowel, (Vuerquhell, Oruell) capella de,

$53. 151, ASH HL,

22a, BUS, FIZ +

457. EOL BED


--- Dunfermline_page623.png ---
INDEX LOCORUM.

Walkmylne, 128. 613.

Wallefard, (Wallyfurd,) #46, 182

Walterscelis, (15.

Walton, (Weltoun.) alivs New
HHO, LOT. ATO, ATI ETBAITS,
ESd, ASS, 493, 695, HS, 502,

Walwein, 220,

Waringes land, in Coldinghame, 374
Wehterealedoure, ceclesia de, #18
Wedal, ecclesia de
Weder}

Wemys, ecelesia de, 207, +

cle

de, 206.

Westmonasterium, 217.

Westmylne,
w
Wi

‘strestoune,
» (Witker, Wythker,) 193, 260, 261,

72.

Wimet, (Wolmett, Womett, Wymet, Wy-
meth,) 19, 28, #0, 46, 154, 157, 175,
264, 26S, 430, 434, 458, 466, 492.

561
Wimet, ecclesia de, 1, 63,66, 71.
SU SQ 154 1
118.
Withnockes, (Wythenoe,) 112.
Wodtelde, 3
Wonat bank, #30.
Woodaiker, #10,
Wondeage, (Wyndecse
470, 47
Woynderigis, 254.
Wyndichil, #86,
Wryadnillill, #25, 437, 460,
Wyteside, 105.
Wytosem’, ecclesia de, 206.

204,

TAGES.

Wytyngheham, capella de, 204.

Yhalwleche, 2:
Yneanghynki, 109,
Yneianes, 108.

Yoohry den, 3.



--- Dunfermline_page624.png ---
OMISSUM.

Coutirmatio carte de Petconmerk -
Georgios counuendatarius coutimsevit eartam Joannis iuiivite de Raith
un apnd Leeblevin 6 die Julii 1544 quondan Willehno
Mailvile cjus filio et pro tenmore heredi apparenti in parte folutionis

militis the

onerum matrimonii contract ct folemnizati inter didium Willelmun et
Margaretam Douglas forerem Roberti Douglas de Lochlevin - de dimidie-

tate terrarum de Petconmerk - fine die ct loco -

DINEUisens Pts TE Yt 1tOW

PLE To HER Wad



--- Dunfermline_page625.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page626.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page627.png ---


--- Dunfermline_page628.png ---

