OCR results for Kelso1.pdf

--- Kelso1_page1.png ---


--- Kelso1_page2.png ---


--- Kelso1_page3.png ---


--- Kelso1_page4.png ---


--- Kelso1_page5.png ---


--- Kelso1_page6.png ---


--- Kelso1_page7.png ---
REGISTRUM CARTARUM
ABBACIE TIRONENSIS
DE KELSO

1113—1567

TOM. |

EDINBURGL MDCCCXLVI

s OCAT ES


--- Kelso1_page8.png ---
BALLANTYNE AND HUGHES, PRINTERS, EDINBURGH,


--- Kelso1_page9.png ---
PRESENTED TO THE BANNATYNE CLUB

BY THE DUKE OF ROXBURGHE,


--- Kelso1_page10.png ---


--- Kelso1_page11.png ---
THE BANNATYNE CLUB.

JANUARY M.DCCC.XLVI.

THOMAS THOMSON, ESQ.

PRESIDENT.

THE EARL OF ABERDEEN.

LORD VISCOUNT ACHESON,

VICE-ADMIRAL SIR CHARLES ADAM.

THE EARL OF ASHBURNITAM.

LORD BELHAVEN AND HAMILTON.

WILLIAM BLAIR, ESQ.

BERIAH BOTFIELD, ESQ.

THE MARQUESS OF BREADALBANE.

SIR THOMAS MAKDOUGALL BRISBANE, BART.
GEORGE BRODIE, ESQ.
CHARLES DASHWOOD BRUC
O. TYNDALL BRUCE, ESQ.
THE DUKE OF BUCCLEUCH AND QUEENSBERRY,

THE DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM AND CHANDOS,

THE MARQUESS OF BUTE.

THE REY. RICHARD BUTLER,

JAMES CAMPBELL, ESQ,

SIR GEORGE CLERK, BART.

WILLIAM CLERK, ESQ.

HON. Il. COCKBURN, LORD COCKBURN, (VICE-PRESIDENT.)



--- Kelso1_page12.png ---
THE BANNATYNE CLUB.

DAVID CONSTABLE, ESQ.
ANDREW COVENTRY, ESQ.
JAMES T. GIBSON CRAIG, ESQ., (TREASURER.)
WILLIAM GIBSON CRAIG, ESQ.
GEORGE CRANSTOUN, ESQ.
JAMES DENNISTOUN, ESQ.
DAVID DUNDAS,
GEORGE DUNDAS, ESQ.
WILLIAM PITT DUNDAS, ESQ.
LORD FRANCIS EGERTON.
JOSEPH WALTER K. EYTON, ESQ.
SIR CHARLES DALRYMPLE FERGUSSON, BART.
LIEUT.-COL. ROBERT FERGUSON.
COUNT MERCER DE FLAHAULT.
ARTHUR FORBES, ESQ.
WILLIAM GOTT, ESQ.
ROBERT GRAHAM, ESQ.
RIGHT HON, THOMAS GRENVILLE.
40 THE EARL OF HADDINGTON.
THE DUKE OF HAMILTON AND BRANDON.
SIR THOMAS BUCHAN HEPBURN, BART.
JAMES MAITLAND HOG, ESQ.
RIGHT HON, JOHN HOPE, LORD JUSTICE-CLERK.
COSMO INNES, ESQ.
DAVID IRVING, ESQ., LL.D.
HON. JAMES IVORY, LORD IVORY.
SIR HENRY JARDINE,
HON. NCIS JEFFREY, LORD JERPREY,
50 THE EARL OF KINNOULL.
DAVID LAING, ESQ., (SECRETAR

a



--- Kelso1_page13.png ---
60

wn

THE BANNATYNE CLUB.

SIR THOMAS DICK LAUDER, BART.

THE EARL OF LAUDERDALE.

VERY REVEREND PRINCIPAL JOHN LEE, D.D.
LORD LINDSAY.

JAMES LOCH. ESQ.

LORD Lo
ALEXANDER MACDONALD, ESQ.

HON, J. H. MACKENZIE, LORD MACKENZIE.
JAMES MACKENZIE,
JOUN WHITEFOORD MACKENZIE, ESQ.

KEITH STEWART MACKENZIE, ESQ.

WILLIAM FORBES MACKENZIE, ESQ.

ALEXANDER MACONOCHIE, ESQ.

JAMES MALDMENT, ESQ.

THOMAS MAITLAND, EXQ.

LORD VISCOUNT MELVILLE,

THE HON. WILLIAM LESLIE MELVILLE

WILLIAM HENRY MILLER, EsQ.

THE EARL OF MINTO.

HON. SIR J.W. MONCREIFP, BART.. LORD MONCREIFF.
JAMES PATRICK MUIRHEAD, ESQ

HON. SIR JONN A. MURRAY, LORD MURRAY
WILLIAM MURRAY, ESQ.

MACVEY NAPIER, ESQ.

ROBERT NASMYTIL ESQ.

CHARLES NEAVES, ESQ.

SIR FRANCIS PALGRAVE.

LORD PANMURE.

ROBERT PITCAIRN, ESQ.

ALEXANDER PRINGLI



--- Kelso1_page14.png ---
THE BANNATYNE CLUB.

JOHN RICHARDSON, ESQ.
THE EARL OF ROSEBERY.
THE DUKE OF ROXBURGHE.
ANDREW RUTHERFURD, ESQ.
THE EARL OF SELKIRK,
JAMES SKENE, ESQ.
WILLIAM SMYTHE, ESQ.
JOHN SPOTTISWOODE, ESQ.

on EDWARD STANLEY, ESQ.
THE HON, CHARLES FRANCIS STUART.
THE DUKE OF SUTHERLAND.
ARCHIBALD SWINTON, ESQ.
ALEXANDER THOMSON, ESQ.
WALTER CALVERLEY TREVELYAN, ESQ.
WILLIAM B.D. D. TURNBULL, EXQ.
DAWSON TURNER, ESQ.
PATRICK FRASER TYTLER, ESQ.
ADAM URQUHART, ESQ.

100 RIGHT HON. SIR GEORGE WARRENDER, BAR’.



--- Kelso1_page15.png ---
THE PREFACE.


--- Kelso1_page16.png ---


--- Kelso1_page17.png ---
THE PREFACE.

No other spot of Scotch ground has witnessed such changes as the
river bank where Teviot falls into Tweed. A town once stood there, of
such importance as to form one of that remarkable Burgher Parliament,
known as “the Court of the Four Burghs of Scotland,” of which uot
a house, not a trace, remains. Still carlicr, and long before the kin-
dred people dwelling on the opposite sides of the Tweed had learned
to look on each other as aliens and enemies, the great Princes of Nor-
*: thumberland had built a castle there, which beeame a favourite dwelling of
Earl David, afterwards King David I. Before his aeecssion to the throne,
while Prince of Cumberland and of a large distriet of southern Scotland,
as well as after he became king, and while he ruled in peace all Northum-
bria to the Tees,* that prince found Roxburgh a central and eonvenient
residence. Even after southern Northumbria had been severed from Scot-

land, the castle continued one of the chief royal residences, where courts and
councils and parliaments were held, ambassadors and legates were enter-
tained, and a royal mint was established, during the reigns of David's
grandsons, and down to the end of that long period of prosperity and peace

* The English chroniclers, painting vividly beyond Tees, as enjoying undisturbed peace
the distractions of southern England during and prosperity under the authority of David
Stephen's reign in the middle of the twelfth — of Scotland.—Bromton; W. Neubr.

century, deseribe the northern region, all


--- Kelso1_page18.png ---
iv THE PREFACE.

which terminated for Scotland with the reign of King Alexander IIL*
That old importance has left a traditionary and romantic interest about
Roxburgh, which has survived its towers and walls, and the very memory
of its actual story and of its share in the disasters of
later times; and the same association which led the
unfortunate prince, whose father fell in assaulting the
castle, to adopt the name for one of his heralds, and his
chivalrous son to blazon it around his shield,‘ still at-
taches to the green mound which the Teviotdale pea-

sant shows as the site of “the Castle of Marchmound.”

While the baronial castle and the gilds of free burghers were each con-
tributing their share in the ike
David and his snecessors, the foundations were laid of other institutions

still more influential, and destined to be more enduring. As if foresceing

‘eat work of civilization, under princes

that his favourite valley was to become, in later times, the field of arms for

two warlike nations, the wise David had restored ancient, or planted new

monasteries thickly over Teviotdale, which were not only to spread the

blessings of religion, and in part to tame the rough Borderer, but were
destined to afford him sometimes an
wasted all that was not under the protection of the Church.

At length, the abbeys too were swept away, when they had fulfilled their

Jum and support, when war had

destiny : and the effeet produced by the suppression of such houses as

te John nothing of the matter, it would seem that the
of Crema, at Roxburgh, in 1125, and there chivalrous styles of our Seotch Heralds and
convened a council of the clergy. “Raul of Pursuivants,—Snowdoun, — Albany.

of much of the Scotch Rothsay, Marchmond, Hay—Carrie, K
least four Ormond, Bute,—were introduced by

» David reeeived the Cardinal-Le:

Roxbure” was mon
currency of William’s reign, At
parliaments or great national councils were James IIL. James IV's signet has the name
ns of Alex-  AMlarehutgwY on a seroll over the shield of
Parl. I. the arms of Scotland.

held at Roxburgh during the re
ander II, and Alexander I.
© Although our books of heraldry tell us


--- Kelso1_page19.png ---
THE PREFACE. v

Kelso, Jedburgh, Melrose, and Dryburgh, after four centuries of power, was
more than had been experienced from the razing of the royal castle, and
the utter disappearance of the flourishing city.

The period of our investigation embraces no less remarkable changes
in the population of that district. When the light of record first breaks
upon it, we can discern dimly, but with sufficient certainty, a native race
retreating or sinking into dependency before the influx of predominating
strangers of Saxon and of Norman lineage. These new settlers figure
for some centuries as the feudal lords of the soil, rivalling the most muni-
ficent sovercigns in their benefactions to the Chureh, With them, as well

as with many of their immediate vy, s and of those of the Church, we

become acquainted in the transactions recorded in this and other monastic

Registers. We find evidence, also, of the early importance of a burgher

class, and of the wealth of many merchants, burgesses of Roxburgh and

still more of Berwick, a place which, before it became the unhappy subject

of contention and war, carried on the most extensive commerce of any port

on the eastern coast of the island, always excepting London.’ Of the con-

dition of the peasantry we have, incidentally, some information, though
more of the kindly tenants under the easy rule of the Chureh than of the
Imsbandmen and villains who tilled the land of the lay lord and followed
him to battle. But, long before the end of our period, the great lords who
once bore sway on the marches, the Earls of Dunbar, the De Morvilles,
Balliols, Ranulphs, De Vescis, Cumins, De Sulis, and Avenels, had, in
their turn, died out; and, for some centuries, the distracted state of the
Borders scems to have been adverse to the rise, on firm footing, of any
great familics in the district. Even the Church could scarcely hold its own

* Note to Tytler’s History, vol. ii—An ‘whose riches were the sea, and the waters

“a city its walls? In those days its citizens being

old chronicler deseribes Berwick as
of such populousness and commerce that it most wealthy and devant, gave noble alms,
might justly be styled a second Alexandria, among which,” &e—Lanzrcost, A.D, 1266.


--- Kelso1_page20.png ---
in a time so stormy,
to rival it, in that dis
the time of its downfa
In the mean time,

birth to a population

adaptation to varying
condition. The lower
the old minstrels w

THE PREFACE,

aud there was no very dominant aristocracy at all
trict, from the period of the war of the succession to
1.
however, the disturbed state of the Border had given
not more remarkable in its carly stages, than for the
fortunes throngh which it has arrived at its present
x elass of that population has furnished subjects for
no created the popular poetry of Scotland; and

our great Minstrel has thrown round them the romantic colouring of his

poetry. But thongh

trooper of the old Bore

features of his eharae
nature accommodatin!

‘lifter’? of an Englis!

the stoutest husbandin

bear a comparison witl

The progress to ci
The rough leaders of
style of Scotland, but

iS
times they loved to d

we may not take their picture of the stark moss-
er days without abatement, we have there the marked
ter, and cannot fail to observe his hardy but plastic
« itself to better times ; till the Borderer who, in the
well upon, would have been sung as the most daring
h drove, is noted only as the hardiest shepherd or

an among a peasantry and ycomanry that may well

I any.

zation was still more remarkable in the upper elass.
those Border hordes ; ¢ gentle,’ undoubtedly, after the
not in general men of noble family, aequired conse-

quence at first by the command of the readiest lances for any expedition

that wanted their serv

men had gone down,
tors,) those illiterate

management of intern

ice. But in process of time, (when the old chureh-

who formerly did the business

of envoys and media-
captains were foreed into a kind of diplomaey and
national affairs, from their very contact with their

neighbours on the English side. From the same cause, they were of neces-

sity employed in the
March

C8 5

as a eool head, their h:

through all eommotio

mixed military and judicial office of Wardane of the

and in emergencies that often called for a ready hand as much

ardy nurture bore them bravely upwards. They rose

ms and all changes of parties. In the troubled times


--- Kelso1_page21.png ---
THE PREPACE, vil

that sueceeded the Reformation, church lands were ready for rewarding
their service ; and when the time of tranquillity came, it found the children
of adventurous leaders of a few troops of border lances, not only among the
old nobility, but taking their place, without effort, among the foremost rank
of the nobles of Scotland.

It was in 1113, during the period of the consequence and prosperity of
Roxburgh, that Earl David, the heir-presumptive of the crown of Scot-
land, brought a little colony of thiricen reformed Benedictine monks from
the newly founded abbey of Tiron, in Le Perche, and planted it beside
He endowed them with large possessions in

his forest castle of Selkirk.’
Seotland, and a valuable territory in his southern carldom of Huntingdon ;
but the French monks were dissatisfied with their position on the banks
of the Ettrick ; and upon Davyid’s accession to the throne of his brother,
he removed them from Selkirk —* a place unsuitable for an abbey”!—
and established the monastery “at the Chureh of the Blessed Virgin on
the bank of the Tweed, beside Roxburgh, in the place called Calkou.”

The abbey was dedicated to the Virgin and St John the Evangelist. The
first abbot was Ralph, one of the French monks. The Scotch chronicles
record that he sueceeded St Bernard, the reformer of the Order, in his
abbacy of Tiron, who died in 1116; which, however, can scarecly be reeon-
ciled with the succession of abbots as given by the F'renel writers.

© Simeon of Durham.—1113 is most pro- year a statement, not only against probabi-
bably the true date. ‘The Chronicle of Mel- lity, but contrary to his authority, the Chro-
rose reeords the foundation of St Bernard’s nicle of Melrose, which places the coming of
monastery of Tiron in 1109, and it joms to the ‘Tironensian monks into this country in
that, a memorandum, (but without date,) that 1113, “ Anno .c.xu1r, monachi Ty!
Ralph was sent from thence, and became the — venerunt in patriam istam.”—Chron.de Muir.
t abbot of Sulkirk. Fordun, who is here Fordin, v. 36.

following the Chronicle of Melrose, appears € Quia locus non erat eonveniens Abba-

to have mistaken the entry, and asserts that thie.
the Tironensian monks came to Selkirk in that * Gallia Christiana, tom. viii,



--- Kelso1_page22.png ---
viii THE PREFAC

William, another of the monks of Tiron, succeeded as abbot of Selkirk,
in 1115 or 1116." On the death of Ralph, he also was promoted to be
abbot of Tiron, in 1118.

Herbert, a monk of the abbey, was the third abbot of Selkirk.! In his
time the change of situation took place from Selkirk to Kelso, by the
counsel and advice of John bishop of Glasgow, who had been the King’s
tutor, and who continued, during life, his counsellor in all matters connected
with the Chureh,

This translation, with a considerable increase of the endowment, seems
to have taken place in 1126, the year after David’s accession; and the

monks having been engaged perhaps for two years in the necessary pre-
parations, and in ere
of the new Abbey of Kelso was founded on the 3d May 1128/

In 1147, on the death of John bishop of Glasgow, Herbert abbot of

Kelso succeeded him in the episcopal chair;

sting dwellings for themselves, the conventual churel:

and was succeeded in the

abbaey of Kelso by Arnold, who seems, while abbot, to have been much
engaged in public affairs, and in attendance on the court ; and in 1160, on
the 15th November, was raised to the episcopal see of St Andrews.'

On the vigil of the feast of St Andrew, 29th November, 1160, John, the

1

1115: Chron. Maily—tbut as mentioned
above, St Bernard, the first abbot ot Tiron,
died in 1116.

* Sucee
Maile.

3 © Anno WCXNVHE fundata est ecel
Kelehehou y. nonarum M — Chron. Mailr,
“ Monasterium illue translatum per rege
David, anno Domini 1.c.xxv1. 3 et post duos
annos post translationem conventus, fundavit

He |

us monachus, —Chron.

ia de

ceelesiam de Kaleo.”—Fordun, v. 36,
* Chron. Mailr.—Crawfurd confounds this
abbot with Herbert, the chancellor of Scot-

land. In a charter of David L., granting

Govan to the church of Glasgow, Herbert the
chancellor is one of the witnesses, and Her-
Lert abbot of Selkirk another, Rey. Glasg. 6.
It may be necessary also to distinguish Her-
bert the abbot, from the great Chamberlain
of that name. In another charter of King Da-
vid to the same chureh, two of the witnesses
are Herbert abbot of Roxburgh, and Herbert
the chamberlain—Reg. Glusy. 3.

* Chron. Mailr. Armold or Ernold, whilst
abbot, oceurs as a frequent witness in the
charters of David £. and Maleolm.—Registers
of Dunf., St And, Glasy. Melr., 8.



--- Kelso1_page23.png ---
THE PREFACE. ix

eantor of the abbey, was elected abbot, and on the feast of the Epiphany
following was consecrated by Herbert, formerly abbot of Kelso, then
bishop of Glasgow." Like his predecessor, he wasa frequent attendant on
the King’s court, and he witnesses many of the eharters and public trans-
actions, during the reigns of Malcolm and William. In 1165 he obtained
from Rome, for himself and his monastery, the privilege and preccdeney of
a mitred abbey." In 1176 he was engaged in a contention for priority and
subjection with the parent abbey of Tiron ;° and two years later, King
William’s great monastery of Arbroath was planted by a colony of monks
from Kelso, to whom, and to Henry, then first abbot, previously one of his
own monks, John abbot of Kelso gave a eharter of exemption from all
subjection and allegiance to the parent house.” Abbot John died in 1180.

He was succeeded by Osbert, prior of the cell of Lesmahago.t In 1182,
le went to Rome with Joceline bishop of Glasgow, and Arnold abbot of
Melrose, on public affairs. He occurs frequently as a witness in ebarters
of the King, and of the Bishops of St Andrews and Glasgow.
party to the decision of disputes with Melrose, by King William in person,
in the Utas of the Epiphany, 1202; and he died in 1203.

Geoffrey, the prior, sueceeded in the abbacy,” who does not occur in any

He was

of the chartularies, and of whom nothing is recorded in the chronicle,

except his succession.

© Chron. Mailr—Fordun, vi. 35.

® Chron, Mailr, “Joannes Abbas Cal-
choensis venit de Roma mitratus ;”
sions which would infer a personal
Abbot to Rome ; but the dates of chart
nessed by him in Seotland, render a journey
to Rome improbable, and any lengthened
stay impossible. ‘The bull conferring the pri-
vilege is recorded (467,) but unfortunately
without date.

expres-
it of the
Ts wit=

© Chron, Maile.

® Reg. Aberb,, f. 41. “Sta ut abbas de
Kalkou majorem  potestatem non habeat
in abbatem vel in predietam eeclesiam Sancti
Thome quam abbas Saneti Thome in abbatem
vel in ecclesiam de Kalehov.”

4 Chron. Mailr.

* Chron. Mailr.

b


--- Kelso1_page24.png ---
x THE PREFACE.

In 1206, March 29,° Ricardus de Cane was chosen abbot. Little is
known of the short incumbeney of this abbot. The elevation of Bricius of
Douglas, prior of the cell of Lesmahago, to the bishoprick of Murray, seems
to have been the occasion of the abbot’s visiting that remote diocese, where
he witnessed, in the full chapter of the cathedral, the great charter of its
constitution.* He died in the year 1208.

Henry, the prior of the monastery, was chosen abbot in his room, on the
17th June 1208." He is said to have assisted at the gencral council (the
fourth Lateran) held at Rome in 1215, to deliberate upon the extir-
pation of the heretic Waldenses. Abbot Henry died on the 5th October
1218.

The suecession again fell upon the prior of the house, Richard, who was
elected on the 19th October 1218.5 Tn 1219, Abbot Richard, along with
Walter bishop of Glasgow, and the abbot of Melrose, acted as Papal dele-
gates in determining a claim of the abbot of Paisley, and affixed their
seals to a deed recording their decision. In an instrument taken on that
deed in 1346, the notary deseribes the seal of Abbot Richard thus—
“ Aliud sigillum habet quandam imaginem ad similitudinem unius abbatis
mitrati vestiti quasi ad eelebrandum, cum casula sua, cum libro in manu
sinistra et pedo pastorali in manu dextra; ct in cireumferentia ipsiu

ulp-

tum erat sicitum Ricarp agbatis pr Caxcuo ; ct retro in dorso ipsius

sigilli erat impressio unius parvi sigilli, in quo feulptum erat, ut mihi
apparebat, imago unius monachi orantis, genubus flexis, tenentis erncem
in manibus; seulpturam vero cireumferentie ejusdem in literis legere non
potui.’” Abbot Richard died 2d August 1221.

His successor was Herbert Maunsel, “ seeretarius ejusdem domus,”* who

* Chron. Mailr, ‘There may be some mis- — * Chron. Mailr. * Chron. Mailr.
take in his surname. ™ Reg. Pass. p. 9.

* Reg. Moray. 36. x Chron Mailr.


--- Kelso1_page25.png ---
THE PREFACE, xi

appears while abbot as witness and arbiter in a few church transactions ;*
but little is known of him in the discharge of his office, till we find him
anxious to retire from the burden of it. On the day of the nativity of the
Virgin, 8th September 1236, he deposited his erosier and mitre on the
great altar of his church, in testimony of his resigning the pastoral eure:
and Hugh, a monk of the convent, was elected abbot in his room. He was
not so at once, however, to escape; for in 1239 he was compelled by the
Papal legate to resume the office which he had resigned “ indisercetly,”
and it was not till after the arrival of the Legate Otho in Scotland, that
Herbert was allowed effectually to relinquish the office of abbot—* full of
days, of praiseworthy life and morals-”*

Hugh, formerly elected, then obtained his seat unquestioned. He
attended the Parliament of Alexander I. in 1244, and was abbot till
1248, when he died, and w:

Robert de Smalhame, also a monk of the convent, who granted a
charter, as abbot, in May 1250, and whose last recorded transaction was

eceeded by

holding a court at the bridge of Ettrick, on Monday next after the feast

of St Bartholomew the Apostle, in the year 1258, in which John Fitz Hugh

of Revedene quit-claimed to the monastery a picce of land in the territory
of Revedene, named Floris, which he had held contrary to justice.” He
died in the month of September following.

Patrick, a monk of the abbey, was chosen his successor ;* but in the
meantime Henry de Lambeden, the chamberlain, had gone to Rome, and
used such means, that, in the year 1260, he brought back tho Papal

reseript deposing Patrick, and appointing himself abbot in his room; and

7 242, and Reg. de Dunferm., pp. 131, * Chron, Mailr.
33. 293, © 218.
* Chron Mailr. * Chron. Mailr.



--- Kelso1_page26.png ---
xii THE PREFACE.

the chronicler records, that the very day of Henry’s arrival, armed with
the Papal bull, Patrick, without delay, deposited on the high altar his
pontificals, which the said Henry immediately assumed. Henry died in
1175,° and the mode of his entry into the abbacy was not forgotten. “ Let
him see to it,” says the ehronicler, “ how he entered to that pastoral cure ;
for—whether by the Divine vengeance, or the good pleasure of God, we
know not—he was cut off by sudden death at his own table, at the begin-
ning of his early meal, and was buried that same day, after the second
refeetion of the convent, perhaps because they did not choose to watch his
body.”

There is no record of the appointment of Henry’s successor. In 1281,
we find an abbot of Kelso whose name began with J... who was dead
before 1285, for

Richard, abbot of Kelso, held a plein cour of regality at Revedene on the
15th of May that year. In August 1291, Abbot Richard was one of Balliol’s
commissioners for examining the claims of the competitors for the crown.
On the 28th Angust 1296, Abbot Richard and his convent took the oaths
of fealty to Edward,‘ and on the 2d September he had letters ordering
restitution of the estates and goods of the monastery. We are ignorant of
the fate of this abbot. The Bishop of St Andrews, whilst the war of the
suecession was still raging, gives an affecting picture of the ruin heaped upon
the abbey, once famous for the splendour of its rites, its numberless works
of charity, its unbounded hospitality ; which was exposed by its situation on
the marches, and was so destroyed by spoiling, fire, and ravage, that,
miserable to relate, its monks and novices went among the other religious
houses in Scotland, begging their food and clothing?’

* Fordun, x. 35, * Chron. Mailr. » 219, * Ragman Rolls.
© 343. ? 309.


--- Kelso1_page27.png ---
THE PREFACE. xiii

Walran was abbot in November 1807,* and appears to have been so in
18114

Of one person who bore the name of abbot, we hear only in one recorded
transaction. On the 5th October 1315, Robert Wishart, bishop of Glas-
gow, gave the monks in Lesmahago a remission upon the penalties for
10 chalders of meal which Alexander Folcard claimed as sold to him by
Thomas de Durram, an Englishman, while prior of that house, with
a penalty in ease of non-payment, applicable to the fabric of the church
at Glasgow. The Bishop states, that he was certainly informed that the
meal had been paid, although the monks, “ex simplicitate sna,” were
unable to prove the payment ; and, moreover, that the same English Prior
was a dilapidator of the goods of the priory of Lesmahago whilst he
governed it, as well as of the monastery of Kelso during the time that by
usurpation he there bore the name of abbot." The acquittance took place
a year after the battle of Bannockburn.

William de Alynerome was abbot of Kelso on the 2d March 1316." In
1523, Abbot William held a court in the burgh of Wester Kelso, coneern-
ing a complaint against the burgesses for making, of their own authority,
new burgesses, stallers, and brewers; when the burgesses, by their clerk,
made the following guarded admission, that as long as their lord the abbot
held the town or burgh of Kelso in his own hand, and it was not set in
ferme, (ad firmam dimissa,) all the libertics of the burgh, and in particular
that of making new burgesses and stallers and granting license of brewing,
should belong to the abbot alone, provided that those elected by him were
presented in their courts according to the laws of the burghs, and seemed fit
and sufficient.© Abbot William granted a charter of Auchtiferdale, on
Monday after the feast of the Assumption of the Virgin, 1326.

* 42. +195, 196. = 188, * 310. ° 459,


--- Kelso1_page28.png ---
xiv THE PREFACE,

William de Dalgernock granted a charter, as abbot of Kelso, on the 19th
April 1829." He accompanied the young King in his flight into France,
and resided with him as his teacher. The monastery had letters of pro-
tection and restitution of property from Edward II]. of England, in 1333
and 1334; and a charter from David IL., the abbey being burned by Eng-
land, granting the monks leave to eut wood in Selkirk and Jedwart forests,
for its reparation.’ William was abbot of Kelso in 1342 and 1354 ;* but
we do not Jearn whether this was still William de Dalgernock.

On the 17th of July 1370, William de Bolden was abbot, who continued
till after the 12th August 1372."

In June 1398, Patrick was abbot of Kelso, and he occurs in the writs
of the abbey till 17th October 1406." This abbot’s name serves to fix the
period of some of those remarkable Parliamentary proxies, the styles of

which are preserved in this Register.

William was abbot of Kelso in the ninth year of Pope Martin V.,
1426, and was recently dead on the 23d September 1434."

On that day, appearance was made for the abbot whose name began
with §.,.” and who must have died immediately afterwards.

William was abbot of Kelso on the penult day of May 1435,* and con-
tinued to hold the office till 16th September 14447

® Reg. Glasg, 281, Lib. de Kelso, 487. “ Dene William of Dalgernow,
«Ina nanuseript of Wyntoun, Harl. MSS, That tyme abbot of Kelsou,
6909, which Maepherson (his editor) thinks ‘echor all this tyme,
to have heen written in the abbey of Kelso, Keopit in a eastell fyne,
at book viii. eb 26, where Wyntoun has That standis into Normandy,

written, how in 1332, Castell Galliard callit suthly.”"

* Robertson’s Index of Charters.

° Registrum de Aberb. Lib. de Kelso.
* 614, 515, * 6li,
* Thid.
¥ Lib. de Melr. 575.

 Owre Kyng Daivy wes send in Frawns,

And nyne yhere he bade thare”—

the Kelso seribe has added—


--- Kelso1_page29.png ---
THE PREFACE. XV

In August 1464 Allan was abbot of Kelso, and he was still abbot on
the 22d May 1466."

Robert was abbot of Kelso, and one of the Border Commissioners, in
1473, and he was still abbot on the 18th April 1475."

George, abbot of Kelso, witnessed a crown charter at Edinburgh, on
the 15th day of July 1476."

A second Robert was abbot of Kelso, and sat as one of the Lords
Anditors in Parliament, on the 7th June 1493.° He was still abbot
on the Sth February 1505.

Andrew Stewart, bishop of Caithness, held the abbeys of Kelso and
Fearn in commendam, the former probably from the death of Abbot
Robert ; and he held both till his death, which took place in his palace of
Skebo, on the 17th June 1517.7

Though the bishop must have been legally recognised as abbot, the dis-
turbed state of the country and the distance of his usnal abode may have
exposed the abbacy to other competitors. A person styled abbot of
Kelso was imprisoned at Dunfermline by the Regent Albany in August
1515 ;° and, from his being one of the faction of the Lord Hume, there is
reason to believe that this was the same Thomas Ker who certainly was

abbot of Kelso in 1519.

* 529, 531.
» Reg. Glasg. 410.

© Acta Audit.

* Obitus bone memorie reyerendi in Cristo
patris et domini domini Andree Steward,
cpiscopi Cathanensis, commendatariique mo-
nasteriorum de Caleo et Ferne perpetui, ac
camerarii supremi domini nostri regis, comi-

He was the brother of “ Dande Ker of Farne-

tatus Rossie et dominii de Ardmanaich, qui
obiit in palacio suo de Skebo, die decimo
septimo mensis Junii, anno dominice inearna-

tionis millesimo quingentesimo decimo sep-
timo, sneque consecracionis quarto decimo, ct
tumulatur in choro sue ecclesie eathedr
Cathanensis de Dornoch, Orate ex earitate
pro anima ejus.—Ferne Calendar.

* Harl, MSS.: Calig. B. iii. 133,

lis



--- Kelso1_page30.png ---
xvi THE PREFACE.
hirste ;” was much employed in public affairs on the Border,‘ and continued
to hold the office on the 7th October 1528.6

James Stewart, a son of King James V. by Elizabeth Shaw, was made
commendator of the abbeys of Kelso and Melrose in the fourteenth year
of his age, apparently before 31st August 1536, although his appointment
was confirmed by the Pope in 1541.
1558."

On the death of James Stewart, the Queen-dowager granted both the
abbacies which he had held to her brother, the Cardinal of Lorraine; but
the Reformation prevented his reaping any fruits of his gift.

An abbot of Kelso of the name of Ker was slain by the young laird of
Cesford, his own kinsman, in August 1566

Sir John Maitland, afterwards’ Lord Chancellor, the ancestor of the
family of Lauderdale, was commendator of Kelso, and exchanged that
abbacy, on the 8th March 1565, with Francis Stewart of Bothwell, for the
Priory of Coldinghame.

Sir John Maitland was again commendator of Kelso in July 1587 ;' but

The young commendator died in

in the same year, Stewart, now Lord Bothwell, held both the abbacies of
Kelso and Coldinghame.

‘The confirmation of peace on the part of
the Seots was brought hider by th’ abbot of
Kelsoo, the hedesman of the Carres of Tevi-
dail, well accompanied with honest men to

borderers, I bid them to be well accompanied,
and good chere to be made unto theym. The
said abbot being a right sadde and wise man,
brother to Dande Carre of Farnehirste.—

the nomber of xl persons, to whom I made
suche chere as T couth that day at dyner, and
furthwith after we examined onr commissions,
and made collacioun of other our greater
writings. And soe, agenste night we depart-
od, and kept our lodgings. And bycause the
companyons coming with the said abbot were

Harl. MSS, : Calig. B. ti. 59,

© 536;—a deed which is dated at Kelso
the 7th October 1528, but printed by mistake
as of date 1508.

® Pinkerton, ii. 384,

* Birrell’s Diary,

> Acta Pari. iii. 454,



--- Kelso1_page31.png ---
TILE PREFACE, xvii

After the attainder and ruin of the Earl of Bothwell, Sir Robert Ker
of Cesfurd, who was created Lord Roxburghe about 1599, had grants of
the greater part of the abbey lands of Kelso. These still remain with his
descendant, the Duke of Roxburghe, who inherits the estate and honours of
Roxburghe through his great-great-grandmother, Margaret Ker; andis the
representative in the direct male line, of a family which proves its descent, by
charters, from the time of Malcolm IV., and hada grant of the lands of Innes
from that king, the year following the date of his beantiful charter to Kelso.

The Register of the Charters of the Abbaey of Kelso has been long
preserved in the library of the Faculty of Advocates at Edinburgh.* It is
a volume of two hundred and nineteen leaves of vellum, measuring cight
inches by five and a half. The leaves are numbered in a modern hand,
from the beginning of the volume; but it may be doubted if the first
seven leaves originally formed a part of the chartulary. These are
ocenpied by a very important “ Rotulns reddituum,” or notice of all the
property of the monastery, whether in lands or tithes, written before the
year 1300. The eighth leaf, bearing the title inscribed at the top,—

Liber See Marie ve Calchou,
is the proper commencement of the register of charters, which continues
in an uniform style of writing, and of nearly the same time, if not by the
same scribe, down to the 171st leaf" It is in a good hand, with plain red
initial letters, and rubricated titles to the charters and tops of the pages.
From the handwriting, the dates of the charters, and other cirenmstances,
this portion may be ascribed to the reign of Robert L, or the first quarter

* The first leaf has the library mark, with ™ The rubricator had not completed his
the date 1704, part of the work quite so far. ‘The red titles

' It is here printed at theend of the Chartu- of the charters, and at the tops of the pages,

lary, in connexion with other rentals. —P.455. stop at fol. 164.
c


--- Kelso1_page32.png ---
xviii THE PREFACE,

of the fourteenth century. It is arranged under certain heads by the
scribe, however inartificially, and, to preserve that arrangement, it has
been printed throughout in the order of the original register, with the
single exception of placing the charter of erection of Earl David at the
beginning, which the chartulary seribe has placed fourth in order.”

From the 172d leaf to the end, consists of mixed deeds, generally of a
later date, some of them of the fifteenth century, and entered by scribes of that
time. In printing these, it has been endeavoured to arrange them nearly in
order of time, where any dates could be assigned.? A small portion consist-
ing of formule or styles, which admit of no date, are arranged separately.”

In addition to the whole matter contained in the Register, there are
here printed the following illustrative documents :—

1. The charter of Malcohn LV., A.D. 1159, from the original, preserved
in the charter-room at T'loors.*

2. The account rendered to the Abbot of the superior house of Kelso,
by John Veir, the chamberlain of the dependent cell at Lesmahago, on
the 1st day of February 1555, from the original at Floors.

3. The rental of the Abbacie of Kelso, from the same charter-room.
It is without date, but, from certain entries of it, compared with other
accounts preserved in the same repository, appears to be of the year 1567.

The writing of the register throughout abounds in abbreviations, which
are faithfully represented in the print, so as to give it, as nearly as possible,
the authority of the original, and to risk nothing on the conjecture of the
Editor. Another mode of abbreviating adopted in the Register, is much
to be deplored. The seribe of the chartulary, to save time or vellum, has

362. The rubries of PP. 438 to p. 451.
the pages of the original are given on the ® Prefixed to the matter of the Chartulary,

margius of this volume. pet top. vL
© P, 363 to p. 437. * PLATS top. 485.

* From page 1 to p



--- Kelso1_page33.png ---
THE PREFACE. xis

thought proper to omit, in most instances, the arrays of witnesses which
formed the necessary authentication of ancient charters, and frequently the
most interesting part to the modern historian and genealogist, Some deeds,
where they scemed to the registering scribe merely to confirm former
grants, have been still more unsparingly enrtailed ; and, in this manner, a
few of the most ancient and most important muniments of the Abbey appear
in our record only in the shape of memorandums.*

Notwithstanding these defects, the register of Kelso stands very high in
rank among those of the regular religions honses of Scotland, whether we
consider the historical information it contains, or the materials it affords for
illustrating the antiquities of our law and of Scotch Parliamentary usages ;
the polity of the ancient Church; pedigrees of Scotch and Northumbrian

families; the carly transmission of land over a wide district ; the manner of
its cultivation of old; and the habits and modes of life of the rnral popula-
tion, and of all classes, from a very early period.

The limits of a preface render it necessary to pass at once over all those
minute particulars of local antiquities, which form the chief interest, in a
collection like the present, to the intelligent people of the district. The
ancient names of places; the boundaries between farms, settled by Saint David
now

in person ;* the sites of ancient churches, chapels, castles, granges
rnined and forgotten ; all those marks of the advances of early civilization,
must be left for those who have the advantage of loeal acquaintance, and
the opportunity of reading the charter upon the ground to which it bears
reference. The time must come, when the gentlemen of Scotland will take
an intelligent interest in the antiquities of their own districts ; and scholars
will be ashamed to know less of the colonizing and carly history of Scotland
than they do of Greece or Italy. All that ean be attempted here, is to
notice a few points of more gencral interest or curiosity, either illustrated
or suggested by the contents of this volume of ancient Scotch charte

+ As 3,4, 11, 24, 26. "1d


--- Kelso1_page34.png ---
XX THE PREFACE,

A charter of Richard Cumyn, the first of that great name in Scotland, re-
cords a donation of the Church of Linton-roderick to Kelso, for the weal of
the souls of Earl Henry, his lord, and of John, his own son, “ quorum corpora
apud cos tumulantur.”* The Earl Henry whose place of interment is thus
recorded, was the son of David I., who predeceased his father, dying in
1152. By his wife Ada, daughter of William Earl Warenne, be left three
sons, Malcolm and William, who in succession filled the throne, and David-
Earl of Huntingdon, the ancestor of the later sovereigns of Scotland.
Lord Hailes has aliuded to an unaccountable assertion, which rans through
some of the chronicles, that Earl David was older than his brother William.”

The reason a: sent when
the succession to the throne opened by the death of his brother Malcolm ;

but the report is put upon a different footing by the chartulary of Newbotle,

igned for David being set aside is, that he was a

where, upon a charter of King Malcolm 1V., witnessed by his brothers
William and David, and their mother, it is noted, “ hoc est contra cos qui
dixerunt, de tribus fillis comitis Henriei, videlicet Malcolmo Willelmo et
Davide, ipsum Davidem fuisse primogenitum;” showing that the report,
however groundless, went to raise David to the head of the family.

Some historical interest attaches to the grant by Malcolm IV. of the
Chureh of Inncrlethan.* Lord Hailes used this charter for refuting the
fable of the chroniclers, of Maleolm’s vow and practice of chastity; the King
himself giving as a reason of his grant, that his son’s body lay in the Church
of Innerlethan the first night after his death, The charter is remarkable
on another ground, For the cause already mentioned, the King grants to
Innerlethan a right of sanctuary, as fully as was enjoyed by Wedale or
Tyningham. Much doubt has been expressed regarding the constitution
and privileges of the church sanctuaries of Scotland. Without going into
the very curious Teutonic antiquities of the subject, or speculating on the
times when among our forefathers, as in Judea of old, places of refuge

* Annals, | uoting Wyntoun and Fordun. aL



--- Kelso1_page35.png ---
THE PREFACE. xxi

were anxiously provided, “that the slayer may flee thither which killeth any
person at unawares”—“ that the manslayer dic not until he stand before
the congregation in judgment” *—it may be cnough here to observe, that by

the Canon, and the more ancient ecclesiastical law, all churches were held
to afford protection to criminals for a limited period, sufficient to admit of
a composition of the offence, or, at any rate, to give time for the first heat of
resentment to pass over before the injured party could seck redy That
this was the Church law among ourselves, we learn from the ancient

canons of the Scotican councils; where, among the list of misdeeds against

which the Church enjoined excommunication, after the laying of violent
hands upon parents and priests, is denounced “ the open taking of thieves
out of the protection of the Church.”? But, though all were equally
sacred by the Canon, it would seem that the superior sanctity of some

* Numb. xxxv. 11, 12.

» Hist. maj. Winton. apud Anyl. Suer. I.
182.—In several English churches there was a
stone seat beside the altar, where those fleeing
to the peace of the church were held guarded
by all its sanctity. One of these s
at Beverley, another at Hexham.
the protection of the frith-stol, the
peace, or of the fertre, the shrine of reliques,
behind the altar, was not, like other offences,
to be compensated by a pecuniary penalty
It was bot-leas, beyontl compensation, Spe
man—Ric. Hagust. cited in Glos. of Archit.

In a vohme of Depositions and other
ecclesiastical proceedings,” now printing for
the Surtees society, under the charge of Mr
Raine, who has done so much forthe antiquities
of the patrimony of Saint Cuthbert, there isa
notice of a breach of sanctuary, and its punish-
ment by ecclesiastical authority, in 1312. The
Bishop of Durham states that he had heard

with dismay that certain children of evil had
incurred excommunication by withdrawing
fromthe Church ot the Carmelites of Neweastle,
some who had fled thither imploring church
protection for safety of their lives; and afte
wards, when the guilty person is discovered,
naniely, Nicholas le porter—he is sentenced
to appear bareheaded and barefoot, wearing
only a linen robe, at the door of the Church
of St Nicholas of Newcastle, every Sunday
for a whole year, and there to be publicly
seourged (fustigatus) by the curate, in pre-
sence of the assembled congr
from thence scourged to the Church of the
Carmelites, all the way confessing his fault.
Moreover, he is to have the same penance at
the Church of St Nicholas and the cathedral
Church of Durham, on three days of Whitsun
P. 7.

* Regist. Aberd. IL. 31.
1240, in the Lambeth MS.

sation, and

Scotch canons,


--- Kelso1_page36.png ---
xxii THE PREFACE.

churches, from the relies preserved there, or the popularity of their patron
saints, afforded a surer asylum, and thus attracted fugitives to their shrines
rather than to the altars of eommon parish ehurehes. We must not
be surprised, that in rough times even Holy Mother Church was not
able to afford proteetion to her suppliants against the avenger

alw

of red-hand ;* and it was to strengthen her authority, and to support
what in the circumstances of society was a salutary refuge against rash
vengeance, that tho Sovereign at times granted his sanetion to particular
ecelesi:

cal asylums. We have four of those mentioned in this register.

The most celebrated, and probably the most ancient, was that of the Church
of Wedale, a parish which is now called by the name of its village, ¢ the
Stow” There is a very ancient tradition, that King Arthur brought with
him from Jerusalem an image of the Virgin, “fragments of which,” says
a writer of the eleventh eentury,” “ are still preserved at Wedale in great
veneration.” About the beginning of his reign,? King William issued a
precept to the ministers of the Chureh of Wedale, and to the guardians of
its “ peace,” enjoining them “ not to detain the men of the Abbot of Kelso
who had taken refuge there, nor their goods, inasmuch as the Abbot was
willing to do to them, and for them, all reason and justice.”

In the year 1144, David I. granted the Church of Lesmahago as a cell
to Kelso, and by the same eharter conferred upon it the secular privilege of
sanctuary in these terms—* Whoso, for eseaping peril of life or limb, flee to
the said eell, or come within the four erosses that stand around it; of
reverence to God and Saint Machutus, I grant them ‘ my firm peaee.’’”¢
To incur the eensure and vengeance of the Chureh was sufficiently formi-
dable ; but to break ‘the King’s peace,’ brought with it something of more

“Homicida cum Taymdury,” is © Between 1165 and 1170, 410,
written in an ancient Scotch law MS. 4 &—Lesmahago is ecclesia Machuti,

» Old marginal annotation on a MS. of
Nennius,


--- Kelso1_page37.png ---
THE PREFACE, xxiii

definite punishment, It was not the mere mysterious divinity that doth
hedge a king: ‘The King’s peace’ was a privilege which attached to the
Sovereign’s court and castle, but which he could confer on other places and
persons, and whieh at onee raised greatly the penalty of misdeeds committed
in regard to them. By our most ancient law, the penalty of raising the hand
to strike within the King’s girth, was four cows to the King, and one to him
whom the offender would have struck ;° and for slaying a man “ in the pes
of our lord the King,” the forfeit was nine score of cows to the King, besides
ze of

the asythment or composition to the kin of him slain, “ after the a
the land.”

In granting the same privilege to Inverlethan, Maleolm IV. ordains
“that the said chureh, in which my son’s body rested the first night after
his decease, shall have a right of sanctuary in all its territory, as fully as
Wedale or Tyningham ; and that none dare to violate its peaee ‘and mine,’
on pain of forfeiture of life and limb.”* Of the Sanetuary of Tyningham,
thus mentioned as of almost equal celebrity with Wedale, we have but
little further information.

The Seotch law of sanctuary or girth was carly ascertained with much
precision, and carefully guarded from the danger of encouraging crime by
affording an easy immunity to fugitives." In later times, and during
a period of intolerable misrule, among other temporary enactments for
the suppression of homicide, the Parliament of Seotland enaeted, that
whoever took the protection of the Church for homicide, should be required
to come out and undergo an assize, that it might be found whether it was
committed of ‘ forthought fellony,” or in “chaudemellce ;” in case it should
be found of chandemellee, he was to be restored to the sanctuary ; and the

* Assise, R. David. Act. Parl. Ip. 8 Fan,
* Leges inter Brettos et Seotos. Act. —™ Hailes, Ann, 1214.—Stat, Alex. IL. ¢. 9.
Parl. 1. p. 300, Act. Parl, T. p. 71.



--- Kelso1_page38.png ---
xxiv

THE PREFAC

Sheriff was directed “ to give him security to that effect before requiring
him to leave it.”*

But while our carly monarchs were thus ready to aid the Church in
mitigating the violence of a rude age, they were prepared to withstand
any assumption of jurisdiction that put in peril the entire indepen-
On occasion of a Papal commission granted to an

English and a foreign churchman, for trying an action against the Abbey
of Kelso, King Alexander II. promptly interfered, and prohibited the
commissioners from proceeding, while he intimated that any thing done
by them could have no effect’ The King conceived he set forth a
suflicient ground for that step when he eited the Papal privilege, “ that
causes originating in our kingdom shall not be drawn before other judges
beyond the kingdom.” It was not his intention to question the right of
appealing to Rome, which was especially reserved in the bull founded upon."
Still less was it necessary now, as his forefathers had done,! to assert that
as an indefeasible right which the Papal commissioners would respect more

dence of the Crown.

as a Papal grace.

After the monkish fashion of copying into their register whatever excited
their particular interest, whether connected immediately with the affairs of
the monastery or no, we have in our chartulary a fine contemporary copy
of the famous deed of Edward III. and his council, in Parliament, renoun-
cing all claim of This deed was formerly a

superiority over Scotland.”

‘Act. Rob. TE. 18 Lp

' Hailes, 1181-1188, and the Papal bulls

184. The reading of the last clause is dif-
ferent from that adopted by Skene.

5-396.

“The privilege runs against removing
j ad sedem apostolieam, pro hiis
at negotiis que in regno commode ter-
non possunt.”-—Bull of Urban III.
Rey. Glasg. 69.

suits,

in the chartularies.

™ 537. It is imperfeet. ‘The conclu-
sion giving the date (Ist March, an. reg.
and the authority of the English com-
oners to make oath for their king, are
here wanting.



--- Kelso1_page39.png ---
THE PREFACE. XXV

great subject of dispute, and apparently even of doubt. The Parliament of
Scotland directed a transupt, or authoritative copy of it, to be made for
preservation, so lately as 1415. An old English chronicler, who gives the
words of the deed faithfully enough, (with the exception of the solemn
authentication—By the King and Council in Parliament,) adds, as a
palliation, —we fear rather of Edward’s granting such a recognition, than
of his violating it—*scd notandum quod hive notanda aeta sunt anno
zetatis suze decimo sexto.”™

It may surprise some readers to find a charter bearing the style of Jolin,
King of Scots, and dated the tenth year of his reign.° John Balliol, whose
reign dates from his coronation in November 1292, is generally said to have
resigned his kingdom to his liege lord, Edward, in July 1296. The Scoteh
Envoy at Rome in 1300, formally denied that transaction, and asserted that
Edward, attcr sending Balliol into England to prison, used the seals, which
he had taken foreibly from the Chancellor, for fabricating the letters of resig-
nation.” He maintained that John was still King of Scotland ; and, what-
ever may be the truth with regard to Edward’s forging Balliol’s resignation,
it was then the policy of Scotland, in its desperate struggle, to put forward the
unhappy John as its righttul King. We accordingly find Wallace in 1298,
while taking himself the style of “ Guardian of Scotland,” acting “ in the
rious prinee, John, by the graee of God King of Scots ;7"4

name of an illu:
and, in the following year, the Bishop of St Andrews, the Earl of Carric,

and John Comyn, then Guardians, use the name of the King in the
same manner.’ We here find that Sir Jol de Soulys, the guardian, con-

® Lanercost.. The words forming the eon- — ° 897,
entary tran —® Fordun, XI. 63, quoting the pleading of
jum in par- Baldred Bisset, the Seoteh Envoy at Rome.

clusion of the deed in the Parliam:

script, © per ipsum Regem et conc
fiamento,” may have been written apart from) @ Act. Park Lp. 87.0? Ibid. p08,
the body of the deed.—Aet. Part. L. p.

d


--- Kelso1_page40.png ---
xxvi THE PREFACE.

tinued to set forth the style of the degraded and forgotten King John
so late as the year 1302.

Another series of these charters is of some historical interest.“ It appears
that, under the doubtful sovereignty of David IL, during his English
imprisonment, a certain Roger de Auldton founded a chantry in the church
of St James of Roxburgh, which he endowed with the lands of Softlaw in
Teviotdale ; and, on the same day apparently, granted two several charters
regarding it; the one running—* for the soul’s weal of a most excellent
prinee, my lord David King of Scots;” the other, for the weal of “my
lord King Edward of England.” These charters seem to have been each
presented for confirmation to the sovereign commemorated in cach ; and a
confirmation, engrossing Roger’s charter at length, bears to be granted by
David “at Inverkeithin, in our council there held, on the first day of
April, the year of our reign the twenty-fourth, and A.D, 1354;”* while
Edward’s confirmation of the grant is in a charter under the great seal of
England, dated “at Berwick on the first day of May, the year of our reign,
of England the twenty-eighth, and of France the fifteenth,” é. ¢., May 1,
1354,

These dates, in both instances, occur in duplicate, and we cannot, with-

out much violence, presume an error of the record. It would appear, how-
ever, that in neither case can the Sovercign have been present at the grant-
ing of the charter which passes in his name and under his seal. We have
no other evidenee, nor any notice by historians, of the imprisoned David
having attended a council at Inverkeithing in April 1354; and Edward
was undoubtedly at Westminster on the Ist of May of that year. But

* 495, 500, short of the truth, These charters show
© Tt is now well known, that in all docu- that this diserepaney between the years of
ments after his return from England, the his reign and the years of our Lord, existed
regnal years of David IL. are stated one year also some time before his return from captivity.



--- Kelso1_page41.png ---
THE PREFACE. xxvii
at that period, and for long after, the English practice agreed with that of
Scotland ;* and, in both countries, the King was believed to be where he
‘The terms of the English confirmations are also
remarkable. They set forth Edward’s usnal style of « King of England
and France, and Lord of Ireland,” while the subject-matter is wholly
Scotch. It would seem as if the English monarch considered Teviotdale,

at that time, as part and pareel of England.*

attested his charter.

It is scarcely of less than historical interest to endeavour to ascertain the
early history of the family of Donglas; a race which, in two or three gene-
rations of remarkable men, rose so high as to send its future chroniclers into
the region of romance to seck for a suitable origin.

Later writers, willing to escape from palpable fables, sought for proofs of
the Donglas origin in this Chartulary. Myr Chalmers lays it down as
demonstrated by him, that the lands of Douglas, the ancient family estate,
were first granted to a ecrtain Theobaldus, a Fleming; and that his son
William, in the end of the twelfth century, fi

In both positions he seems to be mistaken.

st took the territorial name

of Douglas.” The lands
granted by the abbot to Theobald,* thongh on the Douglas water, appear,

after the mimitest enquiry into their boundaries, not to be a part of the

ancient territory of Douglas ;° and there is no proof, nor any probability, of

William of Douglas of the twelfth century, the undoubted ancestor of the

* This presumption ceased after the eight-
centh of Henry VI; subsequent to which,
the plaee where an English crown charter is
dated affords no proof that the King was
present.

* Tt will be observed that one of the wit-
nesses, John de Coupland, the hero of
Neville’s Cross, is set forth in Edwars -
ter as viceromes noster de Roxburgh; as it
he considered Roxburghshire actually an
499, 500,

English county.

* Caledonia, I. p. 579; followed by Wood
in his Peerage.

= 107, 116,

> If it shall be thought that the charters,
189, 202, of date 1269-70, convey the same
lands, granted a century before to ‘Theobal-
dus Flamaticus, it would follow that the
Douglases were not even then in the heredi-
1 of the land of his grant,

tary posse


--- Kelso1_page42.png ---
xxviii

THE PREFACE,

family, being descended of the Fleming who settled on the opposite side of

his native valley.

‘© povacas

2 © De surso de Polnele usque ad aquam
de Duglas,” though not quite precise, seems
to make the burn of Polnele, for its whole
course, the southern boundary
? © The Hfleechan mos
*slatum mos” of the eharte:

* Pauldho,” (Thomson’

“Tongum fan” of the charter.

” (Bleau,) perhaps

Atlas,) perhaps

cROSSFORD

\
\\\ LANARK
Qo
a

+ © Broken eroce moore,” (Bleau,) perhaps
+ Hirdelau.”

° Black Hill,” (Thomson,) here or near
this place, perhaps was
ford” of the eharter.

“longum vigrum

All these conjectures may he wroug, with-
out alfecting the general accuracy of the
boundary given by the ascertained points,


--- Kelso1_page43.png ---
THE PREFACE. XNIX

The materials of the early history of the Parliament of Scotland are so
scanty, that it was to be expected our constitutional lawyers should not
overlook the fragments of Parliamentary styles which have been preserved
on the blank leaves of this register.» These are a series of slightly varying
forms of proxies to Parliament, running in the names of Abbots Patrick and
William of Kelso, and of a certain J. de H., a lord of that ilk, and, as a free
tenant of the crown, bound to give suit and service in Parliament. From
the handwriting and the style of these writs, they may be safely aseribed to
the time of Patrick and William, successively abbots in the beginning of the
fifteenth century ;* and we may be allowed to conjceture that one, in which
the abbot sets forth sickness as the cause of lis own absence, is of date snb-
sequent to the Act 1425, which required that no members should appear
by proxy, “but gif the procuratour alleage there, and prove, a lauchful
It will be observed that all these styles substitute two or
more procurators for the absent member ; and we find that more than one

eaus of absens.””

sometimes actually attended,” showing how little the voting was considered,
y Ss Ss

and earrying us back to the times when a seat in Parliament was felt as a

burden much more than a privilege.

In the charters of Schottun® and elsewhere, we find some references to
the marches of the kingdoms, too minute for all but the fortunate enquirer
who may trace ‘the rivulet as it descends by the chapel of Saint Edelrid the
virgin, and divides between the kingdoms of England and Scotland, close

* GAQ-544.

* Wight, in his “Enquiry into the rise and
progress of the Parliament of Seotland,” has
mistaken the age of the ouly one of these
whieh he has used. His argument in support
of its being of the 20th May 1258, loses its
last support, when we ascertain that the
Patrick of that century certainly was not
abbot soouer than September of that year.

‘The mistake has been long ago pointed out,
and but little detraets from the merit of a
valuable law-book, not making much elaiin to
reeord learning or antiquarian researeb.

» Thus we find Dunean Waleis mentioned
in the parliament of 1309, as “one of the
procurators of the Earl of Douglas.’—Aet.
Parl. L. p. 173.

© BOL, et seq.

892, &e,


--- Kelso1_page44.png ---
XXX THE PREFACE,

beside Homeldun.”
been sufficiently turned to the actual boundaries of the kingdoms, as they

The attention of historians and antiquaries has not

existed at different times. Nothing would be more important for the carly

history of Scotland than to a

certain what was really comprehended in the
province of Lothian ; upon which some light might be thrown by an attempt
ive limits of the Bishoprick of St Andrews; and it is
ble that a clue to the geography of the much disputed

to fix the suc

by no means impos
kingdom of Cumbria might be obtained, by exploring the boundaries whieh
separated the jurisdictions of the Bishops of Durham and those of Glasgow.
We have it established on the best evidence the subject admits of, that
Edgar of England and his witan yielded the province of Lothian to Ken-
latter half of the tenth century, which led
to the permanent incorporation of the Scoto-Saxon lowlands with the king-
dom of Scotland proper." Now, along with the kingdom of Northumbria,
the patrimony of Saint Cuthbert must have suffered curtailment ; and there
seem to be more mate:

neith King of Scotland in the

s for fixing the subsequent limits of the ecclesias-

tical than of the ¢

jurisdiction

“AD. Edinburgh had already
been evacuated by the English, See the ad-
mirable translation of Lappenberg’s Anglo-
Saxon history by Thorpe, and the authorities
cited.

©The following very curious mandate,
recorded in the Registers

of Durham, is com
municated by the kindness of the
Stevenson. It is here printed entire, in the
hope that it may exeite the attention of some
zealous Church antiquary, who will perhaps
elucidate the time and circumstances in which
it has been issued,

Rev. J.

Prohibitio T. Archiepiseopi Eboracensis
clerieis de Tenydale que est de dio
ces} Dunelmensi.

Thomas Dei gratia Eboracensis archiepis-
copus Alg’ clerieo salutem. Ipse tibi ore ad
os prohibui, cum per te erisma et oleum ad
m ceclesiam misi, ne crisma yel
oleum illud dares in parochiam Dunehnen:
cpiscopi. ‘Tu vero illud, contra defensionem
meam, in Teucytedale dedisti, de qua cecle-
siam Dunelmensem saisitam inveni. Mando
igitur tibi et episcopali autoritate prohibeo et
omnibus presbiteris de Teueyetedale ne de
crismate et oleo aliquod ministerium anodo.
faciatis, nisi per octo dies tantum postquam
breve

tud videritis, ut interim requirere
possitis crisma a Dunolmensi
vobis illud dare solita est.

veclesia que
Quod si post illos
oeto dies de crismate quod misi, aliquam


--- Kelso1_page45.png ---
THE PREFACE. XXxi

Of the Church, its dues and its burdens, and of the life of the clergy, we
have scarcely so much information in this as in most of the other chartn-
laries. In a bull, which scems to be of Innocent IV.,f is a curious notice
of what was perhaps the carliest shape of dues levied by Rome from the
monasteries of Scotland, before the cra of either of our ancient taxations
of benefices. We have very careful and solemn settlements regarding the
share of the Abbey benefices allowed to the working clergy : the privileges
of the Mother Church in cases where chapels were tolerated :* regarding

€ procuratios or the visitation dues of the bishop, archdeacon, and rural
2

dean : and fi
rector (the abbey) and the vicar.' The eclibacy of the clergy was effectually
established by David I, among his other Roman reforms—a change of
vast consequence for good and for evil. Its first and best effect was to save

ing, that extraordinary exactions were to be borne equally by the

the clergy from becoming a hereditary caste. We do not find, within the
period of our Register, acknowledged marriages of priests ; nor, as in other
church records, proofs of their sons succeeding to their livings. But we
have here abundant occurrences of the sons of clergymen, appearing along
with their fathers, and plainly taking th
About the beginning of the thirteenth century, the Abbot confirmed to

rank and style from them.

John, the son of the Dean of Stobhon, the land of Corroc, which his father
had held of the abbey. The Abbot’s words are peculiar—* We receive
him as his father’s heir.”*

It may be presumed the convent scribe entered, rather as a model, than

christianitatem facere presumpseritis, a divino £460, The pontificate is gathered partly

officio vos suspendo [donee] dirationatum sit, from the enumeration of the Pope’s prede-

ad quam ceclesiam pertineat. Valete. cessors, and from the list of the bishops and
Reg. 1, Prior. § Capit. Dunelm. fol. 183, kings of Scotland given in the bull.

The old annotator on Nennius quoted above, ® 230, &e.

(p. ssii..) speaks of Wedale as ‘in the pro- —* 442, &e. 419.

vince of Lothian, but now within the diocese 2 104, 161, 163, 167, 178, 268, 369, &e.

of the Bishop of St Andrews in Scotland.” * «In heredem ejus reeepimus.” 112.



--- Kelso1_page46.png ---
xxxii THE PREFACE,

as having any authority within the Abbey territory, the two summonses of
the Bishop of Durham against heretics.'_ No register of Bishop Walter
Skirlaw is preserved at Durham ; and concerning James Notyngham,
Robert Roxburgh, and John Withby, “ priests, heavily suspected of per-
verse and erroneous doctrine, and opposed to the Catholic faith,” we may
only conjecture that they were some of the clergy imbued with Wycliff’s
opinions, which were then beginning to spread in the north of England.

Our register affords a great deal of information regarding the occupation
of the soil and the manner of its culture; and we are enabled to form a
tolerably complete idea of the state of the population and the whole scheme
of rural life, at least as it existed under the kindly shelter of the Church.
We have a glimpse even of the mystery of rents and prices, the value of
land and of labour, in Teviotdale in the thirteenth century.

At the period of the Rent Roll, or about the year 1290,” a great part
of their ample lands and baronies were held by the monks “ in dominico,”
in their own hands, and cultivated (by their villeins, doubtless,) from
their several granges, as at Reveden, Sprouston, Molle, Faudon, Witemer,
Witelaw, Bolden. The land so held they measured in ploughlands
where arable, and by the number of sheep it maintained where pasture, We
must not judge of a plough of the monks by our modern notions, or fill it
iv our fancy with a pair of quick-stepping Tweedside horses. ‘The Scotch
plongh of the thirteenth century (and for three centuries afterwards) was a
ponderous machine drawn by twelve oxen, whether all used at once, or by
two relays ; so that for the five ploughs of Reveden they had sixty oxen ; and
we do not wonder at finding pasture for those work cattle set down as a cou-

siderable part of the produce. On their land they reared oats, barley, and

: taken the period of the rent-roll, It certainly
Lord Hailes, mistaking the date was very near the year mentioned in the text.
auil’s accession, has slightly miss —Jfieecl. Ocewr., 1205.

of Abbot


--- Kelso1_page47.png ---
THE PREFACE. XXNili

wheat," as their sueeessors do. They made their lill pasture afford them
hay, by removing their sheep from a portion of it at one season of the year.
They had waggons for their harvest work, and wains of some sort for
bringing peats from the moss.° Some tine liter, the abbot’s wains were
usually sent for commodities to Berwick, and had a special resting-place
allotted them upon ‘ the bourn bra, south from the vedryng meadow,’ in
the lands of Simpring ;? but perhaps that rood was not at the time of the
rental passable for wheel carriages."

The monks had large flocks of sheep—fourteen scores of ewes in Res eden,
500 in Colpinhope ‘ beyond the mareh,’ with 200 dinmonts; 300 hogs in
Spronston ; 300 dinmonts in Altonburn of Molle ; 700 wedders in Berchope,
which were to be removed for a month in summer, when they were to have
pasture in Molhope ;* 1000 ewes in Newton ; 300 lambs at Malearvesten, &c.
—more than 6600 enumerated, besides ‘two flocks ’ of wedders at Witelaw.

Tt would rather seem that at that period the monks did not rear black
cattle in considerable number. The oxen mentioned on their pastures were
But at Witelaw® they had a herd of
fourscore cows, and smaller herds in other places ; and they had 60 s
pasturing in Newton.‘

mostly those used in their ploughs.

So early as the twelfth century, the monks had a grant from Odenel de
Untfravil, lord of Prudhoe, of the tithe colts of his haraz, or stud of brood

mares ; extended by his d
pastured in their forest we

5

"Pp.
oP. The Abbey had from the land
of Molle, rods for repairing their waggons, as
it would seem, though the word is gene
used in old Scotch charters for ploug'
virgas pro reparatione currucarun,—P.
» 556.

scendants to the tenth colt of the mares which
rard of Cotteneshop. The monks put their

* We find, however, that the venders of isl
and other commodities at Kelso, anid at the
fairs of Roxburgh, brought them thither both
in waggons (quedriyis) and on horseback, as
the time of William the Lion. 13.

* P41. P. 463.

e


--- Kelso1_page48.png ---
Xxxxiv THE PREFACE,

brand on those tithe colts, which were then allowed to follow their dams in
the Umfravils’ forest till they were two years old."

We have here some indications of the previons existence of a system
which must, in all likelihood, have been the earliest mode of land tenancy
every where ; when the occupier of the ground, not yet possessed of capital
cnough of his own, hired, along with his farm from the landlord, the cattle,
system, which is still

seed, and stock, required for cultivating it. Thi
remembered among us by the name of steel-bow, seems, at the time of
the rental, to have felt the effects of a long period of national prosperity,
when the tiller of the ground had risen in cirenmstances, and was enabled

* says the rent-roll,

to cultivate his farm with his own stock. “ Formerly,”
“each husbandman of Reveden took with his land, Stubt) namely, two
x bolls of barley, and three of wheat.

oxen, a horse, three chalders of oats,
But when Abbot Richard commuted their services into money, they gave up
their Stubt, and each paid for his land yearly eighteen shillings.”

bhed—On thai sylfum lande the
m on-starnt gobure gebyreth that him

" 825, 331. thus de:
Of the word stuht, which is here plainly — theos re
equivalent to “steel-bow goods,” it is feared man to land-setene sylle 2 oxan § 1 cu § 6
no further explanation can be ventured ; and sevup § 7 weeras gesarcene on his gyrde landes.
we niust vest satisfied with the account given forthige ofer that year ealle geriktu the him to~
hy Dr Jamieson in the supplement to his  gebyrigcan, § sylle him man tol to his weoree &
dictionary, who connects it with the Gaclie andlaman to his kuse. Thonne him forth-sith
stuth, ‘stuf’ The subject of ‘steelbow  gebyrige gyme his Maford thers he lwfe-— Ou
goods" is interesting to the legal antiquary, that same Jand where this eustom holds, it
Stair describes them as © goods set with lands falls to the boor that there be given to him
upon these terms, that the like number of at the setting of the land two oxen and one
goods shall be restored at the issue of the cow and six sheep and seven acres sown in
tael his rood of land. (He is to fulfil after that
found in the most curious of An, x year all the obligations which attach to him ;)
law relies, the Rectitudines singularum per- and there are to be given to him tools for his
sonarum, (Thorpe’s Ancient Laws and Inst. work, and furniture to his lous When
o! .) where, in the chapter death befalls him, let the lord take what he

of Gebures gerilite—" the boor’s rights” —itis may have left.”

An early indication of this

glo-



--- Kelso1_page49.png ---
THE PREFACE.

But, to come to the period of the ‘Rotulus redditunm ’ itself, we find the

”

“ grange,” or farm-stead of the Abbey, the chief house in each barony or

estate. In it were gathered the cattle, implements, stores needed for the
cultivation of their domain lands or mains, the nativi, serfs or earles who
cultivated it, and their women and families. Some monk of the Abbey
occasionally looked after the grange, but the proper steward was a lay
brother or conversus, who dwelt there, and rendered his accounts to the
cellarer of the monastery.

Of the inhabitants of the grange, the lowest in the scale was the nutivus.

earle, bond, serf, or villein, for by each of these names he was known, who

d,and might be eaugh:
Ear!
Waldev of Dunbar, in a deed of four limes, made over a whole tribe to th:
Abbey :—* I give and confirm to the Abbot and monks of Kelso, Halden an‘

was transferred like the land on which he labor
and brought back if he attempted to eseape, like a stray ox or sheep,

valeur égale an prix de Pestimation de cet»

Of a custom so ancient and so wide-spread,
it is interesting to observe how remarkably
it has retained its éron appellation in other
Tan! 's as well as our own, in reference,
we must suppose, to the enduring nature of
unt domino.

qu'il aura ree)
The Scotch term séeel-bow. being th
plainly equivalent to the stabline bieb, best
fervi, Stablinen hub wire sebaatle, of the eon -
tinental lawyers; the last member ot tl
phrase is perhaps to be found in the Seote!

the cattle or goods gine non p
We find them styled eiger bieb, stabléve
bith, stiblinen Rub, “iron, or stecl cattle,”
in the old German law-books ; bestia ferri,
“beste de fer,” in old law Latin and French, cattle: as the lines of Virg
(Besold. thesaur.—Ducange, §¢.:) and the 485.)

tenure still, known in French law by the ‘Tyirhensqne pater eui regia parent

word Low, whieh, though now obsolete, seen:
at one time to have been used for a

LL (2

herd
n. VE.

name of Cheptel de fer. The Code treating
«Du cheptel donné par Ie proprittaire & son
fermier” uses the ancient phrase — “ Ce
cheptel, aussi appelé cheptel de fer, est celui
par lequel le propriétaire d'une métairie Ia
donne i ferme, & la charge qu’h Pexpiration
du bail, le fermier laissera des bestiaux d’une

alrmenta et late custodia credita campi :
are translated by Douglas—
“Tyrrheus thar fader was fee master ani
gyde
Of studdis, flokkis, Bowis, and heirdis
wide ;”
unless we are satisfied with the more general


--- Kelso1_page50.png ---
THE PREFAC

XXXVI
his brother William, and all their children, and all their descendants.””
Another and later benefactor of the Abbey, after conveying lands in
Gordun, (by a boundary so plain that it must be still easily traced, at the
distance of five ecenturies,) throws into the bargain two crofts, occupied by

Adam of the Hog and John the son of Lethe; “and Adam of the Hog

himself, my native, with all his following; ”

with pasture in the mains for

forty beasts, with all their followers of one year, &e.; and then he warrants

the Abbey the said lands, meadows, mez, and pastures.”* In the

{ister of Dunfermline are “ genealogies ” or studbooks, for enabling the

lord to trace and reclaim his stock of serfs by descent.

Adjoining the grange, was usually a hamlet oceupied by the cottar
J Ss grange,

sometim

, were very far above the cl

pied from one to nine acres of land along with his

Geoaan word baw, which may express any
«of eultiration: giving as the translation

vel-bow, cultus ferrens.

28; see also 401, &e.

124, The former of these grants con-
seys the subjects of it as absolute serfs,

in gross,”

as they were called in
The latter might seem, by seve-
rune from the manor, to have changed the
“tac of the serf from «ville regardant,’ or

sland.

olveriptus glebe, the bond attached to the
oo, and passing with it in conveyance by
ill certain rights; to the
more absolute villenage, where the naticus,
like the other cattle, could be disposed of at
pleasure. But it may be doubted whether
this distinetion was re ized in Seotland,
It is said there were few ¢ villeins in gro
land ; and Sir Thomas Smith, writing

seisin, but having s

in Eng

from thirty to forty in number,

s now known by that name.

,
The ‘ cottars, under the
>
Each occu-

cottage.’ The rents were

in the reign of Edward VI, says, that in his
time he never knew a villein in gross through-
out the reala, (Haryrave’s argument in the
St. Tr., 20.) There is
no reason to believe that at that time villen-

Negro's case, V771.

age existed at all in Scotland, (except in
colliers and salters.) But in the old laws
regarding them, and the numerons convey-

ances of neyts or serfs, preserved in the
chartularies of an early date, we can trace no
admission or claim of right raising any class
of them above the rank of absolute serfs or
villeins in gross. .

7 It might be thought that the word ‘ cotta~
gium’ of the roll, expressed a portion of land
as well as a house; but in one instance a
‘ecottagium’ in Witemer is mentioned “ sinc
terra.” —P. 460,


--- Kelso1_page51.png ---
THE PREFACE. XXXVI

generally in money, varying from one to six shillings yearly, according to
the size and advantages of the place, together with services, not exceeding
nine days’ labour in the year. The tenants of twenty-one cottagia at
Clarilaw, having each thee acres of land, minus a rood, and pasture for
two cows, paid each two bolls of meal yearly, and were bound to shear
the whole corn of the Abbey grange of Newton.

Beyond the mains and the hamlet, or cottar-town as it was sometimes
called, along the outskirts of the barony, were scattered in small groups
the farm-steads of the heshandi, the next elass of the rural popula-
tion, Each of these held of the Abbey a definite quantity of land, called
a husband-land, It has been already noticed that the Scotch plough
required twelve oxen ; and a ‘ plough-gate’ of land was composed of
gangs.’ Each tenant of a husband-land kept two oxen; and

twelve ‘ox
six together united their oxen to work the common plough. The husband-

land thus consisted of two ox-gangs, which might vary according to the

soil; but which was estimated long ago in the Merse, as “ twenty-six
acres where plow avd seythe may gang.”*

Asa fair specimen of the rate at which these tenants sat, we may take
the rental of the barony of Bolden, which was considered as the model of
the Abbey lands in regard to services. The monks had twenty-eight
husband-lands there, each of which paid yearly six shillings and eight-
pence of rent in money, and the following services :—

Four days’ reaping in harvest, the hushandman with his wife and all
their family ; and a fifth day, the husbandman with two other men ;

One day, carting peats from Gordon to the Pullis, and one cart-load

(plaustrum) yearly, from the Pullis to the Abbey
The service of a man and horse to and from Berwiek once a-year; and

* Act. Parl. I. Notice of the MSS., p.


--- Kelso1_page52.png ---
sxxxvill THE PREFACE.

on this oceasion they were to have their food from the monastery. (The
husbandmen of Reveden were bound each to give carriage with one horse

from Berwick, weekly during summer, and a day’s work on their return—
or, if they did not go to Berwick, two days’ tillage.) In these services of

carriage, a horse’s load was three bolls of corn, or two bolls of salt, or one

and a half bolls of coals; or somewhat Jess in winter ;

To till an acre and a half, and to give a day’s harrowing with one horse
yearly 5

To find a man for the sheep-washing and one for the sheep-shearing :
these were to be fed from the monastery ;

To serve with a waggon one day yearly, for carrying home the harvest ;

All were bound to carry the abbot’s wool from their barony to the Abbey ;
and to find carriages across the moor to Lesmahago.*

In such transactions with the labourers of the soil, we perceive the chief
opening for escape from villenage or hereditary servitude, for which ¢ the
air of Britain was too pure ;’ and which died out among us without exer-
tion of the legislature.” Whether any ceremony or act of emancipation
took place, we cannot now perhaps determine; but it is manifest that
both those classes of tenants were virtually and effectually freed from
servitude. The covenant of a limited portion of service implies that the
rest was free.

It

service is imposed on women except harvest work: and a still more decided

worthy of observation, that in all this catalogue of services no farm

proof of advancing civilization is, that at the period of the rental the whole
services were in process of being commuted for money rent.°

»P.46l. known to us, in this country, of proceedings
> The Church, too, did its part; and the under a brieve ‘de nativo habendo,’ was in
free institutions of burghs not only afforded the Sheriff-conrt of Banff in 1361. Regist.
the machinery, but supplied the spirit and Morav, 143.
motive, for emancipation, The last case © P, £62, 463,


--- Kelso1_page53.png ---
ix

THE PREFACE. x

The next step was to convert the ‘ kindly tenancy ’ of the Abbey rent-
eoman.

allers into a still more permanent right ; to raise the tenant into the
Such an one was that Hosbernus," whom the Abbot John styl
man,” and who gets a half plongh of land in heritage and perpetuity in
1 of the Abbey, pe
of cight shillings, and giving certain services in ploughing time and harvest.
Of this kind the Abbey had numerous vassals, holding of them by a heredi-
illusory.

s, who held a place only second

“* onr

Middilham, and becomes the liege vas: ng a reddendo

tary title, and paying a rent by no means

Last of all were the great Chureh v
to the baronage and frecholders of the Crown. These were chiefly in the
territory of Lesmahago. They had their lands free from all service, and
(by license of the Abbot) had courts of Bloodwit and Byrthensak, and
petty canses.© They had ‘merehet’ for the marriages of their ls?
daughters, and paid to the Abbot ‘merchet’ for the marriage of their own.

In the very carliest of these charters there are grants concerning mills,
showing that the system of thirlage was even then introduced ; and their
curiously minute regulations of precedency at the mill, and payment of
multures, prove the carly ingenuity with which this picec of feudal oppres-
sion was enforeed against all but the privileged.

At the period of the rental, the mill of Bolden, with its thirlage, gave
cight merks of yearly rent. Four brewing-honses were let for ten shillings
cach, and were bound to supply ale to the Abbot at the rate of a gallon and

a half for a penny, ‘The Abbot had from each house of the barony a hen
at Christmas, which was worth a halfpenny.
The land of Abbots Selkirk, which was a plongh-gate and a half, used

to give ten merks of rent.

“V7. suis, et nos de hominibus nostris”—so im-

© 102116, &e. But in each
provided—* sanguis effusus fuerit in terra and fines of court.
ejus, ipse forisfactum habebit de hominibus

se it Was portant was the revenue derived from escheats



--- Kelso1_page54.png ---
xl THE PREFACE.

The Abbey had hostilages and mansions in many burghs, perhaps to
enable their Abbot or his representatives to attend the king’s court during
the royal progresses. It lad valuable fishings, and others of so little value,
yet so carefully guarded by charters, as almost to lead to the belief that
the monks esteemed some sort of fishing for sport.f

We are not informed of what materials the bridge of Ettrick was con-
structed, for the support of which Kir

Alexander II. gave the monks a grant
of land? and where the Abbot afterwards held his courts of regality ;
but we have a very formal transaction recorded, for leave to build a bridge
across the rivulet of Blackburn, and to have passage for earts and waggons
to and fro; and we find the bridge was designed to be of stone, in the
middle of the thirteenth century—an carly instance for Scotland, and
marking considerable progress in the arts, if the s

am is of any size."
All the Abbey tenants and vy:

‘als were probably bound to relieve the
Abbey of the military and other public services. We find this expressly
provided in the ease of the husbandmen of Bolden ;! and with regard to
the lands of Prestficld, which in 1327 were found by an assize to be four
husband-lands ; to be parcel of the barony of Bolden ; and bound to
provide a man-at-arms, who should be the captain of thirty archers, found
by the barony?

Although richer in notices of the rural population, our Chartulary is not
devoid of information regarding the class of burghers, such as they existed
in those burghs of second rank which enjoyed privileges, under the
authority of some of the great lords of the Church. Kelso was one of

‘In the first charter to the Abbey, the the angle. It must have been of more con-
founder granted the monks the fishing of the sequence, however, when the lower water
Selkirk waters— aquas meas de Sclechirehe was Jess closely fished,
communes ad piscandum suis propriis pisca-
toribus ut meis ;” a right that would now
be held of little value, save by the lover of

* 123, 136.
2471,



--- Kelso1_page55.png ---
xi

THE PREFACE.

this class, and there are some amusing instances, as early as the reign
of William the Lion, of the jealousy with which the royal burgh of Rox-
burgh protected its privileges of fair, and right of trading, against the
Abbot’s pretty village on the other side of the river.

The Abbey of Kelso, the first and perhaps the richest of the Sainted
David’s monasteries, freed from all episcopal jurisdiction and dues,' itself
enjoying the privileges of the mitre and crozier, took precedency among the
monasteries of Scotland second only to the Priory of St Andrews. It was
not, indeed, until the reign of James I. that priority of place in parliaments
and councils, above the Abbot of Kelso and all other prelates (after
bishops,) was adjudged to the Prior of St Andrews, not on account of the
antiquity of the foundation, but plainly by reason of his connexion with
the primal sec.™

Thus foremost in rank and power, the monks of Kelso vindicated
their place by their practice of the monastic virtues. We find their
charity and hospitality early acknowledged by their diocesans,* impartial
witnesses, of the opposite faction, and with some canse for jealousy of
the independent regulars. We may see them, in the transactions here
recorded, as the liberal landlords of a vast domain, stimulating and aiding
their people towards emancipation and true independence. Lovers of
peace, yet not altogether exempt from the infirmity of small disputes

which besets country neighbours even in our own time, the monks

* 13, &e.

' Ab omni subjectione episcopali et ex-
actione libera.”"—445, 438, 439,

© Fordun, vi. 49; where Bower evidently
misunderstands the arguments he reports.
Without reckoning the foundations of Cul-
dees, of remote and obscure antiquity, the

Abbey of Scone and the Priory of Colding-
ham, at least, were earlier foundations of
regulars than either St Andrews or Kelso.
The controversy, therefore, cannot have
turned upon mere antiquity.

» 455, &e.

ft


--- Kelso1_page56.png ---
xii THE PREFACE.

endeavoured to provide a partial remedy. In the middle of the fifteenth
century, the four abbots of Teviotdale® judicially declared it to be of an-
cient and established usage, “that if any dispute or misunderstanding arose
between any two of them, the other two had authority to mediate and settle
the difference.” Good landlords and good neighbours, hospitable and
charitable, when the time of trouble came in the War of Independence,
we find them the objects of general sympathy. After peace had been in
some measure restored by the vigour of Bruce, John bishop of Glasgow
expresses his sorrow that “the Benedictine monastery of Saint Mary of
Calchow, which used to show a liberal hospitality to all who crowded
thither, and lent a helping hand to the poor and needy, being situated
on the confines of the kingdoms, through the hostile incursions and
long-continued war of the countries, is now impoverished, spoiled of
its goods, and in a sort desolate.”? The Bishop of St Andrews, Wil-
liam of Lamberton, who had himself experienced so many of the mischief
of the civil war, in the preamble to a grant in their favour, speaks with
equal commiseration of our Kelso monks—*Secing that the Monastery
of Saint Mary of Kelcho, on the borders of England and Scotland, is,
through the common war and the long depredation and spoiling of goods
by fire and rapine, destroyed, and, we speak it with grief, its monks and
* conversi’ wander over Scotland, begging food and clothing at the other
religions houses—in which most famous monastery divine service used to
be celebrated with multitude of persons, and adorned with innumerable
works of charity; while it sustained the burdens and inconvenience of
crowds flocking thither of both kingdoms, and showed hospitality to all in

want—whose state we greatly compassionate, &¢.”4

” Kelso, Melrose, Jedburgh, Dryburgh— 477.
Liber de Melros, 565, 566, + 309.


--- Kelso1_page57.png ---
THE PREFACE. sliii

Such education as was then known—and it is the fashion now rather to
underrate it—the monks of Kelso cultivated and promoted. They had
schools in the town of Roxburgh as early as the reign of William the
Lion ;* and they furnished instruetion within the monastery to a higher
class than those who benefited by their burghal schools. In the thirteeuth
eentury, the widowed Lady of Molle resigned a part of her dowery lands
to the convent, on the condition that they should maintain * her son among
the scholars of the best rank in their “ poor’s house.”

That the arts were cultivated within the Abbey walls, we may conclude
withont mnch extrinsic evidence. The beantiful and somewhat singular
arehiteeture of the ruined church itself, still gives proof of taste and skill
and some seience in the builders, at a period which the confidence of modern
times has proclaimed dark and degraded; and if we could call up to the
fancy the magnificent Abbey and its interior decorations, to correspond
with what remains of that ruined pile, we should find works of art that
such a

might well exereise the talents of high masters. The erection of
structure often extended over several hundred years. Kelso bears marks
of having been a full century in building ; and during all that time at
the carver of wood, the senlptor in

least, perhaps for long afterwards
stone and marble, the tile-maker and the lead and iron-worker, the
painter, whether of scripture stories or of heraldic blazonings, the de-
signer and the worker in stained glass for those gorgeous windows which
we now vainly try to imitate—must cach have been pnt in reqnisi-
tion, and cach, in the exercise of his art, coutribnted to raise the taste and
cultivate the minds of the inmates of the cloister. Of many of these works
the monks themselves were the artists and artisans; and it would be a
gricvons mistake to suppose, that the effect was merely that of living and

* 409, which has given rise to the academical term
* 173. Exhibebunt in victualibus—a phrase of exhibitions.


--- Kelso1_page58.png ---
xliv THE PREFACE.

working in an artist’s shop. The interest and honour of the convent ; the
honest rivalry with neighbouring houses and other orders ; above all, the
zeal for religion whieh was honoured by their efforts ; the strong desire to
render its rites magnificent, and to set forth in a worthy manner the worship
of the Deity ;—all these gave to the works of the old monks, a principle
and a fecling above what modern art must ever hope to reach.

Among the arts praetised in the monastery, was that of ealigraphy,
which was so often applied in religious houses to serviee-books, to ehron-
icles, charters, and the registers of them. It has already heen noticed that
a eopy of Wyntoun’s Chronicle is supposed to have been written at Kelso.
At an earlier period, the Abbey seribe w

a

usefully employed in reeording
the muniments of the Abbey, and to his industry we owe the present eollec-
tion. But long before the date of our Register, the art had been practised
in the monastery ; for some of the most elegant of the charters of David I.

and his grandsons,

issned from the s

criptorium of Kelso.
The most remarkable of these, and as a writing, the most remarkable

of Scotch charters, is the great charter of Maleolm IV., granted to the
It is
carefully and even handsomely written ; but its ehicf interest is derived
from an illuminated initial ), whieh gives us a favourable idea of the
art of miniature as practised in the monastery, and perpetuates a pair
There is

no reason to doubt that the two personages represented with the insignia

Abbey in 1159, which is still preserved o xepnass, at Floors.

of the earliest Seoteh portraits that have eome down to us."

* Lord Hailes has noticed the elegance of pression of the sovereign for the time: but

the charters of the reign of William, (An.
1153.) Those of his son were much more
elaborate and ornate. During the twelfth
century we find a witness at Kelso designated
as © Stephen the writer’ —!

“Tt might he supposed that we should
exeept coins and seals, which bear the im-

IT.

the former in early times are so rude as to
give a vile imitation of humanity ; and with
regard to seals, there is too much reason to
suspect, that suecessive kings of Scotland
often used the same representation of the
person of royalty, slightly differenced in the
circumscription or otherwise.



--- Kelso1_page59.png ---
THE PREFACE. xiv

of royalty in this remarkable illumination, are King David 1, the founder
and great benefactor of the Abbey, who had died, full of years and of
honour, six years before—and his grandson Maleolm IV., the reigning
sovereign, the granter of the charter, whose youthful and beardless face
contrasts with the venerable countenance of his grandfather, and accounts
for his soubriquet of ‘the Maiden,’ better than the refuted tradition of his
vow of chastity. Asa charter, this stands alone in Scotland, and whether
we regard these pictures as portraits of two successive sovereigns, or only
as specimens of regal costume and of the advancement of ornamental art
in Scotland in the middle of the twelfth century, they are manifestly of
great interest, and must stand first, and, it is feared, by a long interval,
in any catalogue of Scotch works of art.*

The Abbey buildings of Kelso must have suffered s
periods of its history. We have seen the melancholy state to which the
convent was reduced during the War of Independence ; and subsequent
wars with England, which always fell heavy on the Borders, must have
rendered necessary more than one refitting of its buildings. But those
chureh walls of massy stone were not easily obliterated. The solidity of
their structure was proved when the English forees under the Earl of
Hertford made that ferocious foray, in which the Church was no more
sacred than the corn and cottage of the unarmed peasant. The leaders of the
expedition describe it themselves, in a letter addressed to the King of Eng-
land—* From the Campe at Kelso, the 11th of September 1545, at night-”"

“ Please it youre Royall Majestie to understand that uppon Wensdaye at
two of the clock at after none, 1 thErll of Hertford, with youre Highnes

erely at several

* The charter, which is printed here at the another and more eareful representation of
beginning of the volume, is also given in fac- the initial letter is prefixed.
simile, after the copper used for the ‘ Diplo- * State Papers, vol. v.
mata Seotia,’ corrected by the original. Bue


--- Kelso1_page60.png ---
sli THLE PREFACE,

armye, did arryve here afore Kelso; and ymediatly uppon our arryvall a
certen nombre of Spanyardes, without myn appoyntment, gave of their
owne courage an assault with their harquebuces to the Abbey; but when I
perceyved the same to be to lytell purpose for the wynning of yt, I caused
them to retyere, and thought best to somon the hous, whiche I did furth-
withe ; and such as were within the same, being in nombre about an hun-
dred persons, Scottishemen, (whereof twelve of them were monkes,)
perswaded with their own follye and wilfulnes to kepe yt, whiche no man
of any consideration of the daungier they were yn, the thing not being
tenable, wolde have don, did refuse to rendre and delyver it. Wheruppon
I caused the same to be approched out of hande with ordnaunce, and within
an hower or lytell more made a grett breche ; and the Spanyardes, whiche
had byn at yt before, desyryng the assanlte, which I graunted theym, did
enter the churche at the breche, and haundeled yt so sharpely, that the
Scottes were by and by dryven into the steple, whiche was of good strenght,
and the waye to theym so narrowe and dangerous, that the night being at
hand, althonghe they had wonne the churche, and all the house in effect
saving that steple, yet they were forced, by reason of the night, to leave the
assauite till the next morning, setting a goode watche all nighte aboute the
house; whiche was not so well kept but that a dosen of the Scottes, in the
darke of the night, escaped out of the house by ropes, out at back wyndowes
and corners, with no lytell daungier of their lyves. When the daye came,
and the steple eftsones assanlted, yt was ymediatly wonne, and as many
Seottes slayue as were within ; and som also that fledde in the night were
taken abrode. Of the Spanyardes were loste not past three or 4, whiche
were kylled with the Scottes hacbutiers, at the first assaulte given afore the
breelie was made, and one or two Englishe men hurte, whereof Henry
Isai, servaunt to me Sir Henry Knyuet, was one.

« Yesterdaye all daye, intending to procede to the makyng of a fortresse
of the said Abbey, (as I the saide Erle have before advertysed that I wolde,


--- Kelso1_page61.png ---
THE PREFACE, xbvii

yf uppon the viewe of the place the same were fesible,) we devised ther-
uppon with the Italion fortifier that ys here, Archam, and the master
mason of Berwik; and when we had spente all the day theraboutes, we
found the thing so difficulte, that, in our pore opynyons, yt seemeth
impossible to be done within the tyme that we can tarrye about ytt, for the
causes folowyng ;”

Among the reasons given for not fortifying Kelso, are the following :—

“We fynde there, so great and superfluous buildinges of stone, of gret
height and cireuit, aswell about the churehe as the lodginges, whiche, to
make any conyenyent fortresse there, must of force be down and avoyded,
that the taking downe and advoyding therof only, woll axe at the leeste two
moneths ; and yf the same shuld be taken downe and not advoyded, the
heapes of stone, besides the confusion of the matier, shuld remaine an
enemye to the fortresse ; and to make the fortresse so large as shuld con-
teyne all those superfluous buildinges, shuld be suche a confused and longe
worke as can not be perfected inagreat tyme. . . . . Also by reason
that the water of Twede ryseth many tymes sodenly, we cannot have
[victuelles] brought unto us when we wolde; wherof we had a good
experyens on the day of our marching hither ; for when the vaunt garde
and the moste parte of the battell was passed over Twede, the water rose
so sodenly, that the rereward could not passe, and drowned some of their
carriages ; by meane wherof the rereward was fayne to marche on th’other
syde of the ryver, till they came agaynst our campe on this side, and so to
encampe theym silfes as strongly as they coulde agaynst us, the ryver being
betweene us; and the next mornyng, the water being fallen, they came over
tous. This experyens we had of this ryver; and yet the wether was as
fayre as was possible, and no likelyhod, nor no man wolde have thought
that yt coulde have rysen so sodenly. . . . . On th’other side of the
water, even hard by, ys a gret hill called Maxwell hughe, whiche may
beate the house, and ys an exceeding great enemye to the same. And


--- Kelso1_page62.png ---
xt THE PREFACE.

besides all this, the soyle hereaboutes is suche, and so sandye and bryttell
earthe, that we can find no turfe any thing nere hand to buylde withall ;
and the ground about the house ys suche a hard gravell, that without a
countermure of stone, yt woll not serve to make the ditches, whiche woll
axe a long tyme.”

After weighing all which, the English leaders come to the resolution
“to rase and deface the house of Kelso, so as th’enemye shal have lytell
commoditie of the same, and to remain encamped here for five or six dayes,
and in the meane season to devaste and burne all the country hereabouts
as farr as we maye with our horsemen. As to morrowe we intend to send
a good bande of horsemen to Melrosse and Dryburghe to burne the same,
and all the cornes and villages in their waye, and so daylie to do some
exploytes here in the Mershe, and at th’end of the said & or 6 dayes to
remove our campe, and to marche to Jedworthe, to burne the same, and
thus to marche thorongh a great part of Tyvydale, to overthrowe their
piles and stone houses, and to burne their cornes and villages”—a pious
resolution, most faithfully fulfilled.

It is not wonderful that so little remains of the Abbey of Kelso. The
storm of the Reformation vented itself on the remaining images of saints,
and relies of the old religion ; but found little of the fabric entire. The
‘great and superfluous buildings of stone,’ which impeded the English
engineers in their plans of fortification, after being ‘razed and defaced’
by them, have disappeared under the gradual but persevermg inroads of
the neighbours ; and the cloisters and conventual buildings of the convent
and its lordly abbot, have passed by a common transmigration into the
dwellings of their former dependents, the burghers of the Abbot’s burgh
of Kelso, The Abbey church, breached and shattered by the English
‘ordnaunce,’ seems never to have been repaired. After the Reformation,
an unsightly fabrie was fitted up within its walls, to serve the double
purpose of a parish church and a jail, which has now for some time been


--- Kelso1_page63.png ---
THE PREFACE. slix

removed; and the church of St Mary at present suffers only under the
gradual decay of age, and the encroachment of some villager, whose sturdy
Presbyterian heart feels no compunctious visitings while he stalls his cow
on the consecrated ground where altars stood of old, and where warriors
and princes chose their place of rest.

Reposing on the sunny bank of its own beautiful river, the modern town
of Kelso looks a fitting rural capital for “ pleasant Teviotdale.” It has little
the air of an old monastic burgh, and still Jess calls up any recollection of
the heaps of ruins that impeded the plans of the English engineers. There
is not much knowledge or tradition of its former state, and but few memo-
rials of its old inhabitants. Last year, a worthy burgher who had dug up
in his garden under the Abbey walls what seemed to him a rare coin of a
ed to learn that it was a leaden dulle

Scotch King, was scarcely well plea
of Pope Alexander IIL, bronzed with the o
In the midst of the modern town, the Abbey Church stands alone, like

izing of seven centuries.

some antique Titan predominating over the dwarfs of a later world, Its
ruins exhibit the progression of architecture that took place over Scotland

and England, between the middle of the twelfth and the middle of the

thirteenth centuries. What remains of the choir affords a good specimen
of the plain Norman style, not of the earliest character, but such as pre-
vailed in England before 1150, and in Scotland perhaps a little later,



--- Kelso1_page64.png ---
1 THE PREFACE.

The western front is later Norman, probably of the latter half of the
twelfth century; and the great western doorway, of which but a fragment
must have been a fine specimen of the period which produced
the richest architecture of the circular areh.

remains,

Of the same period nearly, is the arcade of intersecting arches, a form
more common in the churches of Normandy than in those of Britain; and
lastly, the tower springs from arches of a transition character, marking the
first half of the thirteenth century, when the Norman style was pa

sing

ito that which is now almost authoritatively stamped with the appellation
of Early English.

In adding to the ancient Register of the Abbey the later Rentals of
Kelso and its dependent cell of Lesmahago, the object has been to give
a continuons view, not merely of the possessions of the Abbey and their
value, but of the manner in which the land was oceupied, and of the state
of the population, down as low as the period of the Reformation, to which
even the bare lists of tenants conduce in some degree.



--- Kelso1_page65.png ---
THE PREFACE, ht

The Table of Contents, prefixed for convenience to this volume, which is
not in the original chartulary, is made up almost literally from the rubries
of the charters, divided according to the rumning titles of the leaves of the
Regi

found in the orig

er itself. It is necessary to explain that the dates, (where not

nal charters,) are supplied conjecturally. In many eases,

where charters are completed with numerous witnesses, the date ean be
approximated with much likelihood; but where no witnesses are cited, it
becomes a much more difficult and more doubtful matter; and the reader
cannot be too earnestly warned against receiving for certain, dates assigned
always on scanty data, and sometimes approximated on no better founda-
tion than, after ascertaining the era of one member of a family, calculating
those of the others, whether ascending or desecudimg, by allowing the
average length of time for cach generation ; as, for example, in the charters
showing the descent of the family of Haliburton—

Trueta or Truita,

David 2 : — David
de Graham, == Amable — Faunes, 1160, (208,
id Richard de Walter,

de Graham. anes.

1150-90, (133, 146, 197.)
f 1
Adam de Faunes, Christian _ William de
(234,) de Faunes. Haliburton,

(103, 270.)
Philip de

Haliburton,
1261, 271.)

In conclusion it is proper to state, that in the list of the abbots, and
elsewhere throughout the preface, frequent use has been made of the


--- Kelso1_page66.png ---
lit THE PREFACE.

previous labours of the Rev. Mr Morton in his excellent work on the
“Monastic Annals of Teviotdale;” a liberty which his zeal for the
subject will lead him to excuse. It is to the plates of that work the Club
is indebted for the previous illustrations of the ruins of the abbey, and for
this view of the interlacing arches.

C. INNES.



--- Kelso1_page67.png ---
TABLE OF THE PLATES.


--- Kelso1_page68.png ---


--- Kelso1_page69.png ---
TABLE OF THE PLATES.

PLATE [.—Fueing the titlepage.—\ fac-simile of the illuminated initial Q) of the
charter of Malcolm IV., 1159, containing miniature portraits of David
I, and Malcolm [V. (See Preface, p. sliv.)

I1.—Page 1.—A fae-simile of the whole charter after the copper of Ander-
son’s diplomata, corrected by the original, and coloured to represent it.

IIL—Puge 78.—Fac-simile of the Register, giving the first copy of the
charter to Theobaldus Flamaticus, fol. 39.

IV.—Page 84.—Fac-simile of the Register, giving the second engrossing of
Theobald’s charter, fol 42, v.

V.—Page 455.—Fac-simile of the Register, giving the commencement of
the Rotulus Reddituum, c. 1290, fol. 1.

V1—Page 470-—Fac-simile of the Register, giving the commencement of
the roll of the Abbey’s churches in the Rotulus Reddituum, fol. 6.


--- Kelso1_page70.png ---
VIL—Aat the end.

TABLE OF THE PLATES. ii

\ plate of seals of Kelso :—
al of the convent of Kelso, appended to one of the
Melros charters, the property of the Duke of Buccleuch, (Liber
de Mel 5.) ‘That charter is of date about 1202; but the
seal is found in the Treasury of Durham, affixed to a ehéregra=
pham dated in 1171, and also to a testimonium in 1200, both
printed in the appendix to Raine’s North Durham.

SigiMlow Sancte Marie Ralchaensis ecelesic

1. A seal of the Abbot of Kelso appended to a deed of hom-
age of 1296, in the Chapter House, Westminster.
round the seal, birga thbur natour factans fae ace Sibi qratout
across the seal, s, abbatis de calehou

3, Seal of the Abbot of Kelso, affixed to a convention with the
Abbot of Melros, in the church of St James of Roxburgh, on
Monday nest before the feast of Saint Luke the Evangelist, 1309,
preserved among the Melros charters, (Liber de Melros, 428.)

round the seal, birge tobut natbm Lactans fac nte sibi gratour
across the seal, 8, abbatis Be Keleho

4, From a coarse brass stamp of low date and bad art, in
the Museum of the Antiquarics, Edinburgh.
Sigilloue connmbre ste marie Ve heler


--- Kelso1_page71.png ---
TABULA.

Carta Malcolm’ IV. Regis, ex autographo in archivis de Floors, AD. 1159,

1, Carta Comitis David filii Regis Malcolmi de fundatione istius Monasterii,

Cad Selechyre seilicet] A.D, 1119-1124, . . .
2. Carta Regis David de prima fundatione, [ad Calkou scilicet] AD, 1147-
1152, . . . : : : .

Notitia de Confirmatione Malcolmi Regis super Carta David Regis, et

aliis donationibus, . : : :
+. Notitia de Confirmatione Regis w illelmi eidem succedentis

super conces-

sionibus antedic . :
5, Carta Regis Willelmi, ne quis unquam namum capiat super Abbatem

neque infra neque extra, 4.D. 1165-71, . : .
6. Carta Domini Regis Alexandri super codem, A.D. 1224, : .
7. Carta Domini Alexandri Regis Scottorum super privilegiis, et Nati
nostris calumpniandis, A.D. 1223, . 5
8. Carta Domini Regis David de Baronia de 1 et AD, 144,
9. Concessio Willelmi Regis de terris Willelmi Comyn, A.D. 1165-1214,

10. Ut terra de Lesmahiago sit liberum forestum, A.D. 1236, :
11. Notitia de Donatione Willelmi Regis Ecclesie de Dunfres,

TU


--- Kelso1_page72.png ---
ii TABULA.

12. Carta Regis Willelmi super fandatione [similis in omnibus carte Malcolmi
IV. superstiti] A.D. 1165-1214, : . : . :
Confirmatio Regis Willelmi super donationibus antecessorum suorum,
AD, 1165-1214, . . . . . .
Willelmi
ndri Regis de libe

13.

1k. arucatis terre in Edenham, 1178-98,

15, Confirmatio Alex

uuper tribus

a Reg

atibus et consuetudinibus, 1221-36,

16, Carta Regis Alexandrine quis namum capiat super Abbatem, 1214-40,

17. Carta Mexandri Regis de centum solidis in burgo de Roxburgh perci-
1214-49, . : .
18. Idem ad ballivos suos de dictis centum solidis solvendis, 1214-49, .

piend

19. Carta Willelmi Regis de controvers
Ba

ja inter nos et ipsos de Melros, 1204,

3-65,

. Carta Regis Malcolmi de tofto in Ruglene, 1

» Carta Malcolmi Regi
Carta Willebni Reg’
per Keel

super ecclesia de Inverlethan, 1153-65, .

super Ecclesia de Cultre, 1165-1214, :

- David Rex

ia de Sprouston, . . .
. Confirmatio Willelmi Regis libertatum nostrarum in villa de Molle, WG5-

DEREWYK.

is David super quadam piscaria in villa I

rwyei 1124-53,

apud Berwieum a rege Davide data, 1124-53,

. Memoria de una earueata terr:

Carta Malcolmi Regis super tervis Dodyn et Walef, 1153-65,

. De multis aliis terris in Berwico, : : :

. Carta Henrici comitis super tofto Dodini, 1147-52, . a

30, Carta Regis Willelmi de quadraginta solidis in Berwico, 1165-1214,

81. Consensus uxoris Walteri Forgrand de duabus mareis, p. 1147, .
Carta Willehni Res
Confirmatio Regis David de quadam piscaria in Twede, 1124-53,

super tofto Dodini in villa Berwyei, 1160-80,

34. Carta Walteri Forgrund de duabus marcis in quodam tenemento iufra
Berwyeum, p17. . . . . .
35. Conventio inter nos et Rogerum Laird super firma in Waldefgat, 1257,

36, Quieta clamatio Johannis de Granthame de terris in villa Berwyci, e. 1270,

14
1s
19
a

ih,
23
wh.



--- Kelso1_page73.png ---
TABULA.

37. Quieta clamatio Alexandri de Riparia de terris in Twedemude, 1217-27,

38. Confirmatio Regis Alexandri super conventionem inter nos et communi-
tatem Berewyci de septima parte molendinorum, 1214-49, . .

39. Consensus Malcolmi Regis super donatione patris sui de terra de Dodin
et aliis, 1153-65, . . . . . . .

40. Carta Henrici comitis de illa tofta Dodini in villa Berwici, 1147- ‘

41. Donatio Ade Northumbrie Comitisse, de tofto Walef et de una carucata
terre apud Berwicum, 1139-52, . . . :

42. Resignatio Nicholai dicti Moyses super cotagio in Bondington, 1307,

43, Carta conventus erga Willelmum Maceone super terris in Waldefgate,
1307, . 5 5 5 . . .

44. Venditio terre in Waldefgate per Thomam de Ravinisher, 1290, :

45. Consensio Emme de Bernevyle uxoris Radulphi de eadem super omnibus
nobis datis per eundem in villa Berwici, 1260-' : .

46. Donatio Ade filii Tudding de terris in Huddingate in villa Berwici.
1227, . . . . . . . .

47. Carta Thome Batail super quadam terra in Waldefgate infra Berwicum,

48. Conventio inter nos et Thomam Batail super carueata terre et croftis et
edificiis in Bondington, 1266, ? : : :

49, Quod Petrus capellanus de Berwyk nobis injuriabatur super quadam
terra et aliis rebus, 1215, . . : . .

50. Resignatio Ricardi Gwalensis super tota terra sua de Berwick, e. 1200,

51. Confirmatio Hugonis de Balliol super donatione Bernardi de Balliol de
Wudhborn, ¢. 1200, . . . .

52. Carta Bernardi de Balliol super piscaria de Wudhorne in Berwyk. c.

53, Carta Iugonis de Balliol super eadem piscaria, e, 1200, :

54. Carta Rieardi Dunelmensis Episcopi super Wudhorn et Redhowch,
1247-27, . . . . . . .

55. Quieta clamatio Willelmi Masculi super pisearia de le Redhowch,
1217-27, . . . . .

56. Quieta clamatio dicti Willelmi super le Redhoweh, 1217-27,

iii

33

44

ib,


--- Kelso1_page74.png ---
iv TABUL

Si. a elamatio David de Houburne super piscaria de Orde et Blakewel,
1220, . : : : .
58. Quieta clamatio Roberti de Pesale super le Redhoueh, ec. 1220, .

59. Quieta clamatio Alexandri de la River super pisearia de le Redhouch, ¢, 1220,

60. Quieta clamatio Matildis de la River super dicta piscaria de la Red-
houeh, ¢. 1220, . . . . . .

6L. Quieta clamatio David de [louburne super eadem piscaria, c. 1220,

62. Quieta clamatio Willelmi Maseuli super eadem pisearia, c. 1220, :

63. Confirmatio Willelmi Masculi super eadem, c. 1220, : : :

64. Carta Ade filii Hudding de terris in Muddinggate, 1227, (eadem ae supra,
46). . : . .

65. Quieta clamatio Hugonis Mulard et sociorum ejus super pisearia apud

Berwicum, ¢. 1220, . . o . . . .
U6, Carta eorundem super le Redhouch, ¢. 1220, . . . .
67. Quieta clamatio uxorum predictorum virorum super dietis piscariis, ¢. 1220,
68. Carta earundem super Je Redhouch, ¢. 1220, 5 ; 5 :
69. Carta Roberti de Pesale super piscariis de Orde et Blakewel, ¢. 1220, .

70. Carta Mabille matri

Susanne super le Redhouch, c 1220. . .

MERSEKIS.

71. Carta Cospatricii comitis super ecclesia de Home cum duabus carucatis

terre, Grenlawe, Lambedene, Foghou, ete. ¢. 1159, « :

Confirmatio Patricii comitis filii Wallevi comitis super ecclesiis de Home,

Grenlaw, Lambedene, Haliburton, Foggou, ete, ¢. 1190, . .
73. Carta Wallevi comitis super ecclesia de Tome, duabus carucatis terre et

aliis, e. 1170, . : . . : : :
74. Carta Patricii filii Cospatricii super ecclesia de Grenlaw, Lambeden, et
Haliburton, e. 1170, 7 . . .
75. Carta Willelmi filii Patricii, ne fiat in prejudicium nostrum quod capella

construxerit in curia sua apud Grenelaw, c. 1230, 5 5 .
. Carta Willelmi filii Patric
crofto in tenementis de Grenlawe, ¢. 1230, . : . :

=
o

super duabus bovatis terre et uno tofto et

46

47

ib.
48
ib.
49

50.
50
bl
ab.
52

wh.

wb,


--- Kelso1_page75.png ---
81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

x
-

%
z

WO.
91.

. Carta Patri

TABULA.

Confirmatio Patricii militis, filii Patricii Comitis, super donationibus ante-
cessorum suorum, @. 1289, . . . . : .

Carta Willelmi filii Patricii super quodam tofto in villa de Grenlaw et aliis
donationibus, ¢. 1230, . . : . .

Carta Cospatri
a. 1159, . . . . . . . .

i comitis super tofto et erofto et duabus bovatis terre in
villa de Grenlaw, ¢. 1230, . : . : :

Litera domini Patricii filii ct heredis Patricii comitis, quod non impediet

comitis super ecclesia de Grenlawe eum pertinentiis,

Carta Willelni filii Patrieii super ecclesia de Grenlaw et dimidia carueata,
©. 1230, . . . . . . . .
Carta episcopi Sancti Andree super ecclesiis nostris in le Mersek
prios usus, 1188-1200, . . . . . .
Carta Iugonis episcopi Sancti Andree super eisdem ecclesiis, 1178-88,

Kern.

Carta Symonis Fraser super ecelesia de Keth, terra et nemore nobis con-
. 1160, . . .

s per enndem Symonem,

ce

36. Confirmatio Hugonis Lorens ct Fae uxoris ejus super ecclesia de Keth,

terra et nemore, ¢. 1190, : : . : .

. Confirmatio Hervei filii Philippi Maresealli super omnibus donationibus

230, .

Carta Johannis de Keth Maresealli super controversia inter nos et eundem

Symonis Fraser de ecclesia de Keth, terra et nemore, e.

de quibusdam terris apnd Keth et donationibus ejusdem super ecclesia
de Keth et aliis, «. 1250, . . . . . .
Confirmatio Hervei filii Philippi Marescalli super ecclesia de Keth. terra
et nemore, et aliis, e. 1236, 5 . . . .
Confirmatio Maleolmi regis super Ecclesia de Keth, c. 1160-65, . .
Confirmatio regis Willelmi super eadem ecclesia de Keth et pertinentii
1165-121, : : : : 5 . :

. Concessio Gilberti de Umfranvyle super dicta ecclesia de Keth, c. 1160,

60

wh.

61

62

63

64


--- Kelso1_page76.png ---
98.
99.

100.

101.

102.

103.
104.
105.
106.
107.
108,
109.

110.
111.
V2.

. Confirmatio Alexandri Regis

TABULA.

cotie super dicta ecclesia de Keth, terra
et nemore, ¢. 1236, . . . . . . .

Confirmatio Ricardi episcopi Sancti Andree, super donationibus regis

Malcolini de ecclesia de Keth et aliis, 1163-5, . :

5. Sedatio controversie inter nos et Iferveum Marchad de ecclesia ville sue

de Keth, «. 1176, . . : . . . .
judicum a Papa

Carta Jocelini Episcopi Glasguensis et Prioris de Pas!

delegatorum super dicta controversia, «. 1176, : . .

. Confirmatio conveutionis inter nos et dictum Herveum per Ricardum

Episcopum Sancti Andree, e. 1176, « : . : .
Carta
De institutione Rectoris in dicta ecclesia, [ubi memoratur conventio cum

ymonis I

er super ecclesia de Keth, terra et nemore, c. 1160,

Hlerveo de Keth, 1175-7.) : : : . : :
Conveucio inter nos ct Dominum Robertum de Keth super Iundeby
Keth, ¢. 1800, . . . . . . .
Carta Regis Willelmi de quadraginta solidis in Berwico, 1165-1214, :

ABBATES.

Inter nos et Lambinum Asa, super terris de Drafane et de Dardarach,
1147-60, . . . 7 .
Abbatis super Drafan antedicta, 1208-18, .

Carta Henri

Carta Osberti Abbatis super villa de Douaue, 1180-1203, .

is, 1160-80,

Carta Henrici Abbatis super Foleardistune et cetera, 1208-18, . .

Carta Arnaldi Abbatis super terram de Duueglas cum divisis, 1147-60,

5, 1208-18,

Carta Uenrici Abbatis super quandam partem terre in Fincurrokis,
1208-18, . . . . . . :

Carta Osberti Abbatis super quadam parte terre in Glenane, 1180-1203,

1160-80, -

Carta Osberti Abbatis super terra de Currokis cum suis divisis, 1180-

1203, : . . : : : : :

Carta Johamnis Abbatis super parva Drafane eum suis div

Carta Henrici Abbatis super le Fincurrokis eum divi

‘arta Johannis Abbatis super octavam partem de Currol

ih.

75

80
sl

ab.


--- Kelso1_page77.png ---
TABULA.

113. Rieardus Abbas eoncessit David filio deeani de Stobhou et heredibus suis,
libertatem sartandi infra terram de le Currokis, 1206-8,
114, Carta Johannis Abbatis super quandam partem terre de Fincurrokis per

snas divisas, 1160-80, : : . .
115, Carta Johannis Abbatis super tertiam partem de Avchinlek eum st
divisis, 1160-80, . : . : . .
116, Carta Amaldi Abbatis super terra de Duneglas, cum suis rectis divis
(cadem ae supra, 107,) 1147-60, . : : . .
117. Carta Johannis Abbatis super dimidia earucata terre in villa de Midilham,
1160-80, . . . : . .
GoRDUNE.

118. Ineipiunt Carte de Gordon, per Richer de Gordon, incipiendo a eimiterio

que ad Lipsta
LIf. Carta Ade de Gordon filii Ade de Gordon super quandam te
Gordon, per certas divisas, ¢. 1300, . . . .

ne, : . . . :

am apud

120. Carte Alicie de Gordon filie Thome de Gordon super donatione anteces-
sorum suorum, c. 1270, . . . .

21. Carta Thome de Gordon Junioris de quadam terra, c. 1250,

» 1250,

Carta Thome de Gordon junioris de eadem pettaria, «. 12

Carta ejusdem super pettaria yoeata Bron Mo

24, Carta Andree Fraser super earucata terre in villa de Gordune, «. 1280,

Conventio inter nos et Adam de Gordon militem, super dicta earueata

terre, 1:
126. Contirmatio Thome de Gordon filit Rieardi de Gordon super donatione
patris sui predicti in villa de Gordon, e 1180, . . : .
127. Confirmatio Thome de Gordon junioris super omnibus donationibus ante-
cessorum suorum, e. 1250, . . . 7 .
128. Carta Wallevi Comitis super Halden et Wi WVillelmam fratrem ejus, liberos
vorum, et omnes sequaces eorum, ¢. 1170, . .

vii

ST
Ss
90

Mo

oS.


--- Kelso1_page78.png ---
viii

129,

130,

131.

132.

133.

134.

135,
136.

137.

13s.
180.

140,

141.
142,

. Confirmatio super ecclesiam de Langton, 1189-99,

TABULA.

Home—MELoxisTane.

Carta Ade Curtenay filie Patricii Comitis super quadam parte terre in
territorio de Home, c. 1230, . . . . . .

Confirmatio Patricii filii Waldevi Comitis de Dunbar super dieta terra in
territorio de Home, ¢. 1230, « . . : .

Carta Patricii Comit

super terram in Melokestane datam David filio
David de Grame, ¢. 1200, . . . . . .

Carta de controversia inter nos et Willelmum Dominum de Home super
le Pullis, 1268, : : : 5 :

Donatio Rieardi de Fawnes facta David de Grame fratri suo de terra in
Meloestane, ¢. 1200, . . . . 7 .

Carta Ade de Faunes filii Rieardi de Faunes super terra in Melokistane,
eo. 1230, . : . . : : .

Carta David de Grame junioris super terra in Melokistane, ¢. 1200,

Carta Willelmi de Hatteley ad firmandum pontem ultra rivulum de Blak-
burn, et cetera, . . 5 5 5 .

Carta Philippi de Haliburton super terris in Melokistane, c. 1260, :

LANGTUNE.

Carta Rogeri de Ov super eeclesia de Langton, «. 1150, . . .

Carta Willelmi de Veteri Ponte super dieta eeclesia de Langtun, 1198-

Carta Willelmi de Veteri Ponte primogeniti filiorum Willelmi antedieti,
super dicta eeclesia et terris de Langton, 1198-1214, .

Carta ejusdem super dictis ecclesia et terris de Langton, 1198-1214,

Carta Willelmi de Veteri Ponte super predictis, eum omni plenitudine
sua, a. 1219, . : : . . :

. Amicabilis compositio inter nos et Willelmum de Veteri Ponte super

ossibus patris sui de Anglia reportandis, 1203, . .

99

wb.

100

102

103

104
105

106

107

108
109

110

1
112


--- Kelso1_page79.png ---
TABULA.

145. Conventio inter nos et Rolandum de Grenlaw, super capella infra clausu-
ram suam, ce. 1200, . . . . . . .

Motte.

146. Carta Eschine de Londoniis super Eeelesiam de Molle, 1185, . .
147. Carta ejusdem de eadem eum suis divisis, ¢. 1190, . i .
148. Carta Ceeilie de Molle super toftum et croftum Willelmi de Molhope,

1200-2, : : . . : . .
149. Carta R. de Lincoln super pastura feodi de Molle, 1250, . .
150. Carta super toftum et croft Willelmi de Molhope, 1200-2,

151. Carta super quandam donationem Cecilie de Molle, 1200-2, . .
152. Carta Anselmi de Molle super quandam pasturam in tenemento de Molle,
1190, . . : . . . .

Carta super eadem, ¢ 1190, . . . .

. Carta super quasdain terras in territorio de Molle [Helayeshoug] ¢, 1190,
. Compositio super decimam Molendini de Molle, e. 1190, .

. Carta super unam bovatam terre in territorio de Molle, «. 1200,

Carta super toftum et croftum que fuerunt Willelmi de Mothope j juniors,

seilicet Aldtounburn, 1200-2. . . .
Carta super quamdam partem pasture in tenemento de Molle, ¢. 1190,

59, Carta super quamdam partem terre in territorio de Molle, que vocatur
Temple Acre, c. 1190, ’ : : p . :
iu territorio de Molle, 1254

160. Carta super viginti acras terre arabi
161, Carta super quamdam partem terre in territorio de Molle, ¢ 1190,

Carta super unam bovatam terre in territorio de Molle, e. 1200,

Confirmatio super octo acras terre et unam rodam de Molle, ¢. 1190, .
ones iu territorio de

164, Confirmatio super quasdam ferras et po:

Molle, 1251, 0. . : . . : . .
165, Carta super unam acram terre in territorio de Molle apud Theules,
ec. 1190, . 5 : : : 5 5

166. Super loquelam inter Abbatem de Kalchou, et Henrieum de Molle, et

uxorem ejus, de quadam pastura, 1190, . :
b

ih.

114

115
Mia
118
120

121
122
133
124

125

126
127

135,

the


--- Kelso1_page80.png ---
x TABULA,

167. Carta super quamdam partem terre in territorio de Molle, c. 1190, . 136
168. Super quatuor acras terre in tenemento de Molle, ¢. 1300, : . ab
169, Carta super unam bovatam terre in territorio de Molle, ¢. 1220, . . 137

170, Carta super unam terram in burgo de Roxburg, et in Molle, et in villa de
Renfruu, 1165-77, . . . . . . . 188
171. Cartasuper quasdam possessiones et libertates in territorio de Molle, c. 1220, 139

172. Conventio inter Abbates et Conventus de Kelsou et de Melros, 1273, . 140
173. Conventio inter Ricardum de Lyncolnia, dominum de Molle, et Abbatem

et Conveutum de Kelso, 1260, . Fi a . . 142
174. Carta super terras et libertates in tencmento de Molle, 1270, . . M48
175. Divise terre de Molle, . . . . 144
176, Carta super ecelesiam de Molle cum terra adjacenti [Helayeshough,)

a. 1152, . a o 5 5 . . th
177. Carta super terras ct libertates in tenemento de Molle, ¢. 1190, . . 145

178. Carta Tenrici de Molle super ecclesiam de Molle, ¢, 1190, : th
Keucno rr MEenros,

179. Super litem motam iuter Abbates de Kelsou et de Melros, 1269, - 146

LesMAnaco.

180, Carta super ecclesiam de Lesmabago cum tota parochia, 1144. . . 149
181, Carta super terram de parva Kype, 1240, . : be
182. Confirmatio Regis Alexandri super terra quam Ricardus Bard dedit
domui Sancti Machuti, 1240, . . . . » 150
183. Confirmatio regis Alexandri super quadam parte terre in territorio de
Kadyou, 1222, . . . : : : . Wl
184. Protectio prioratus de Lesmahago, 1222, . . . - tb

Litera pacis et protectionis prioris et monachorum de Lesmahago, 1230, 152
186, Carta super totam decimam bladi terre Ricardi de Bard, 1228, . tb
187. Carta super dimidia marca argenti percipienda de terra quam Gillemur

dedit, a. 1144, . . . . . . » 153


--- Kelso1_page81.png ---
188.

189.

190.
191.

192.
193.

194.

195.

196,
197.

205,

206.

TABULA.

Littera super decem celdris farine avenarum venditis domino Alexandro
Folkard per Thomam de Durram quondam priorem de Lesmahago, 1315,

Resignatio super particulam terre in tenemento de Lesmahago que dicitur
Pollnell, 1316, . . 5 . 0 .
Resignatio super majore Ardauch et minore Ardauch, 1266, . .
Controversia inter Abbatem et Conventum de Kelso, et dominum Alexan-
drum Folkard, 1316, . . . . . .
Resignatio super terram de Dowane, 1294, « . .
Resignatio Ade de Dowane junioris de tota terra sua in dicta villa de

Dowane cum pertinenci is, 1301, . . . .
De causa versata inter nos et Danielem et Robertum de Douane et eorum

uxores, super terra de Dowane, c. 1240, . . . .
Resignatio Ade de Dowane senioris de terra in Grenrig, ¢. 1311,

Conventio inter nos et dietum Adam, 1311, . . : .

Inter nos et Reginaldum de Courrokis super terra de Kype sub titulo

permutationis, «. 1290, : : : :

. Resignatio dicti Reginaldi super terris de Fincurrokis, «. 1290, . :

. Deliberatio nobis facta de Fincurrokis, 1315, . : :

Resignatio Willelmi filii Philippi de Grenrig super tertia parte de Tlau-
tillet, 1266, : : : : 5

. Littera Willelmi de Duglas super cartis suis a nobis receptis, 1288, :

Carta de terra de Polnele domino Willelmo de Duglas concessa, 1270,

Acta inter nos et Willelmum Foleard super tenemento de Foleardston,
1295, . . . . D 5 5 .
Carta regis Roberti super decem marcis ad lumen Sancti Machuti con-
cessis, 1306-29, . . . . .
Iaupenr.

Carta Bernardi de Hauden super una carucata terre in villa de Hauden,
1202-11, . . . . . .

Carta dicti Bernardi super octo acris et una roda terre in Hauden,
c. 1214, : : : : . :

161
lW2
163
164
ob.
165
166
tb,
168

th.

169

170

171


--- Kelso1_page82.png ---
xii

208.

209,
210,

218.

219.

220.

TABULA.

SprovisTUNE.

. Conventio inter nos et dominum Eustachium Vesey super capella haben-

da in curia de Sprouston, 1207. . . . . .

Carta Enstachii de Vescy, de viginti solidis in molendino de Sprouiston,

ec. 1207, . . : . . : 5 .

Confirmatio dicti Eustachii super terris nostris in Sprouistone, c. 1207,

nti solidis, c. 1207, . :

Carta Margarete de Vescy super dictis

EacpEene.

. Finalis concordia inter nos et Bernardum de Hauden, 1202-11,
. Carta Margarete uxoris Eustachii de Vescy super libertatibus nostris in-

fra terram suam, ¢. 1207, . : : .
Carta Bernardi de Llauden super molendino et stagno de Revedene,

filii Brien, super una carucata terre in villa de Tau-

a Bernar

den, 1165-71, : : . . . . .

. Carta Radulphi de Veyre super una bovata terre in villa de Sprouiston,

c. 1180, : . . : . . : :
Carta Serlonis clerici domini Regis

super dimidia carucata terre in
Sprouston, p. 1165, . . : : : .
Carta Bernardi filii Brien super decem acris terre apud Hauden, c. 1170,

Revepe

Carta Johannis filii Mugonis super quadam parte terre apud Revedene,
1258, . o . . . . 5 .
Carta Hugonis de Revedene super totam terram suam in territorio de
Revedene, et apud Home similiter, 1285, : 5 : :
Resignatio dicti Hugonis super dicta terra per vicecomitem de Roxburgh,

176

tb.

179

tb,

180


--- Kelso1_page83.png ---
TABULA. xiii

221. Resignatio W. Glasguensis decani super decem marcis et decimis de
Langton, 1271, . . . . : . . 180

Camsy—Curre.

222, Carta Maldoveni Comiti
libertatibus, 1225—46, : : : ° : . Isl
Compositio inter nos et magistrum et fratres templi Jerosolomitani in Scotia

de Lefnax super ecclesia de Kamsy cum suis

super ecelesia de Culter, 1287, . . . : . ih
224. Confirmatio Gilberti Aberdonensis episcopi super ecclesia de Cultre,

1228-39, ; . . . , : . . 1sd

Quod ecclesia de Cultre sit nobis in proprios usus, 1250, . 2185

Super ecclesias de Kamsy et de Altermunyn eum terris et decimis in
1200, . . . . . . 186

onem Alani de Soletre capellani ad vicariam ecclesie nostre

Lewena:

227. Super adn

de Culter, 1240, . . 5 B . . . ib
228. Carta super donationem predicte eeclesie predicto Alano, 1240, . LST
229. Compositio super decem mareis ab ecclesia de Kamsy debitis, 1266, . INT
230. Conventio inter Glasguensem episcopum et Kelso super ecclesia de

Kamsy, 1221, . . . : . : . 18s
231, Super decem marcis de ecclesia de Kamsy per magistrum Abel percipien-

dis, 1235, . . : o . . . . 190
232. Resignatio decem marearum de ecclesia de Camsy, 1266, : . tb
233, Litera super libertates spectantes ad ecclesiam de Culter, ¢. 1220, » 1
234, Carta super decem marcis de ecclesia de Camsy, 1521, . th

MALCARUSTUN.

235. Carta super ecclesiam de Malearuston per Walterum Corbet, ¢. 1170, 192
236. Carta super dimidiam carucatam terre in territorio de Malkarustun,

¢. 1170, . . . . . . . ty

Carta super duas acras terre in territorio de Malkarustun, ¢. 1170, . 193

. Carta super antedictas duas acras, ¢. 1170, . : . nO


--- Kelso1_page84.png ---
xiv TABULA.

239 Carta super capellam in curia domini Willelmi filii Patricii Comitis de

Dunbar per Abbatem et Conventum concessam, 1241, . .
240. Carta super hospitale saneti Leonardi de Upsedelington, c. 1240, :
241. Carta super Treverlen cum suis divisis, 1133-47, . : .
242, Carta super Estirdodingston concessa Thome filio Reginaldi de Boscho,
1219-26, : : . . . : :

CRANESTUN.

243, Carta super villam et tenementum de Estrekraneston, ¢. 1320, .
244. Carta super villam et tenementum de Estrekraneston que vocatur
Preston, ¢. 1320, : . . . : . .

m, 4.1206, « 5

246. Carta super octo solidis pereipiendis annuatim de Willelmo de Hertisheved

245. Carta super quinque earucatas terre in Ullfkelis
et heredibus et suecessoribus suis, 1215-14, . . . .
Isverwye,

247. Carta super terram quam Walterus dapifer dedit nobis in territorio de In-
verwick, 1236-46, 5 : : : : . .
248. Confirmatio super conventionem inter nos et homines de Inverwick,
1190-1203, 0. . . . : : . .
249, Carta Roberti Hunaud super sextam partem de territorio de Inverwick,
«1190, . . 5 . .
250, Carta Rollandi de Inuerwick super sextam partem de territorio de Inver-
wick, « 1190, : 5 7 o 5 . .

« Carta super duas partes terre in territorio de Inverwick, . 1190,

. Carta Vincencii filii Roberti Avenel super sextam partem de territorio de
Inverwick, ¢. 1190, . : : . . .

253. Confirmatio super quandam conventionem inter nos et milites Dapiferi

Regis, p. 1203, : : . . . . .

254.
255, Carta super duas partes terre in territorio de Inverwick, ¢. 1190, .

Carta super unam Salinam in Lochkendeloch, e. 1200, . . .

197

198
201

wy
Ss
i

203

205

206

207
209

210

201

212


--- Kelso1_page85.png ---
TABULA.

Conventio super quamdam terram in territorio de Inverwick, c. 1190,
Carta Roberti Avenel super sextam partem de territorio de Inverwick,

ce. 1190, . . . . . .
258. Carta super pasturam de Inverwick, ¢. 1190, : : :
259. Controversia inter Abbatem et Conventum de Kelso, et dominum Alanum
de Mundegumery militem, 1221, : : : . .
260. Confirmatio super conyentionem faetam cum domino Roberto de Kent
milite, p. 1190, : : : : 5 ,
261. Confirmatio super candem conveutionem faectam inter Abbatem et Con-
ventum de Kelso et Robertum de Kent et alios, p. 1190, : :
262. Quod possumus licite ingredi terram de Bothkyl, 1310, . .
263. Resignatio super calumpuiam in stagno Molendini de Sperteldon, ¢. 1200,
Mercnerye.
264, Carta super Mercheleye, c. 1280, . . . .
265. Confirmatio super Mercheleye a Waltero de Bolbech. ¢. 1280, :
266, Confirmatio ejusdem super terram candem, ¢. 1280, : . .
267. Confirmatio super viginti sex acras terre justa Heleychestres, «1280,
Hatypurten,
268. Carta super ecclesiam de Halyburtun, ¢. 1200, . . .
269. Confirmatio super capella de [alyburtun, ¢. 1
270. Confirmatio super capella de Halyburtun, a Philippo de Halyburtun,
ec. 1261, . . . 5 . . .
271. Resignatio super jus et clameum in capella de Halyburtun, 1261,
272. Carta super ecclesiam de Cambusnaythan cum pertinentiis, c. 1200, .
273. Carta super ecclesiam de Simpring cum pertinentiis suis, 1153-65, .
274. Carta super ecclesiam de Lyntunruderic eum pertinentibus, ¢. 1160, .
275. Carta super ecclesia de villa Thancardi, scilicet Wodekyrke, c. 1180,
276. Super inspectionem quarundem cartarum et coufirmationum super quas-

dam ecelesias in episcopatibus Sancti Andree ct Glasgue, «. 1260,

218
th,
219

by
220
22]

2

204

wow


--- Kelso1_page86.png ---
2sL.
282.
283.

284.

285,

286,

Zi.
290.
2a.

292.

293.

204.

TABULA.

Super ecclesiam de Simpring in proprios usus, 1251, « .
Super inspectionem cujusdam seripti David episcopi Sancti Andree,
p. 1234, . . . . . . : .

Confirmatio super omnes ecclesias et elemosinas nostras in episcopatu de

Confirmatio super decimam bladi terre Ricardi de Barde, 1208-32, .

Glasgu, 1232, : . . .

Kicks.

Contirmatio super ecelesiam de Kilmauris in Cunyngham, [24

Confirmatio super eandem ecclesiam, 1246, .

Carta super ecelesiam de Kilmauris cum pertinentibus, ¢. 1170,

Confirmatio super ecclesiam de Kilmauris cum dimidia carueata terre,
a, 1189, . . . .

Confirmatio super candem ecclesiam cum pertinentiis, «. 1170,

Confirmatio super eandem ecclesiam, ¢. 1170, : . :

Tlome.

Carta super

eclesias de ilome, et de Foghou, 1153-66,

Carta super unam carucatam terre in Home, eandem yillam, et dimidiam
Cordune, a. 147, : : :

Carta

super totam terram quam Adam Longus tenuit in territorio de

Home, ¢. 1250, : : :

Obligatio ad signandam quandam literain confirmatoriam, 1260,

Coufirmatio super ecclesiam de Home cum pertinentibus, 1268, .

Resignatio super terram quam Adam Longus tenuit in territorio de
Ilome, ¢. 1250, . . 7

Carta super terram quam .J. de Cnolles tenuit de nobis in villa de Home,
1250, . : . : : :

Litera super quamdam firmam terre de Tome, ¢. 1200, .

Litera super unam carucatam terre in territorio de Home, 1258,
Carta super unum toftum et croftum in villa de Lambeden, ¢. 1200,

ab.
231
ih.

282
ib.

25a

2st

ib.

935

235

wb.

236

238



--- Kelso1_page87.png ---
297.
298.

299,
300.

301,
302.

303,
BOL,

305.

B06,

307.

308,
B09,

310,

3ll.

312.

TABULA,

Carta super unum toftum in Lambeden, c. 1160, . .
Carta super toftum et croftum in villa de Lambeden, cum octo acris terre
in eadem villa, . 1160, : : : : : :
WepirLey.

Carta super capellam de Wedirlye, cum terris et aliis libertatibus, ¢.

250,
Controversia inter Abbatem ct Conventum de Kelso, et Gilbertum filium

Alden de Home super beneficiis eccl icis de Wedirlye, e. 1250,
Confirmatio super terras et pasturam in villa de Wedirlye, ¢. 1250,

Confirmatio super tres acras terre in territorio de Wedirlye, 1258,
Foenou.

Carta super ecclesiam de Foghou cum pertinentiis, « 1240, .
Confirmatio super universas_ poss

iones datas ecclesie de Kelso per
Cospatricium, «1170, . . . : .

Carta super capellam de Foghon, cum molendino ejusdem et aliis liber-
tatibus, 1280-97, : . : : . : :

Confirmatio super eapellam de Foghou cum molendino ejusdem et aliis

libertatibus, ce. 1804, : : : 7 :
Confirmatio super capellam ct molendinum de Foghon, 1304, :
Confirmatio super capellam de Foghou enm pertinentiis, 1280-97,
Confirmatio super ecclesiam de Grenlaw, cum capellis suis, ¢. 1316, .
CRANESTUN—NAYTHANTHERYN.

Permutatio inter ecclesias de Craneston et Naythantheren cum suis ap-
pendieiis, 1316, : ' : : 5 : :
Compositio inter episcopum Sancti Andree, et Abbatem et Conventum de
Kelso, 1316, . . : 5 5 . : .
Compositio super exemptione et privilegiis Abbatis et Conventus de
Kelso, 1316, . . : . . . .

xvii

239

240

wb.
241

242

pes bad

4

245

245

27
2s

24g



--- Kelso1_page88.png ---
BULA.

xviii

313. Littera de Saysina super dictam ecclesiam cum fructibus, 1317, . .
314, Saysina super eandem eccl

315. Quod archidiaconus Laudonie nullas capiat procurationes de ecclesia de

iam, de Naythantheryn, 1317, . .

Naythantherin, 1316, . . . . . .
316. Confirmatio super ecclesiam de Craneston (in qua carta IL tidel, ¢. 1180,
et dus sequentes confirmantur,) . . .
317, Confirmatio super ecclesiam de Cranestou per R. Ridel, ¢. 1200, .
318. Carta super multura terre de Prestona per R. Ridel, «1200, .
319, Carta super quasdam eschalingas in Lambirmore per Willelmum de
Vyerpont, ¢. 1160, . . . .
320. Carta super duas acras prati in territorio de Horwerden, : :

321. Confirmatio super ecclesiam de Worwelden cum quibusdam scalingis in
Lambirmore, per W. de Vipont, @. 1174, : : : :

. Confirmatio super sex bovatas terre in territorio de Brochesmuth, a. 1174.

Confirmatio super quoddam tenementum in Brochesmuth, 1200-14.

Resignatio super quasdam cartas de ecclesia de Dumfres, ¢. 1200,

. Confirmatio super donationem pullanorum haracii Gilberti de Umfram-

wil, 1228, 0. : 5 : . 5 : :

3. Confirmatio super dictam donationem pullanorum, ¢. 122:

. Confirmatio super decimam dictorum pullanorum, c. 1220, . 7
ec. 1220,
329, Confirmatio super donationem predictam pullanorum, ¢, 1250, :
ie de Ellesden super decimam predicto-

Sarta ad deliberandam decimam pullanorum monachis de Kels

330. Resignatio Rogeri Rectoris e
rum pullanorum, 1228, : : : : . :

REDISPALE.

331, Compositio super quamdam litem inter Abbatem et Conventum de Kelso,

et Rogerum rectorem ecclesie de Ellesden, 1228, .

Compositio inter nos et Henricum Wytwel super quasdam terras in villa
de Dumfres, 1215, . . . . .

3382.

261
th.

262

263,

262


--- Kelso1_page89.png ---
TABULA.

SymonpstTon.
333, Confirmatio super ecclesiam de Symondeston cum pertinenciis suis,
ec. 1180, . . . . . . . .
334. Compositio inter Abbatem ct Conventum, et dominum Symonem Lockard

militem, 1273, . . . . . . .
335. Compositio super capellam ville Symonis, e. 1180, . . :

Wrer

336, Carta super ecclesiam de Wycestun cum duabus capellis suis, 1247-64,

Confirmatio super ecclesiam de villa Wice cum capellis suis, « 1200,
. Confirmatio super ecclesiam que dicitur Wudechirche, e. 1180, .

citun, ¢. 1260, . :

. Confirmatio super ecclesiam de Wy

KaLLosrBerne.

Carta super ecclesiam de Kylosbern, ¢ 1200,
Resignatio super patronaium ecclesie de Killosbern, 1278.
2. Confirmatio super jure patronatus Heclesie de Kyllosebern, 1204,

jonem decimarum ecclesie de Killosbern, 1281,

3. Conventio super z

Varta super ecclesias de Travertlat et de Drumereioch, ¢. 1180,

jas de Traverflat et de Dungr:

. Confirmatio super ecch

Controversia inter nos et Walterum, perpetuum vicarium ecclesie de Ro-
bertston, super decimas garbarum dicte ville, 1279, . .

Carta super ecclesiam de Mortun in Strethtun cum pertinenciis, c. 1200,

Carta super eeclesiam de Caldoure cum pertinenciis, « 1170,

Carta super decimam Molendini de Kalledoure, ¢. 1170,

Confirmatio super ecclesiam de Stapilgortun, p. 1153, : :
0,

ham una cum carta ejusdem,

351. Confirmatio super quamdam terram in villa que vocatur Neuthon, e.

352. Resi jo super quamdam terram in My:

1271, . . : : : . .

xix



--- Kelso1_page90.png ---
XX TABULA.

353, Resignatio duarum bovatarum terre in Mydilham, 1260,

354. Carta super quoddam messagium in villa de Kelso, ¢. 1200, .
355. Resignatio terre Andree filii Willelmi tinetoris in burgo de Kelso,
1237, . . . . : . .

356, Carta super donationem ecclesie de Dunsyer, ¢. 1170, . : :

Carta super eeclesia de Wybaldington, ¢. 1190, . . :

Carta super unam earrucatam terre in Hetona, ¢. 1152, .

ScHorren.

Carta super tenementum de Colpinhope in territorio de Schottun,
c. 1200, . . : : . . . .

360, Carta super pasturam et alia aysiamenta in territorio ville de Schottun,
e. 1200, : . : : :

Carta super Colpinhope eum molendino, ¢. 1230,

362. Carta super unam terram in territorio de Schottun, ¢. 1220, . :
863, Confirmatio super quamdam terram in territorio de Schottun, c. 1220,
264, Carte
. Confirmatio super terram et tenementum in territorio de Schottun,
366, Contirmatio super quoddam tenementum in territorio de Schottun,
1220, : . . . .

amentis in villa de Pranwr-

super quinque aeras terre in territorio de Schottun, ¢, 1220, .

‘arta super duas bovatas terre cum ali
sete, c, 1180, . . . . . . : .
368, Carta super totam IHalech de territorio de Pronewessete, ¢. 1180, .

369. Carta super eeelesiam de Peneathlan, ¢. 1180, . . .

Carta super eandem ecelesiam cum terris et omnimodis decimis, . 1180,

Carta super eeclesiam de Brennath in Moravia et personatum ejusdem
ecelesie, 1203-22, : . . : : :

Carta super Ravendena cum snis rectis diuisis, «. 1140, . .

Carta super ecclesiam de Seleschirehe, 1147-52,

283
284

288
289
291
292

293

298

wb.


--- Kelso1_page91.png ---
TABULA, xxi

376. Carta super duas bovatas terre juxta Prestbrige in Sprouston, 1153-61, . 298

377. Carta super unum toftum in burgo de Inverkethin, 1160-5, . 200

378. Carta super medictatem sagiminis ommiwn craspesiorum in Ford,
1160-5, . . . . . . . ~ tb.

379. Confirmatio super ecclesiam de Keth, 1153-60, . . . 800

380. Confirmatio super scalingas de Bothkel, 1160-4, . - th
381. Carta super dimidiam carucatam terre et super ecclesiam de Sele-

chirehe, 1153-65, . . . . 5 . ~ th
382. Confirmatio super quoddam donum ecclesie de Sprouston, c. 1150, . B01

383. Carta super molendino de Hedenbam et unam earucatam terre cum ali

libertatibus, 1174-8, . : 5 : 7 2 oth
384, Carta super tres carucatas terre in territorio de Edenham, 1189-98, » BOD
385, Confirmatio super unam bovatam terre in  territorio de Sprouston,

1189-99, . . : . : . . » 304
386. Confirmatio super ecclesias de Ch: yet Altermunin, 1165-89, ~ th
387. Carta super quasdam libertates ville de Kelso, 1165-71, . : » 805
388. Confirmatio super decem a erre in territorio de Hawden, 1171 th.
389. Confirmatio super villam de Traverlen, et terram Dodini in Berewick,

1165-74, . . : . c . . » S06
390. Confirmatio super ecclesiam de Pencateland, 1189-99, : . ib

391. Protectio super terram A\bbatis de Kelso et homines ect catalla, 1165-89, 307
392. Confirmatio super tres acras terre in territorio de Yheteham, 1235, - th

393. Quod nullus eapiat namum super Abbatem de Kelso, 1224, B08

Confirmatio super libertates et consuctudines nostras, 1243-6, . th
395, Carta super quamdam terram pro sustentatione pontis de Ettryck,

. : : . . . - 809
. Confirmatio super Immunitatem a Curia Romana indultam, 1254, - ih
Carta super sex mareas nobis debitas de burgo de Perth, 1302, » 310

ConfixMatio super tres marcas percipiendas annuatim de Burgo de Perth,

1233, . . . . . . . . wb.
399, Carta super libertates et consuetudines monasterii de Kelson, 1214-26, . 311
400, Carta super perceptione trium marcarun de villa de Perth, 1160-4, .

401. Confirmatio super omnes libertates de Kelso, 1178-88, . . 812



--- Kelso1_page92.png ---
xaii TABULA.

402. C:
403, Confirmatio super omnes libertates et consuetudines ecclesie de Kelso,

«1211, c . 5 .
Carta super donationem ecclesie de Mortun in Strathnith, 1171-8,
Carta

‘a super Nativos homines et fugitives de Lesmahago, 1165-71,

iper ecclesiam de Malcarweston, 1179-89, . . .
Confirmatio super terras et libertates ecelesie et ville de Molle, 1165-72,
Confirmatio super quinque acras terre in Ull'kyleston, 1165-96,

Confirmatio snper unam carueatam terre in villa de Hawden, 1165-71,

Confirmatio super ecclesias nostras in episcopatu Glasguensi, 1195-9,
Carta super homines et eatalla Abbatis de Kelso, 1165-71,

Carta super eceles

am de Dunfres et capellam sancti Thome, 1175-87, «
Confirmatio super pacem factam inter ecclesi

1203.
413. Confirmatio super ecclesias nost

de Kelso et de Melros,

in episcopatu Glasguensi, ¢. 1180, .
114. Confirmatio super ecclesiam del Wudechirche, cum tota parochia, ¢. 1180,

415, Confirmatio super ecelesias burgi de Roxburgh, ¢. 1160,
416, Confirmatio super ecclesiam de Molle, 1147-04.
117. Confirmatio super ecclesiam de Horveresdene, 1147-61,

418. Littera super dedicationem cimiterii apud ecclesiam Sancti Petri, 1235,
419, Littera super vicariam Ecclesie de Langton, 1240,
420, Confirmatio super Ecclesiam de Gordune, 1163-73, .

421. Confirmatio super

Jeclesiam de forwerden in proprios usus, 1251,

422, Quod Abbas et Monachi de Kelso presentabunt episcope, capellanos vel

clericos ad regimen vicariarum, 1208-

. Confirmatio super eapellam Sancti Thome in territorio de Maccuswel,
ce. L180,

&

424. Confirmatio super Ecclesias de Horverden et Simpring in proprios usus,
Confirmatio. snper ecclesias nostras in Episcopatu Sancti Andree,
e. 1190, . :

26, Confirmatio super ecclesiam faciendam in villa de Lambeden, a. 1158,

427. Conventio inter Episcopos Sancti Andree et Glasgue, et Abhatem et Mo-
nachos de Kelso, 1201, -

312

th.
~3l4

B15

th.
316
317

ib.

B18
ib.
3ly
320
ib.
321

322
323
ob.



--- Kelso1_page93.png ---
TABULA.

428. Compositio facta inter Episcopos Sancti Andree et Gilasgue, et Abbatem
et Conventum de Kelso, ¢. 1201, . : . : :

429. Confirmatio super Ecclesias de Gordune et de Home in proprios usus,
1270, . . . . . . . .

430. Confirmatio super Ecclesiam de Kaledoure cum pertinenciis suis, ¢. 1251,
431. Confirmatio super libertatem Ecclesie de Kelso cum parochia sua,

1188-1202, . . . . . . .
432. Confirmatio snper Ecclesiam de Simprine i in proprios usus, 1251, .
433. Confirmatio super omnes Eeclesias et alias clemosinas nostras in Episco-

patu Glasguensi, 1232, : : : : : :
434, Confirmatio super Ecclesias et alias libertates nostras in Episcopatu
Sancti Andree, ¢. 1211, : . . : .
435, Confirmatio super Ueclesiam de Cultir cum pertinentibus, 1228-39, .

436. Confirmatio super Ecclesiam de Lyntunruderye cum pertinenciis, 1160-4,
437. Confirmatio super sententiam excommunicationis in invasores rerum nos-

trarum, 1247, . : . . :
438, Carta super libertate Monasterii o Kelso, 11 7888, . . .
439, Carta super libertatem ejusdem monasterii, ¢. 1160, : .
440. Confirmatio super decimam terre in territorio de Lilliselef, ce. 1160, .

441. Controversia inter Kelso, et J. rectorem de Lillisclet, e. 1190,

442. Quod oullus exigat procurationes indebitas vel immoderatas ab ecclesii

nostris,
443, Quod ecelesia dle Kelso sit soluta ab omni subjectione et exactione,
a. 1147, . : o . c . :
444. Confirmatio super Eeclesiam de Kultir cum pertinenciis, 1200-7,
445. Confirmatio super decimas et rectitudiues Ecclesie Sancti Laurencii de
Berewic, per Abbatem et Conventum coneessas, c. 1150, : .
446. Confirmatio Prioris, super earta Episcopi Sancti Andree, 1255-71, .
447. Quod episcopi visitent ecclesias Kalchoenses secundum institutum Late-

ranensis concilii, ¢. 1201, . . . . . .
448. Compositio inter Abbatem et Conventum de Kelso, et Lambertum, de qua-
dam terra de Berewic, 1177, . . . . :

449. Confirmatio super Eeclesiam de Cultir cum pertinenciis, List. 99, .

xsiil

B28

B29

330

wh,
331

332

383,

334

338

340
ih,

341

33.
344


--- Kelso1_page94.png ---
xxiv TABULA.

450, Confirmatio super Ecclesiam de Cultir cum terris, 1187-99, : .

451. Carta super Ecclesiam de Langtunia cum appendiciis, 1162-4, :

452. Confirmatio super omnes Ecclesias, jura, et libertates in Episcopatu Sancti
Andree, ¢. 1201, . . . : . .

453. Confirmatio super Ecclesiam de Caldouere Radulphi, «. 1201, |. ‘

454. Confirmatio super capellam Castelli de Pebles, 1174-99, 5

455. Confirmatio super capellam de Wedirleye ad usus proprios, «. 1240,

460.
461.
462.
463.
464.
465.
AG6,
467.
408.
469.
470.
471.
472.

Carta de Estir Dodyngstun data Reginaldo de Boseo, 1221-76, . :
Carta Thome filii Reginaldi, 122

Carta Emme vidue Thome de Bosco, 1239-48, « . . .

De libertatibus burgi de Westerkelsou, 1323, . : .
Papartm Privitecia.

Privilegium Innocentii Pape, [Innoc. [V. 1243-54, .

Privilegium ue ultra mare in eausam trahamur, [Imnoc. IV, 1243-54,].
Confirmatio compositionis, [Imnoc. LV. 1243-54,]

Sulla Innocentii Pape, [Innoe. LV. 1243-54,) . . . .

De privilegiis concessis, hactenus non usitatis, [Lmoc. U1. 1199-1216,)

Commissio Papalis contra molestatores, [Inmoc. ILL 1199-1216,)
Ne aliquis nostrum excommunicetur, [Lucii HT. 1182-5,) .
Privilegium de usu Mitre, (Alex. IIL. 1160-80,) .

Confirmatio de sasina apud Lochkendloch, (Alex. 1V. 1254-61.)

De Ecelesiis de Horneden et Wedirley, - : .
Carta pro Hosberno de terra in Middleham, (eadem ae 117,) 1160-80,
de Prestfeld, 1327, . . . : : .

inter Bolden et Faudon, . . . .

De divisi

De marchiis



--- Kelso1_page95.png ---
CarTAE IN QUIBUSDAM FOLUS ReEGIsTRI &

474.
AT5.
476.
477.
478.
479.
480.
481.
482.
483.
484.
485.
486.
487.
488,
489.
490.
491.
4
493,
494.
495.
496.

497.
498.
499.
500.
501.
502.

TABULA.

Carta de terra de Draffane, 1271, fol. 216, . . : :
Carta Laurentii filti Edmundi de tofto in Edinburg, f. 7, . . .
Carta de decem marcis Ecelesie Sancti Machuti, 1516, £212, . .
De Ecelesia de Eglismaleseok in proprios usus data, c. 1320, f. 193, .

Carta de Aughtyferdale, 1326, £177, . : .

Carta Rogeri de Auldton prima, ¢. 1330, £ 202, : : .
Relaxatio Roberti de Collevyll, ¢. 1828, f, 202, : :

Quicta clamatio et relaxatio Johamnis Valays, 1328, f. 202, . .

Carta Margarete uxoris Rogeri de Auldton, ¢. 1330, £ 202, .

Quieta clamatio Alicie heredis Hngonis de Auldburgh, 1329, f. 203, .
Confirmatio Regis Scottorum super earta Rogeri, 1329, f. 205, . :
Conyentio faeta inter Abbatem et Rogerum, 1329, f. 201. . .
Confirmatio Episcopi Glasguensis, 1329, f. 205, : . :

Carta licencie Abbatis et Conventu: 0, £ 204, : . .
Concessio Abbatis et Conventns de Kelso, 1331, f. 204, . a
Carta Margarete de Auldton de tenementis in Roxburgh, 1345, f. 207,

Mandatum Episcopi de fundatione Rogeri de Auldton, 1546, f. 212,
Carta Sirildis Saddeler, p. 1830, £. 308, . : :
Carta Roberti Sadler, ¢. 1354, £196, . : .

Confirmatio Domini Johannis de Maxwell, e. 1354, f. 197, . .
Relaxatio Domini Johannis de Maxwell super annua firma, f. 197, ¢. 1354,

Confirmatio Regis, 1354, f. 200, : : . .
Carta Rogeri de Anldton de uma cautoria in Ecclesia beati Jacobi de
Roxburgh, c. 1354, f. 198, : . :

Confirmatio Regis Seotie de eadem, 1354, f. 199, : .
Carta cantorie spectantis ad collationem Abbatis, 1354, f. 194, .

Confirmatio Edwardi Regis Anglie, 1354, f. 195, . 5 :
Inspeximus et eonfirmatio Edwardi Regis Anglie, 1354, f. 210, . .
Confirmatio Episeopi Glasguensis, 1358, f. 211, . . .

Memorandum de forma Cantorie, f. 209, . . .

ENTIUS SCRIPTAE, IN ORDINEM DISPOSIT.

XY

304

wh,
B05
366

367
368
369
370
oil



--- Kelso1_page96.png ---
xxvi TABULA.

503. Memorandum de cartis super Cantoriam, fol. 209,

504. De possessionibus ex quibus fundatur Cantoria, f. 209, : .
505. Mandatum Archidiaconi Thevidalie, 1358, f. 211, : : .
506. Confirmatio David Regis Scottorum, 1360, f. 210, . . .
507. Licentia de stagno molendini de Kalcho firmando in territorio de le
Halech, c. 1200, f. 218, . . . . .

508. Carta de terra in Home data Galfrido de i ikkeford, ¢. 1250, f. 218,
509. Procuratorium pro Johanne Ogill, f. 180, : . . .
510. Litera Monitionis, f. 181, . . . . . .
511. Carta de Dodingston, ¢, 1330, f. 219, . . . . .
512. Carta Alexandri de Redpeth de medietate terrarum de Deryngton, f, 213,
513. Carta de Lesmahago, 1370, f. 215, . . . . .

514. Resignatio Ade de Aghynlek, 1370, f. 176, . .

Nova infeodatio ejusdem, 1372, f.177, « . : . .
Preceptum de tertia parte Comitisse de Douglas, 1888, £. 216, .
Breve inquisitionis pro Johanne filio Ricardi, 1598, f. 217, . .
8. Corrodium pro Willelmo Forman, 1398, f. 217, . . .
Carta de Newbotill, ¢. 1598, f. 218, : . . .
. Pensio Ricardo de Hanggansyd data, 1398, f. 173, . . .
| Carta de terra Ricardi de Hanggandsyd, c. 1398, f. 182, . .

Carta de tenemento dato Thome de Viearia, 1399, f. 173.
Preceptum sasine Willelmi de Benatyne, 1400, f. 216,

Carta Rothaldi Were del Blakwodd, ¢. 1400, f. 7, . :
Confirmatio concordie de viearia de Wyston, 1406, f. 175, .
Carta de patronatu de Kyrkyethame, f. 175, P : .

Littera pro Abbate de licentia capelle et capellani in ecclesia de Rox-

burgh, 1434, £178, . . . . . .
528. Constitutio procuratorum Johannis Trewnot ad comparendum pro eo, ad
in burgo de Edinburgh, 1335, f. 190,

quaseunque curi 7
529. Carta Alani Abbatis de Kelso facta Johanni de Rutherforde super duas

terras infra burgum de Jedworth in vico de Castilgate, 464, f. 181, .
530. Assedatio terrarum et possessionum de Mellostanis Alexaudro et Hugoni
Purwes, 1465, £183, . . . : . .

397

398
399

400
wb.
401
103
404
405
406
407
408
th.
400
ih.
410
ib.
41
412
415
ib.
414
415

AIT

419

421

422


--- Kelso1_page97.png ---
540.
OAL.
542,

545.
AG.
5AT.

TABULA.

. Carta feodifirme pro Cudberto Knychtson de terra in baronia de Doding-

ston, 1466, fol. 184, . :

Carta Roberti Abbatis facta Johanni de Rutherforde de duabus terris
infra burgum de Jedworth in vico de le Castilgait, 1475, f. 188,

Carta Roberti Abbatis facta Jacobo Carmichell de Balmady super terris
de Folkartoun cum pertinentiis, 1495, f. 187. .

Carta Roberti Abbatis facta Roberto Weyr de terris de Rogethyll et de
Brownhyll, 1497, £2 185, ; . ’ ; . .

Carta ejusdem facta Willelmo Conynghame de terris ecclesiasticis de Kil-
mauris vocatis the girnale croft, 1505, £185, . .

Carta Radulphi Ker de terris de Blakhill et hoilhous, 1528, f. 186, .

Reformatio pacis inter Regna Anglie et Scotie, Capud Eboracum, Mar. 1
1327,) £171, . . . . . .

Mandatum Episcopi Dunolmensis pro citandis presbiteris de Catholiea fide
suspectis, 1402, f. 174, . :
Alterum mandatum Episcopi de eisdem, 1102, £74, . .

PorMenag.

Litera attornati ad Parliamentum, ¢. 1400, f. 172,

Litera faciendi attornatum ad Varliamentum, f. 216, .

Procuratorium ad Parliamentum, e, 1420, f. 217, . . .
iud Procuratorium ad Parliamentum, ec. 1420, f. 215, . : .
Litera ad faciendum procuratorem ad parliamentum, f. 217, . .

Litera pro presbitero studente in universitate infra Angliam, 1398, f. 178,

Litera presentationis de permutatione, f. 172,
Alia litera presentationis, f. 172, : : : :

xxvii

423

428

429
430

433

135
436



--- Kelso1_page98.png ---
xxviii TABULA.

548. Item alia litera presentationis, fol. 172, . . . : .
549. Litera Ballivi per Willelmum Abbatem, f. 193, : : : .
550. Litera Ballivi ad replegiandum homines ab itinere Camerarii seu Justi-
ciarii, f. 6. . . . . . . : .
Litera attornati procuratoris et commissarii, f. 212, .
Litera attornatus, f. 172, . . . .
Forma faciendi sectatorem, f. 218, . : . . .
Litera de recepto, 1415, f. 216, . . . .

5. Litera de recipiendo in participationem spiritualium, 1403, f. 192,

The Marches of Sympryng, ante fol. 1, . : : : :
De terra in villa de Wester Dodyngstoun, f. 219, : : :
Conventio cum Neubotil de salina in Karso, f. 218, : . .
559. A nobyl tretyse agayne the Pestilens, f. 213, .

ROTULUS ANTIQUUS REDITUUM MONASTERU DE Ketso, a. 1300, &. 1-6,

CHALMERLANE Compr oF THE CELL or LesMataco, From Tne

ORIGINAL ACCOMPT IN THE CHARTER ROOM AT FLoons,

Tue RENTALL oF THE ABBACIE OF KeLso, c. 1567, FROM THE ORIGINAL
RENTAL IN THE CHARTER ROOM AT FLoors, . : .

443
ib,

44
wb.
445
th.

446
wh,
447
wb.
448
th.

489


--- Kelso1_page99.png ---


--- Kelso1_page100.png ---
karra confirmata ch, duno db mearnanione
f oe BU Frits mas’ dda mare mea.G-avfrwe
h canceltario Robro pore far Annee. ayarheo ai
——— ajagyfive deryRoSvalto chico cancett Jobe nep
7 Cofpare comme. Ferverh come: Duncary 66 te
" Rann’ Sjutas BW otfand. Ric cumm.Robro Ault
\ qyace, Om filo hailaph-y Ants quampluriby

i

?

Ene! & Benet hy GA FS, Titers Hae


--- Kelso1_page101.png ---
CARTA AUTHENTICA MALCOLMI IV, REGIS
A.D. MCLIX.

AD FIDEM AUTOGRAPHI IN ARCHIVIS

DUCIS DE ROXBURGHE,


--- Kelso1_page102.png ---


--- Kelso1_page103.png ---
CARTA MALCOLMI IV, REGIS
A.D. MCLIX.

Marcoroscs dei gia rex feottoy - Omnib3 amicif fuif francis % anglit &
feottif - cnnctifiy, [te dei ecctie filiif ? ppetua falutem - Nouerint omf plentef
& futuri - pig memorig DD regem teottoy avum menm dum comet’ fuit
fundafle quandam abbaciam apud Seleschixche in honore {@e dei genitnicis
uirginif Mame - & {ei Johis cvangelitte - pro falute anime fue & patrit ¢
matris fue - ffmq, & foroy fuarum - omniung, antecetloy fuccetloyg faoy +
$3 poltqm diuina clementia poft obitum fiis fui ALexanpnr ei f{neceflit in

regnum ¢ contilio & ammonicide uenerabit memorig Johis tune Guaseyey-

sis epi & peernm fuoy dm timentiwn ¢ predictam abbaciam quia locut ille

non erat conuenienf abbacig ¢ apud Roxessvreva transtulit - in ecetiam
heate marie uirginif que fita eft {up ripam fluminis rvepe - in loco qui

dr kelcho + Quam ecetiam Roserrys epé {ti Axprer - in eni? erat epatn -
p dei amore & tuo # ab oi epifeopali fubiedtione libam Ge conceflit - Ita

feilicet ut abbas Y «onachi fnpradicig ecctig - a quocung, epo uolucrint + in



--- Kelso1_page104.png ---
v CARTA AUTHENTICA

feotia uel in cumbria - erifma fuum & oleum - & ordinationem ipfi? abbatis
 monachoy - © ceta fee eectig facramenta accipiant - Hane libtatem eum
aliis libtatibs ( poffeffionibs quas ex Iibalitate aui mei regis DD - patnif
mei comitif Henrier + fiue mea poflident / cif quantum ad me ptinet in
ppetuum conecdo + ( poteftate regali in ppetuaim elemofinam confirmo -
Videlicct uillam de kelcho eum fuif reétis diuifis - in terris & in aquis -
folutam €f quietam ( ab omni exaétione libam - & q’ndam terram quam
aproupvs dedit iuxta diuifas ipfi? ville - qug tra defeendit in uiam qua

itur ad NEIMAN

ruven - Et qnocienfeung, in ipfa gecta in follennitatibs -

nel in aliis dicbs feruicium di andicro 7 omnes offerendaf meas - ( omniun
qui mecum erunt ipfi eectig confirmo - Et in epenua de molendino - xii -
celdras de brafio unoquog, anno - Et de mora de EpeNHA® ad fodiendum
petas - a quodam foilato Gd defeendit de quada alia mora tranfiendo recto
tramite illam moram ufq ad tres magnof lapides ex alta parte exiftentef -
Et in burgo de Roketburg - xt - folidof de cenfu unoq’g anno + & unam

toftam inxta ceetiam {

BAe ef ;
gacozr » & altam in nono Burgo - & tram que fuit

i - Et ceetias ipfius burgi cum tra fua
acellinuf archidiaconuf caf meli? & liberi? habuit - & dimidiam toftam que

fuit aculphi + Et in molendinif . xx + celdras - inter farinam & fruiitum -

GAVTERL ect fieut unquam

& feptimam partem pifeature + Et in fprofiona unam earrucatam terre &
+x aeras - ( maifuras carrneate ptinentes - & tref aeraf de p'ato - ( eectiam
eidem uille + 7 tram eceti ptinentem - Et iuxta pretterbridge duaf

bonatat tre - quas dedi eif in efeambio duarum bouatarum quas m’ aeeomo-

dauerunt @onaechi de terra geetie {21 Laveentir de Berewie - Et uillam
raucdena in trif 7 in aquif - Et patturas de sprosrona - & moraf ad fodiendii

#uas - commmnef hdibs de

ENDENA fient hominib3 de Sproftona - Et in
Berewich unam earrneatam tre + & unam maifuram carrucate ptinentem -
juxta ecetiam {Gi Lavrencn 7 altam maifuram in burgo - 7 + xt - folidof
de cenfu ei?dem burgi unoqnog anno - 7 dimidiam partem uni? pifcaturg


--- Kelso1_page105.png ---
MALCOLMI IV. V

que uocatur Berewiclirem + & feptimam partem molendinoy - & terram
dovixi in eadem uilla - 7 terram Waltheui filii Ernobold - Et uillam de
middelham - & Bothelnene cum fuif reétis dinifis - in terrif & aquis - in
bofeho & plano . Et - xxx - acraf terre de ‘tritorio Lillefelive - in? alyam
& riuulum qui diuidit terram de middelham & d Lilleselive - 7 decimam
molendini ipfi? uille - feilicet Lillefclive - Et Whitelawa . 7 Whitemere
cum fuif reétif divifis - Et terram de felefchinche ci tuif divifif in tris &
aquif - in bofeho & plano + & aquaf meaf circa Seleschirche » comunet ad
pifeanda - fuif ppif pifeatoribs ut meif & patturaf meaf eOmunef fuif hoibs
ut meis - & bofchof meof domib; fuif faciendis - 7 ad ardenda vt m' - Et
cectiam de alta felefchirche ci dimidia carrueata tre - Et ecetiam 7 tram
d Lesmagn cum foil reétif dinitis - Et rraverten cum fuis rectis dinifis -
ficut Vnieth cam meli? 7 pleni? tenuit & habuit - ci omib3 aifiamentif
uicini ftrodre quod camexj dr + Et eraggam ei’dem uille ficut domin? abbas
Alfwixvs {te erueif + Q& rvatpys abbas de kelcho fe adinuicem concor-
dauerunt - de quadam calumnia que fuit int cof - d ipfa eragga coram hit
teftibs - Rapvlpho abbe de neobotle - WiHo abbe de firevelix - osbto plore
d Jeppewrd - Ricardo clerico machset - Hane autem Traverlen dedit
avvs iis pdicte eectie de kelcho in cfeambit deeem libratarum tre quam
habuerunt in Hardiggasthory inxta Norhamtuniam - Et in Rixfriv unam
toftam + 7 unam nauem - & pifcaturam uni? retis - folutam  quietam -

7
ab omni confuetudine libam - Et in epixpyre unam toftam - Etin naprervn

unam toftam - Et in pebbles una toftam - Et in nannancu una toftam » Et

ecetiam de keth - Et dimidinm fagimen crafpetioy qui in Forth applicuer-

int. Et decimam animalinm  poreoy & cafeoy de chan - de - iii - kad-
rez - de illa Galweia - quai uinente rege ALEXANDRO auus Tis habnit - p
unumquemq annum - Et decimam ealfeoy d tvepepae fimitr p uniiquéq,
annum + Et dimidietaté corioy coquing meg - 7 omnidi occifionti mean -
ita ut ubicung, ego t aliquif fuccetioy meoy unt corit habuerit - habeant


--- Kelso1_page106.png ---
vi CARTA AUTHENTICA

 qonachi altam - Et fimitr de unétis 7 de fepis ? fit d coriis Et ofif
pelles anietum & agnoy + Et decimam corioy ceruoy 7 ceruay q°f veltrarii
mei capient - Hof auté reddit? coquing mee - 7 occifionti meay habebunt
@onachi p illam fram tm + quam uinente rege Alexandro - au? fis habuit -
Et in Karsach unam falinam - Preterea q‘utum ad me fpeétat - concedo &
confirmo ecctie Bnominatg - Ex donatione comitif cofpatrie} ? ecctiam de
How cum duabs earrucatis frp - 7 eum p"to uno in fritorio ei’dem ville +
Et ecctiam de Fogho cum una ecarrucata fre » Ex donatione werner: de

eccta d stpric » Ex donatione ropertr filii Willelmi / ecetiam fei Lay-

coaceh wet ? ecctiam d macch?wel + Ex donatione Hye 7 Petri filii ei? #
°
rentu d perewic + Ex donatione Walter] Corbrth ¢ ecctiam d @at-
CARVASTVN ci wna carrucata terre - Ex donatione verrep1 d @olla ¢
eectiam de qolla eit tra adiacenti - Ex donatione Withee # ecctiam uille
fue + Ex donatione Willelmi Finemund ? ecctiam de Cambsxcithay - Ex
donatione ricardi Cumin ? gectam de lintunnutheric - Prenominataf g
tras & poffeflionef omnef - ego eectig beate uirginit anu d kelcho - 7
qonachif ibidem do fernientibs  libe ( quiete iure ppetuo poffidendas
coneedo - & hae karta mea in ppctuam clemofinam confirmo - ita ut m*
faecedentium null’. de plata eectia « neq de pofleftionib; ci? aliquid pre-
fumat exigere ? nt folas ofonef ad anime falutem ¢ Hee autem karta
confirmata eft - Anno ab inearnatione dni + © ¢° » Wix? - ms TESTIBVs -
HERBERTO GLAS!
Wito Q DD {Fibs meis - 7 apa matre mea + Gautrido abbe d Dus-
fermelix » Osbto abbe de Jeddew - Af abbe d Neobothle - Alvredo
abbe d Strevelix . Walto cancellario - Robto ptore {ti axpREE

* epo + WiHo morauenfi efio + Greg epo d dunkeld -

@atheo archi-

diacono - {@i axpy - Tor Arch laodonie - Herbto camcrario « Nichot chico -
Rig capeHo - Maa@sTRo ANDK « Magistro ARtvro - Walto clico cancell - Johe
nepote efi Rob - Sert clico - Salomone capHo epi Herb - 7 Helia clico
ci’dem epi » f£ Godredo rege infulara - Cofpatr comite - Ferteth comite -


--- Kelso1_page107.png ---
MALCOLMLI IV. vu

Duncan com + Gillebrive com d Anac? - Vetredo filio Ferg? - Gilleb de
Vinframuilt - WiHo d Sumervill - Ricard @ moruiH - Ranfi d fulaf . BB
olifard - Rig cumin - Roberto auenel - Witto d morutH . WiHo finemund -
Walto corb - Afket d rivata . Heyrico pr verci - Liolpho fit Q)ace? «
Orm filio Hailaph - 7 aliis quamplurib; / clericif ac laicis . APVD -
ROKESBVRG -


--- Kelso1_page108.png ---


--- Kelso1_page109.png ---
CARTA JOIMANNIS TENNENT DE TERRIS DE
OVIR HOWDANE ET NETHER IOWDANE. 1539.

Arren the whole matter of these volumes was printed, and they had
been for some time in the hands of the binder, a charter was purchased at
a public sale in Edinburgh, which, though not ancient, nor in itself of much
importance, has some peculiarities, and some points of interest as conneeted
with the Abbey of Kelso, which seemed to make it proper to delay the eir-
culation of the book to admit of its insertion.

The charter is granted by the youthful Commendator, James Stuart, son
of James V.; the Administrator of his Abbaey, and the convent of Kelso;
and with the consent and anthority of King James V., himself the patron
of the Abbey: and it is subscribed by the hands of the King, the Com-
mendator, the Administrator, and twenty-one monks of the convent.

The person in whose favour it is granted, John Tennent, is well known
as the confidential servant of the King. In one charter he is styled balistee
gestor Regi, “the king’s cross-bow man.” In another, he has a grant of

the keepership of Holyroodhouse and the King’s park.

The deed is here given in abbreviate, and below are represented the
subscriptions of the granters, Two seals which remain, are so much muti-
lated that they could not be used.

For this addition to the interest of the Chartulary of Kelso, the members
of the Club are indebted to their Seeretary.


--- Kelso1_page110.png ---
CARTA JONANNIS TENNENT

Ormibus hance cartam vifuris vel andituris Jacobus commendatarius
perpetuus monaficrij de Caleo Johannes abbas de Lindoris coadiutor et
admin

tor dicti monafterii et eiufdem loci conventus » - - falutem

Noveritis nos - - - aceedente ad id fereniflimi principis et patroni noftri |

Jacobi quinti Scotorum regis illuftriflimi confenfu - - - exigentibus quoque

’

nonnichil honorabilis viri Johannis Tennent fumiliaris feruitoris dicti -

regis nobis et nofiro monafterio benemeritis preftitis  » - ad feodifirmam feu

emphiteofim hereditarie dimittere - - - prefato Johanni Tennent et Mariote

feo ahem O40, Measiad

res Vy Oe AD om)
math TU Gay Feb OD 8 7 fie tebe
Ss ie

(we ’ eas ae cae )sbne ra:

Uae Br &

|
}
|
{
|
{
\
|
|
|
{


--- Kelso1_page111.png ---
DE HOWDANES.

Atkinfoun fue fponfe + - - terras nofiras de Owirhowdane ct Netherhowdance
+++jacentes in dominio de Lauderdaill et infra vicecomitatum de Beruik - - -
Reddendo + - + fwmmam triginta librarum - - - In cnins rei teftimonium
figillam commune capituli didi noftri monafterii huie prefenti carte nofire
eft appenfum vnacum noftris fubferiptionibus manualibus ac cum appentfione
figilli oflicij dicii coadintoris cum tua {ubferiptione manuali neenon figillo
feereto dicti ferenifiimi principis noftri patroni cum fua fubferiptione
manuali in fignwn fai confenfus et afienfus ad premifla - Apud dictum
noftrum monatierium xix Februari) A.D. spxxxix +

be onle Wn. May Seng
Prk So Lubes Yorke” wel G fry lor wD
4 9D, nt fang Ash

; As ees “ah sondty far OF i)
har (ath _
aS ia “ae Z2\b- er

— grog SH ot m Asse
| 7 _ Laas a Tiyemeats /PSAo



--- Kelso1_page112.png ---


--- Kelso1_page113.png ---
LIBER

SANCTE QARIE DE CALCHOU.


--- Kelso1_page114.png ---


--- Kelso1_page115.png ---
LIBER

SANCTE MARIE DE CALCHOU.

Carta comitis Danid tilij Regis alcolmj de fidade itti? Qonatterij.

1 DAVID comes fili? Walcolmi Regis Scotori - Omib3 amicis suif francis t ,,. 4
Anglis - ‘t Scotis - cunétisq, {te dei cectie filiis salute cdtinua - Notii
sit omib3 pfentibs atq, fut?

me fundaffe q’ddam @onaftinm in Sele-
chyrea - s - ad abbathia in honore ste marie - t sti Johis ew'ngte p falute
aie mee - t pat's - t mat's mec - fratram ‘%t soroy meay + diumq, aii-
cefloy - Hui? u® eete monachis in elemofina ppetue donaui tra de
Selechirehe - fic' riuulus defeendés a montib; ¢’rit in Gierna ufg, ad riunli
ila q! defeendés de Croffinemara currit in Twoda - * ult cundé riuulii «!
cadit in Gierua + q‘nda pticula fre in? via q° vadit de catiello ad abbathia -
t Gierna videlic3 vers? yetem uilla » Et h dia ita donaui fict meli? hui -
in bofeo - t in plano - t in aq's - Et villa de middelham - * Bothen-
denam - t A‘ldona - fic! meli? hui in Pris * in aq's *t in bofeo - *t in plano .
Et totd ddinid medi de Qalros p mediii vich t p mediti fonté - vig, ad foffa


--- Kelso1_page116.png ---
£ LIBER DE CALCHOU.

t fict fofta dinidit cadés 1 Twoda « Simitr in Pris tin aq's 7 in bofco 7 in
plano - Et in Sproftona vn carneata Pre - % decd acras - % ynd mayfura
carucate ptinété » Et jn Berewyé vna carrucati - t vni maifura Sb ecta ufq,
in Twoda . t dimid vni? pifeat*e . t feptima ptem molendini « t q“draginta
solid de cenfu de burgo p vniiquéq, anni - Et in b’go de Rokefburg yna
maifura - t feptima molendini . t q*draginta folid de cenfu - t feptima
ptem pifcat?e - Et decima cafeoy de can - s + de Galweia - t dimidictaté
corioy coq'ine mee - Et de omiby occifionibs de q'b3 alfam ptem feo -
+ fimitr de unctis - t de fepis - fic' de coriis - *t 6s pelles mitoy t agnoy -
+ decima corioy Enoy t Cuay q’s velt‘rij mei capiét - Et aq’s meas circa
Selechirche cémunes ad pifeand suif pptis pifeatoribs ut meis - t pafturas
meas comunef hdibs fuis ut meis - ~ bofeos meos domib3 fuis faciendis
ad ardendi ut m' - Et jn Anglia in hardingeftrop quae viginti acras de ‘tra
in dominio - fet ci p*tis ad illud dominii ptinentihs . t vna maifurd déinio
ptinenté - t duos bouarios sct q'fq, habet decé acras - t in ultro fex nirgatas
% dimidia de tra * fex maifuras fifas ponte de Norhatune - ‘t q‘nda infula
prati ins“ ponté - t molendina ei’dd ville « Et hee dia sup"déi monafterii
monachis ita libe % pacifice ire ppetuo poflidenda edfirmani - ut m* succe-
dencium nullus nich dino 1 solaf ofoncs ad aie salut exife Pfumat - Hoe
factum cft Henrico Rege regnate in Anglia t Alex® Rege in Scocia -
Johe epo in Glafguenfi ecéa - t Herberto abbate in ead@ abbathia - Hiis
teftibs - Sup“dto Johe efio - Q)atilde comitifla - Henrico filio comitis « Gval-
thelino capellano + Offto eapHo + Alwyno capHo - WiHo nepote comitis -
Roberto de Bruis « Robto de Vinfrinilla » Gualfio de Bolebee « Rofto de
paintona - Cofpat'co fie dalfini - Hugone de Qoruilla - Pagano de braiofa -
Robto corbet +» Reginaldo de Q)ufcampf - Galtio de Lyndefeia « Rofito de
Burnetuilla - Cofpat'eo uicecomite - Cofpat'co filio Aldene - Vehtredo
filio Scot + Qacehus - Colbanns - Gillemichel . Odardo uicecomite de
babenburch + lyulf filio Vhetredi - Radulpho Anglico - Aimaro galleio -

Rofio de lereceft'a - Adam camerario -


--- Kelso1_page117.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 5

Carta Regis Dauid de p'ma fudaée +

2 DAVID dei gfa illuft's Rex Scott « Oimib; {Ce cat's eeclefic filiis  fidelibs fl. s
falf - Nota sit omib3 Plentib * futuris me fundaffe dum fui comes q’ddam
@onaftrium in Selechirche ad abbathiam in honore {8e qarie virgis « + {@i

Johis Ewangelift: « p salute afe mee + t oium aficefloy *t succefioy meoy -

gts +

Sed poftq'm diuina clemé@cia poft obitum fris mei Regis Alexandri succefli in
regni - confilio * ammonicione vetlabilis memorie Jotis cpi Glafg - alioyg.
peera meoy Pdém @onaftinum qr. locus nd erat gueniés abbathie apt Rox-
burgi t‘nituli in ecta be marie v'ginis q° fita eft fap ripa fluminis Twede - in
loco q’ dr Calkon + q’m cetam Robt? {21 Andree ep? in cui? erat epatn p
dei amore t meo coneeflit m’ * eiufdé loci eete abbati - *t monachis - foluta
+ q'etam “t di Sbieccione t exaccione libam - ita +s + ut abbas % @onachi
sup"dée ecée a q’cumg, efio voluerint in Scocia ut in cumb'a crifmma fuii +
oled + t ordinagdm ipius abbis t monachoy ecta ceve fac’menta accipiant +
Ego v® huie ecte in climofina ppetua donani villa de kelch cii suif r°tis dinifis
in tris * in aq's folutam ‘t q'etam *t ab di exaccione libam + rt qeienfetig, in
eadé ecta ‘in folépnitatibg ut in aliis diebs Suicia dei audicro 2 ds offendas
meas t dium q' mech crit ppetue dedi in clemofind -t in Edinham de
wolendino + xij + celd de b'tio q’lib anno + Et de mora de Edynha ad
fodiend cefpites ad faciend igné - a q°da foflato y’d defeend® de ‘dam alia
mora tniiendo recto t"mite illa mora ufq, ad tres magnos lapides ex alta pte
exiftentes + Et in burgo de Roxburg - x1 folid de cenfu unog?q, anno - t ds
ectas t scolas ciufdé burgi cti omib3 cay ptinéciis - et vnii toft inx“ ectam
sti Jacobi - t altum in nono burgo « et ral qf fuit Gaut? cymenta¥ « *t in @o-

lendinis xx - celd? in? farina *t fMmentii - * feptimnd pté pifeature « + in Sprou-

. - 9. . is ©.
ilton” vna carucata tre + t+ x ac’s t maifuras carncate ptinétes - et t’s ac

de p'to ct cetam eiufdé ville - t fra eete ptinent? - Buo Johe epo Glatz
fiml dante t epali auctor® pftmante + Et villa Ranedene ficut ung‘ in meo


--- Kelso1_page118.png ---
6 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

dominio ed meli? habui - in Pris *t in atgs - in paftis de Sprouftofi - t mora
ad fodicnd turuas cOmunes hdib; de Reuedene fict hdib; de Sprouift - Et in
Berewyé una carneata Pre vna maifura earueate ptinenté - inx” eetam fei
Laurécij - % alam maifara in burgo - t - xl fot - de cenfu ei%dé bégi unoq?q,
anno - ‘t dimidia ptem vni? pifeat’e q° voeat® berewyekftreem - t feptima
pté molendinoy +» Et villa de myddilham « ct Bouldene - fict uncg* meli?
hui - in tris - t in bofeo - in aq's - ‘t in plano. Et 3
Lyllefelef? in? alnam *% rinuli q' diuidit rade myddilham « t de Lyllefelene -
% decima molédini ci?dé ville + s « Lyllefelene « t Wythelawe + ei suif r‘tis
dinifis fic ei meli? hui in meo dnio + Et tra de Selkyrke « fiet rinnlus de-
feendés a montib; e’rit in gierwa ufq, ad riunli ill qt defeendés de Croffan-

Os .
" ac’s tre de fritorio

efmer c’rit in Twede - % wt eundé riuuli q' eadit in giernuam - g*dam

ptictam fre in? via q* ven' de eaftello  fup vetem abbiam eadit in eodé
rinulo - t Gierwat vetem villa fict uneg” meli? fui in Pris « in bofeo + in
aq's t in plano - Et aq‘s meas c'ea Sclekirke edmunes ad pifeandi fuis
pp'is pifeatorib; ut meis +  pafturas meas cOmunes fuis hdib; ut incis - *t
bofeos meof domib3 fuis faciendis t ad ardendi ut m' + Et t*ucnlefi ci
fuis r°tis diuifis - fict Vineth e& meli? t pleni? tenuit *t huit - Et craggain
cinfdé ville fict diis abbs Alfwyn? Sée Crucis t Arnold? abbas de kalehou fe
adinuicem ocordaueft + de q’dam caliipnia q° fuit in? cos de ipa Cragga -
cord hiis teftibg - R - abbe de Neubotil - t aliis « Hane & T’uélei dedi pate
ceée de kelchon in efeambiti- x . lib‘tay Preq'in habuerat in hardingefthorit
iux® Norhamtofi q‘m m® acomodatiunt ad mei magni negoeia . Et in
Ronfrin vnii toft -  vnd navim * pifeat?am uni? retis foluta t q'eta -t ab
i exaecde libam . Et deeima aialii * poreoy "t eafeorum de can . de

of

iiij" + eadrez - deilla Galweia q'm viuente Reg Alex? hui p undiquéq, anni -
*t decima cafeoy de Tweddal simitr p uniiquéq, anni - Et medietaté coq'ne
mee t de omibg ceeifionib; meis omitiq, fuceefioy meoy « ita ut ubiciig, und
coriti habtto / habedt conaehi % alii -  simitr de vnctis - % sepiis fict de
coreis + t oms pelles arietii t agnoy - Et deeima corioy Cnoy *t Quay q's


--- Kelso1_page119.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 7

velt‘rij mei capitt + Hos a reddit? coq'ne mee *t occifiond: meay dedi eis p illd
fra tm q'm vinete Rege Alex? fui - Et in karfah vni falina » Et h dia
fup"dG monattii abbi t monacti ita libe + pacifice iure ppetuo poflidenda
cof'maui - vt m* fuecedentiai ns nich ofo nifi solaf ofonef ad aie saluté de
sup'déa ecta exife pfumat - Hiisteftiby « Hent fit Reg - * aliis - Et pea
ectam de Selkirke liam *t qteta fict ele” debet dari « et ocedi + itas s+ g
pda abbes fint capHi mei *t filii mei t succeffoy meoy de Pdéa ecta +

Confirmaé (aleohni regis Sr carta Dauid regis * aliis donaédibs -

3 Maleolm? Rex conf'mat dia sup"déa + *t addit hee - Eeéam videlie; de Sel- sx .
kirke - Ectam ‘% ecllaé sti Qaehuti - Ectam de Waxwelt - Eetam de
Wolle » Ecéam de Inillethan -

Confirit - Regis Wii fris Qaleolmi cidm fueeedés fup edecflionib; aitdictis -

4 Vills % Rex fr ci? ei fuecedés edfirmat dia pdéa - t addit ectam de Dum-
eay ptinéciis inf® burgit %

fres et capella sti Thome in ipo burgo ci omibs
ext” » ‘taddit - Pnoiatas g* Pras +t polfeflides ofis - Ego ecte Be marie de
kelkou - % monach ibid deo Suientib; inure ppetuo pofdendas cdcedo « t hae
earta mea in ppetua elemoiam céf'mo - ut ita life %* q'ete *t honorifice
teneat ‘t poflideat ofis tras fuas *t pofleflides - vnitifa teneméta fia + fiet
alig® ec@a libius - *t qteci?- t honorabili? elemofinam {ua tenet "t poflidet « Ita
ut nemo de hac noiata ecta de kelch + neq, de pofleffionibs ei? - neq
de ulla q° ad ill ptinct aliq’d [fumat exiGe nifi solaf ordes ad falute

animarum +


--- Kelso1_page120.png ---
8 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

\ owen: . © a vat af
Carta Regis WiHmi - ne quis ung’ nami capiat Sr Abbem neq, if’
neq, ex" +

Vids dei gia Rex Scott + Juftit - viet - t oimib3 phis hdib3 toci? Pre sue fot 10.

fa Mando * f'mi? Peipio « ne q's ung® nama capiat fup abbem de kelch
neq, inf neq, ext” tras ei%dt ecée + pufg® ipe abbas ut qinift sui re-
grant? de rectitudie faciéda + t ipi a r'titudie faciéda defecerint + Si q's &
ballinoy ut alioy hoinad meoy huic Peepto meo ptire Dfumpfit in plena
Miam mea ut snecefloy meoy se nottit incidifle - Teft hiis « Nicholao ean-
cellario - Rig de Woruitt - conft - Hugone Ridet apt Edinburg -

Carta Bni Regis Alexandri fup eodm -

Alexand dei gia Rex Scott - Juftit - vieet - %t ofiibs pbis hdibs toci? tre
fue falé » Qandam? ‘t init Peipim’ « ne q's nami capiat fup abbem de
kelch + neq, inf’ + neq, ext® tras eete de keleh - plufy* ipe abbas ut ei*
init’ req'rant? de r'titudie facitda - % ipi de r'titudie faciéda defebint -
Si q's @ ballinoy ut alioy hin meoy hnic Beepto noliro ot*ire pfopferit :
in pleni miam firam + t suceefloy firoy fe notlit incidiffe + fict carta Bui
Reg WiHi pat's firi teftat? - Teft - Rad capHno firo - Thom de Sttuelin clico +
Robto de Rof » Wito de Bruis - Johe de Vallib3 - Witto de Lyndef* ap*
Sclekirke - Decimo die feby - Anno regni dni Reg? + Decimo -

Carta Bui Alki Regis Seoé Sr puileg - t Natiuis firis calipniand -

Alek dei gia Rex Scott + Omib3 pbis hdib3 toci* fre fue cficis * laicis
Sali - Seiatis me gceflifte ec&e ste marie de kelch - t Herfito abbi eitde


--- Kelso1_page121.png ---
ol

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 9

loci oifis eafdé libtates t pfuetudies qs abbtes aficeffores fui ait ipm habu-
eriit t tenuerit + ita bit "t libe fict abbes aficeffores fui eas ung” melius
libins habuerat  tenuerit - Et ubictiq, ex’
natios *t fugitivos hoies fuos inuenit ? illos iufte* sfi dilaébc habeat - Vude

ane . ©
“ ddnia mea i tota tra mea

phibeo f'mit % fap plenarid mea forisfactura ut nemo illos ut catalla faa
fibi iniufte detineat n® ipm ppt hoe ut minifiros ci? iniufte vexet - Toft -
Wil de Bofch CanccH - Walto Olifard Juftit laodoi - Johe de Mackef-
wel - Bernardo de Hauden - Wilt fit Johis ap* Rokefbur& - vicesio die

ap't . Anno regni firi octauo -

Carta Bni Reg Dauid de barofi de Lefm -

Dauid dei gia Rex Scott - Vnilttis fe cete dei filiis % fidelib3 fuis fal -
Sciatis me intuitu dei t p falute aie mee - %t dium aiicefioy t fneeetloy
rta mea co-

meoy + cafilio t Amonicione Johis Glaff cpi dedifie % he
f'mafle abbathie de Kelch q’m fundaui - % abbti *t cqonach
tibs - ilibam % ppetua elemosiam + ecfam de Lefimahag> + * tota lefma-

ibidé deo Snien-

hagu + p fuas r‘tas diuifas - t ea dimodis ptinéciis fuis in bofeo t plano -

in moris -t marifeis - in pafenis "t aq's- in molendinis - * in cetis edificiis
% manfionibs oft*endis in tra fua put cis libtit - Itaq, fllig ofo hoing Hiceat
ras ut polteffides monachoy aliq’? m® occupare u* p ipos - Et uolo ut eafde
tras “t pofleflides ita q'ete t libe ppetutr optineat + fet ego ifie eas ung
libins %& qeci? obtinui * poficdi - solas ordes ad faluté aiay exfoluedo -
Déam u’ ectam Pnoiatus Johes epé ex affenfu toci? cleri fui ad petigm mea
ab 64 cxaeGe *t Sbieccione epali iure ppetuo Pddis abbi t wonach q'eta
clamaut *t liam - fict carta ipius teftat?  coftmat - Itag, abbas  monachi
kalchoenfes de ecéa de lefmahag> fict de cella sua ordinabat + ptorem ‘t
conachos oris t habit? kalchoenfis in ipa succeffiue inftituédo - put loe®
potuit honefte fuftentare + vna ci recepéde paupii p eos t'nfeunciii -
B

fol


--- Kelso1_page122.png ---
10 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Qeiiq, i pp uite ut memb* pictm cnadend ad déam cella gfnGint + ut ini*

9. . . at . es
q‘tnor ernces c'cumfiantes pueilint ob retiencia dei - sti Wachuti {ma
pacé mei do + Hee & carta céfirmata eft - Anno ab incarnaéve dni

ay’. ©*. x1°. iii’. Regni mei + xx° p'mo + cord hiis teft -

Coceflio Wit Reg? de tf Willi Comyne -

9 Vills dei ga Rex Scott . Epis - Abbib3 - Comitibs - Baronib3 - Juttié -
Vicet + ppolitis - Qinift's + + oitibg phis hdibs toci” fre fue eficis t laicis -
falé - Sciant Pfentes t futu¥ me gceflifle deo t ste O° de kalch - *t sto
Wachnto de Lefmahag: t monach ibidé Suientibs - donaéom q'm Wis Comyn
fecit cis de tra illa de q* ot*ufia fuit int cundé Witm Cumyn - t abbim de
kalch + p eafdé diuifas q° cétinent? i carta ci°dé Willi Cumyn - Tenend in

liham %t ppetua clemdam i bofco *t plano - i p'tis t pafeuis - % ofib3 aliis

+ ad pata tra ptinentibs + Ita libe ‘t q'ete » plenarie "t honori-
fice fict carta Pnominati W. Cumyii « teftat? + Saluo fuicio meo - Teft -

aifiamtti

Vi tra de Left + st liba foretta -

10 Alex di gia Rex Seottoy + Oiiibs phis hdibs toci? tre fue falé + Seiatis q
cdceflim? p'ori t cSucntui de Lefmahag? ut tota tra fud de Lefmahagn heant
in libum forefté inppetua - Q're {mit phibem! ne q's sfi coy licencia in Pdza
fra fua fecet ant venet? fap jiram plenaria forisftnra decé libray - Teft> -
pat'cio comite de Dumbar « W. Olifard Juftié laodonie ap* Lanaré - vii.
x°, die aii + Anno regni dni Reg? + xx°i -



--- Kelso1_page123.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. ll

Donat Vitti Reg: eccte de Dunfres -

11 Vits Rex dat nob ectam de Dunfres ci caplla sti Thome i ipo burgo -

a

tofta ad ipam capella ptinente « Et q'nq, ac‘s fre cidé cce® ptindtes - ita ne
liceat nob ecéam illa sine capella - t « cay redditus ab opadde cec® fire + *t
ppiis ufibs fFum q’q°m? alienare + Et pftmat ei’dé Reg donii + Jocclin? epé
Sb cadé for" - Ite Laurenci? clic? p decimis de kars eid? ecte de Dunfres
ptinétibs reddet ap’ Kalch ad niidinas de Roketburg singlis annis vite fue
duos folid . 1é Radulph? fit Duncgat dat cidé ecée q'ndi tra in Dunfres q*
s* pt cognofei - Due nie fepant ab inuicé inf® uilla q*y p altam itur ad
ectam sti Blaani - alta n° peedit ap* orient®  ceuit rupé q'nda q° nocat®
greneham - % s° p q‘nda semit& relitit? ad candé ui de q® peeflit - Tota
u? tra q° iacet in? has uias dei eft t Pndiaté ecto - Ite Ada filins Henrici
de Dunfres ex affenfu - ) + sponfe sue dat nob has tras noiati q's ex
legitia eméde fua adq'finit in burgo de dunfres - videlié ‘tras q's Rob
lokeflmyth + % Waltus fit Wille - % Rob Scot - * Rog Sutor -  Walfus
carnifex + t Radulph? ineator +t Alan? fit Emme « t Ada Sufifwain « t
Alan? de bodha « de se tenueriait + Et refignaut in man? jiras totii ins ‘t
dottiti Gd i Pris habebat -

Carta Reg: Wiki Sr fadat -

2 Vitts dei gia Rex Scoté . Epis - Abbtib; - Comitib; - Baronibs - Juiti¢ -

vicecomi - Ppofitis , @inift's -  omibs pbis hdibs toci? tre fue - elicis * laicis
falé - Noilint offts ta Pfentes q* futu® pie momoric - DD Regé Scott auum
mei di comes fuit fundatle q‘ndam abbathiam ap" Selekirke in honore ste
di genet'cis u'ginis marie - t sti Johis ew“ngt p falute aie sue - *t pat's
mat's fue ffumq t soroy snay diumg, aiicefloy fuceefloyg, fuoy - S3 peg®


--- Kelso1_page124.png ---
12 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

dina clemécia p® obiti fris fui Alex* ei fucceflit in regnit cotilio t amonidoe
ucilabit @emorie Johis tic glafguentis epi + t peeri suoy dm timeneia Pdzam
abbaciam ap* Rokefburg qr loc? erat grnencior t‘nftulit - i eeéam be Marie
u'ginis q° fita Left] {up ripa flutis Twede i loco q* dr Kalch + Q‘m ectam
Rob epe
libam Ge cdceflit - Ita +s + ut abbas *t monachi sup"dée ecée a q’etig, epo
uoltint in Scocia - t in Cumbia crifma fui *t oled "t ordinacdm ipoy abbati
% @onachoy + *t ecta fe ece® factmenta accipiant + Hane libtaté ett aliis

sti Andree i cui? erat efiatu p dei amore t suo ab di efiali Sbieceide

liftatibs * poffefidib; q's ex lifitate aui mei rey - BD « pat's mei comitis
Henrici - Regis Qaleolmi fiis mei fii mea poffident + eis q*ntii_ ad me
ptinet inppetuii pecdo - t poteftate regali in ppetua eleiam cof'mo - Vide-
lies uilla de kalch ci fuis r‘tis diuifis in tris - % in aq's foluta "t q'et - tab
di exacéde liham + % q‘nda tra q’m Geroldus dedit iux* diuifas ipius uille -

idsetq, in ipa eck

q ‘tra defeend' in nia qf itur ad Neythanefthirn « Et q

7 solempnitatib; t aliis dieb3 Suiciit di audiero offis oftendas meas - "t offiium

qi meeii eriit ipi eee pftmo + Et in Hedenham de molendino + xii celdr’s
de b'lio unoquog, anno - Et de mora de Hedenha ad fodiendi petas a q’da
foflato q’d defeendit de q"da alia mora t*nfeundo r‘to t*mite ila mora - ufq,
ad tres magnos lapides ex alta pte exiftentes + Et in ritorio ei%dé uille ex

dono pagani de boffeuilla una bouata fre» Et in b’go de Rokefiurg qd

ginta sot de cenfu unog’q, anno - Et una tofté inx“ eetam sti Jacobi - t

9. - 5 On ee Oo oh woelaw
altam i nouo b’go - ‘t tra que fuit Gauti cimentarii + Et ectas ipfi

s burgi
cfi tra fna + fie! ung" agcllin? archid eas meli? t libius huit + Et dimid tofta
q® fuit Aculfi - Et in molédinis - xx" celdr‘s in? farina "t framenti - Et
ptem septima pifcat’e - Et in Sprouftona una carncata fre tx + acs %
caifnras carucate ptinétes - t tres ac’s de p"to - Et ectam ei*dem uille - *
tra ece® ptinétem - t iuxé pitetbrige duas bouatas fre q's dedi cis i efeambio
duay bouatay q‘m m accomodatiunt qonachi de tra ece® fei Lanréeii de
Berewié - Et uilla de Reucden in frist in aq's - Et pafturas de Sprouftona +
% moras ad fodiend t’uas cémunef hdibs de Renedenna fic' hdib3 de Sprouf-

fol 12.


--- Kelso1_page125.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 13,

tona - Et una carucata fre de haudena ci crofta t tofta in ead@ uilla ex
donaéde Waldepii - Et in Berewié una carucata fre +t vn maifurd carn-
cate ptinenté - inx* ecéam sti Laurencii - % aléam maitura in burgo + Et xl -
sot de cenfu ei’dé burgi unoqnoq, anno + Et dimid pte uni? pifcat?e q®
uocat’ berewitftreme + Et feptima ptem molédinoy + et tram Dodini i
eadé uilla » Et tra Walclini filii Erebaldi + Et uilla de iddilha t de
Botheldeii efi fuis r‘tis diuifis + in ris t in aq's + in bofeo * in plano .
xxx" ac’s re de fritorio Lillifdlef in? alna *t rinula q' dividit ra de Qedil-
ham % de Lillefeline t decima molendini ipins uille - s + Lillefeliue - * Whyte-

lau +t Whytemere cit fis r‘tis diuifis - Pra de Selekird efi fuis rtis dinifis i
{ris - in aq's - *t i bofco ti plano « Et aq’s meas cea Selekir@ edimunef ad pit-
cand fuis pptis pifeatorib3 ut meis + Et bofeos meos domib; fuis faciend « t ad
ardend ut m' - Et ecéam altius Selekirche ca dimidia carneata tre t cetam %
fra de Lefmahag cii fuis r'tis diuifis - Et tuerlen ci fuis r‘tis diuitis « sient
Vincth ef meli? t pleni? tenuit *t habuit + ci

5 tifiamétis uicinifcoodre ¢ q°d
eameri dr - Et c’ggham eiufdé uille sic' dompn? abbas Alfwyn? ste crucis «t

Ernald? tiie abbas de kalchou se adinuicd edcordatiunt - de (da calipnia q*
fuit in? cos de ipa c%gga cord hiis Teft - Rad Abbe de Neubotil » WiHo abbe
Sttuelyn de - Offto prore deJeddeword - Riz clico « Wachebet « Hane a t'uer-
len dedit auns meus pave ceée de kalch + in excambiii - x + libray tre qm
huerdt in hardégafthorn iux* Norhamtoun + Et in Renfru vna tofta. t vna
navim - “t pifeatura vni? retis foluta t qetd - % ab Oi ofnetudine lifam « Et in
Edinburg vnd tofta + Et in Hadingtot vna tofta - Et in Jedd vna tofta -
Et in Pebt vn tofta - Et in Lanart - yna tofta + Et ecelefiam de Keth -
Et dimid segimen cf

fioy q' in ford applicue*t - Et deciam afalid t poreoy -
* cafeoy de can + Et de q*tuor cadred de Galweia q‘m uinéte Rege Alex’
auus fis hnit p uniiquéq, anni + Et decima cafeoy de Tweddale singlis
annis simitr - Et dimidietaté corioy coq'ne mee + ‘t dium occifiond meoy -
ita ut ubiciq, ego ut aliq's fuccelioy meoy unit corid hucrit - heant
@onachi alfum - Et simitr de unetis * de sepis fic' de coriis - + offis pelles


--- Kelso1_page126.png ---
it LIBER DE CALCHOU.

arieti t agnoy « %t decima corioy Guoy * Guay q’s uclt‘rii mei capiét » Hos
A reddit’ coq'ne mee * occifioni meay habebit conachi p illa tra tm q’m
uiuente Rege Alex® auus fis huit + Et in Kars vna salina peca q‘nti ad
me fpectat oeedo + t oftmo ecée Pnoiate - ex donaéde Comitis Compa-
tricii ectam de Home ci duab3 earucatis Pre + % ca pTto uno in Pritorio
cinfdé uille « Et ectam de ffoggon ci una carucata fre - Et ectam de
Grenclaue ca fra ad eandé ptinent + *t capella de Lambedena + Ex dona-
@e Herbti de Wacenfwel + cctam de Waceufwel - Ex donage Hie * pet*
filii ei? ecéam de Symp'ng + Ex donade Rogi de Oy ectam de Langetune
eit omibs ad eam ptinentibs « Ex donadde Rogii fit Willi ec@am {ti Lauré-
cii de Berewyé + Ex donaée Walti Corbet « ectam de Walcaruiftofi + ci
una carneata fre » Ex donaéde Vetredi de Wolla + ectam de Molla ei ra
ad e& ptinéte - Ex dona@de Wifche - ectam uille fue - Ex donaéve Wiki
finemad ectam de kambufnaythan . Ex donaéde Rig Cumyn ectam de
Lyntonrotherick + P*noiatas gt Pras *t pofteffices des - ego ecte be marie
viginis de kalch t monachis ibidé deo Suientib3 inre ppetuo poflidendas ocedo
+ he carta mea i ppetua eleiam cof'mo ut ita libe q'ete *% honorifice tenedt
%t poffidedt ds ras fas *t poffeflises + *t unitia teneméta sua « fict aliq® jot. 1.
eeta libius  q'ecins et honorabili? clemoias fuas tenet * poflidet « Ita ut
nemo de h‘e noiata ecta de kaleh - neq, de pofleffidibs ei? neq, de ulla re
qf ad ea ptinet aliq'd pfumat exiffe n' solas ordes ad aie faluté - Hiis Tefti-
b3 + Idem p oinia dicit Qaleolm? fF ci? ¢ fait Rex afi ifm - nich oo addens

aut subtrahens -

Cofirmae - Re& Wikm &r donaé - aiicefloy « s «

13 Vits dei gia Rex Scott - Efiis- Abbib3 + Comitibs + Baronibs - Jufti¢ -
vicecomitib; + Ppofitis - @inifl's « % offib; pbis hdibs toei’ fre fue elericis
laicis faluté » Noftint ds ta fut’? q” pfentes me cdcefliffe *t pfeti carta mea


--- Kelso1_page127.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 15

coftnafle p falute aie Regis PD aui mei . Et comitis Henrici pat's mei t p
falute aie mee - %* dium aiicefloy *t succefloy meoy + deo t ecte fee Qarie
de Kalch + * monachis ibidé deo Suientibs 1 lifam ppetua clemofina ds
tfas t cefas pofieffises fuas q's hnerat t tenuerat i tépe Regis Danid aui
mei - Et i tépe Q)aleolmi fris mei - Tenédas p eafd libtates *t r°titudies p
q's ipi eas ung® meli®  pleni?- libins * q'eci? tennerat "t poflederiit - Cocedo
X dee ecte {ee Marie de kalch - *t ei’dé loci @onachis - vt hoies fui q' in
kaleho fit manttes dib3; dicbus scptimane ex"? die ftatuto fori mei de
Rokefburg licencia heant vendendi i uilla {ua focale * matiom ‘t annonam -
Et t*nfeuntes licencia teant eis ifta vendendi - Neant % ipi hoies fui
licencia uendendi i feneft's fuis pand *t Suicia + *t carnes - Si & pifeé i suis
pp'is q“drigis ut q's attulerint ct inde uenie volilint in feneft's snis lieeat
cis uende + Qdrige 4 aliunde veniétes - t piude t‘nfeuntes - nd ibi exhone-
rét . neq, ibi uendat + s3 ad foy mei ueniat + Die & fori mei ftatuti de
Roketburg nd liceat cis q’equam cie i uilla sua + 83 ad fori mei ueniat -
t ibi cialis burgenfib3 meis q° nolitint emant - p rtas ofuctudies fuas . Dedi
%t cdcefli Pnoiatis monachis ad nfus t opacdem ipius cete de kalchou
cetam de Dunfres cit tris t decimis % oiodis oblagdibs - t eit capella sti
Thome i ipo burgo - t ci tofta ad ipam capella ptindte - t ei q'ng, ac's tre
q's cidé cet * capelle i lifam elediam dedi.  p Philippi de Valonis t'di
s+ Ita ne liccat alicni cetam illa

feci - t ci omibs aliis ei? eete iuftis ptinc
uf capella aut cay reddit? siue biificia ab opacbe eee de Kalch *t pp's ufibs
@onachoy q’qno m? alienare - Et capella eaftelli de Pebles et carueata Tre
ad ipam ptindte + "t ci redditn x folid de {ma burgi de Pebles que Rex
DBP auus iis cidé capelle aflig“uit ad dinind cflicié i ea ppetuo celebrandi
p ala comitis Henrici firis mei - Ita t q pfati oonachi ibidé ydoned *
pule‘m capell faciét t innenizt ibi honefia ornam@ta ceviattiea t eapellaniit 4
in ea p aia comitis Henrici ppetno miniftret - Et ectam de Cultir inx‘
Aberden ci omib3 ad ipam ectam infte ptinétib; - Et unit tof i hadingtoi
*t tra illa g? eft inx* tofta ili Pius for de ¢ solebam fie singlis annis - iii" -


--- Kelso1_page128.png ---
16 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

denarios + Cécedo 7 cis t cdftmo anuati t*fdecim vaceas ‘“t totidé porcos de
cano meo de tra q'm Dunenaldi tenét p excambio reddit? q*'m pai monaebi
folebant tre de eano + de tra qm Rad filius dune - %t dune fF fuus tenfiunt t
de fra q'm Gillepat'ek f¥ eoy tenuit in Glencham + Et ut loca uafti mei de
Selckyreke ad que t“nfiuli hoies meos de Elrehope fie' de pochia uille mee
de felech « % ds i illis locis hitantes ci vnitilis poffeftioibs fais fint int@dentes

ad ectam de Selekirke tang‘ ad mat'cem cetam fua - Et fi forte edtigrit q
i eifdé locis mat'x ecta ant capella fundata ftit e& ed dibs iuftis ptindciis fuis
do + t edcedo deo “t Pfate ec&e kalehoens « *t ei?dé eee @onachis 1 liham
ppetua clemoiam - Et ex donade pie @emorie reX Walcolmi fris mei eetam
de Innerlethan - Et ex donadge comitis PD fris mei ectam de Kamfy et eeGam
de Altminim in Lenenanf - Et ex donaéde Wii finemund ectam de kam-
bufnaythan + Et ex donaéde Rig Cumin eetam de Lytonrotherié - Et ex

donacione Wice ectam de uilla Wice efi eapellis suif - Et ex dono ferg®

Wackabard ectam de Dunfyer ea eapellis ‘tris *t detis t omibs aliis pdtay

ectay initis ptindeii

+ ita libe qtete « plenat + t honorifice fie' earte donatoy
*t aduocatoy eis donat t edfmant -*t sie earta Joect glaf% epi eis edf*mat -
Et ex donacione Hug Ridel eetam de Cranefiun - cf tra ad ca ptinéte
cit dibs aliis iuftis ptinéeiis fais - Et ex donagde Ettardi de pencathelad «
eetam de pencathelad ci dibs iuftis ptineiis fuis - Et ex donacde
Walti de carnoto ectam de T“verflet t eetam de Dungrey + ett dibs cay
inftis ptinéeiis - Et ex donagde Rad de Clere ec&am de Caledouer + qf fuit
eidé Rad de Clere + efi omibs aliis r‘tis ptinéciis fuis - Et ex donacve Hug
sii manicis ectam de wortun i fi‘hnith et ma carucata fre ‘t ed dibs. aliis
inttis ptinéciis fuis- Et ex douace W

ide Kunygburg + ee@am de Stapel- yy vs.

- Ps)
gorton + ci capellis « tri

+ Con-
mo ~ / ~ ert eqs,
cedo % eis t edftmo und carucata tre 1 uilla de Handena p eafdé divilas - p

+t deeimnis + *t omib; aliis inftis pti

q's ca buerit afig® linaldus fii? Briani hui

5 pd@am Haudene - ci dibs
dinifas ipi? carucate fre » Et vna tofta i Pd@a uilla de Haue-
dene libam % qeta ab di Suicio - Et hoiem illoy q' sup tofta ila sedebit

auliamét


--- Kelso1_page129.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. vs

libum * q'eté ab di Yuicio %t alia edfuctudie sict carta Bernardi teflat? -
Et duas bouatas Pre i fritorio de Wolle fs efchina de Londoniis eis dedit -
~ pafi?am - t alia aifiaMta J uilla de Molle - sie‘ carta efchine tefiat? « Et fox
bonatas tre i fritorio de Brockefmuth - qs WiHs de Worewill - t Rob de
Landeles t uryel yxor einfd Rob eifdé monachis dederiit % edftinancriit -

Et donadm fealigay illay q°s Wits de vete ponte eis dedit -  earta fua
edf'mauit - Et fealingas de bothkil - p r°tas dinifas fuas - ita plenarie - libe -
t q'ete - fict Cofpat'ci? comes « illas cis dedit * carta fua c6f'mauit - Et ex
donaée pic memoric re& Qalcolmi fris mei - vnii toftii i Ruthirglen « Et
donagm q’m Waltns Corbet fecit cis de ceta de Qalearwilton® - de
omib; einfd cee’ iuftis ptinéciis - t dibs Cris - "t potteflioibs *t libtatibs - q's ide
Waltus Corbet Pnoiatis oonach de Kalch donauit - fic’ carta ci? teftat? + faluo
Suigo meo - Et yn bonata fre i Spronifion - q'm Rad de ueir eis dedit -
fict carta ci? teftat? « saluo Suicio meo - Et i fritorio de Molle cota tra + *
ptum t nem? . t toti Honloches hon - i bofco t plano - t pati’a- ext® una act
Tre+ q'm afelin? dedt W + cemétario. Q’? pdés Anfelin’ de Molle dedit pdée
eete Kalchoeii - t q? Rig de Lines - t Qatild filia t heres legia ci°d@ Anfelini

cidé cece cOccferiit + carta fua cdf'matunt - Tenend p diuifts Pnoiatas in
cartis Patoy Anfelini - Rié de Lines - t Qatild filie Anfelini fict carte coy
teftant? « saluo Suicio meo - Et i tritorio de Lefmahag donaddm illa qm
Wilts Cumyn - fecit cis de fra illa de g” cont*tifio fuit in? eund® Wim
eumyn + t abbem de Kalch + Tenend p eafdé diuifas q° edtinent® in earta
ei°dé Wii cumyn - fie‘ earta ei’ tefta® - saluo Suicio meo + Et ex donacoe
Symonif ffrafe¥ cetam de Keth - q° fuit ci°dé Symonif- ct ‘tra ad candé eeZam
ptin@te p dinifas nojatas i carta pdzi Symonis firafer - t efi dibs ci’de ecto
is - sict carta id Uti Symonis teftat® « faluo Suicio meo - Preta

iuftis pting

cdeedo ‘t fmit Peipio ut abbas de Kalch "t ci’dé loci @onachi tencat ’t

habedt inppetuii tra de yf cont*tifia fuit int cos % Monachos de Welros + p

easdé diuifas p q's ila tenflunt - Anno *t die q® rex Danid anns iis fuit

uiuus % mortuus- Ita ut n® erga cos n® aliq’m alia inpoffum intrent in
ce


--- Kelso1_page130.png ---
18 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

placita de dinifis illis - neq, de fra fiue de bofeo q? inf* dinifas illas fait -
phibeo % f'mi? ne q's eif inpoftum iniuria inde faciat fup mea plenaria
defenfionem + Pnoiatas ig? {ras offis « & ectas + % cay capllas +t oifis cay
Pris « dedis « *t dibs cay inftis ptinGeiis t r'titndinibs Bnoiate
ic de Kalch . t pptis ufib; & suftentadbib; @onachoy ibidé deo

obuendes
ecte fée QO):
Suiencium i libam t’ppetua clemofina concedo - ‘t pfenti carta mea conf'mo -

~ Oyen, a) x. = at + . Sn ee + + 9)
ut des Pdéas tras - ‘t ecéas - t tencméta cit Sib; inftis ptin’ciis fuis - ita libe -

qrete - plenarie « t honorifiee heant - i libam % ppetua elemofina poflideat

fie' ali
cenci? hnt *t poflidét - Et fict carte donatoy t aduocatoy pdtay Pray fine

ectay eifdé monachis donit t cdfirmat - faluo Suicio meo de illis de q'b3

alias elemofinas i regno Scott - libius - q'eci? - pleni® - * houorifi-

Suiciai de iure re debeo - Hiis Teft> -

Parte, one Oe a na
Carta Reg> Wii Sr - iii - caruc’ - tre T edinh“m -

14 Vills di gia Rex Scott - Epis Abbatib; - Comitibs - Baronibs - Juft> + viee-
comitibs + ppofitis . Qinift's « t dih3 pbis hdibs toci? Pre fue licis layeis -
falé. Sciant Pfentes t futut me dediffe % geefliffe « fe carta mea cdf"maffe
do t ecto ste Wat de Kaleh « % moi - ibid do Suient % Snitu¥ - i liam
pura « t ppetua clemoiam - t*f carucatas tre i Pritorio de edenham - fie! Er-
kenbald? abbas de Dunf'nclyn eis p Beeptii mei tWdidit « duas « s - % dimid
ppinqfores diuitis Pre fue de Kalch « ab aq'lonari pte petarie de hedenha -
Q tra tendit a petaria px’ loco iux* dinifas coyd Monachoy - vfq, ad dinifas
de Neuton - et p dinifas auft‘les de Neuton - ufg, i Edene « Et s° p Edene

ufq, ad ponté nadi - ab occidétali pte de Edenham - Et inde ? i uid q ducit
Vins hofpitale - ufq, ad fureat?am uie q® ucnit ab aq'lonari pte petarie - Et
s p candé uia - ufq, ad ptmi loci Pnominate diuife « Et paftam eui?da ptidle
Pre gf eft in? diuifas de Kalch « % jld@am petaria . Ita ut monach heant
paft2am eiufd fre - + hoies mei de Edenham heant ayfiamenta ipi? Pre ad


--- Kelso1_page131.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 19

expandenda ibi petas fuas - Et dimid carucata fre ab orientali pte q‘verie
ipfoy monachoy int q‘tuordeci ac’s fre q’s hint ex dono pagani de bofeuil -
t Pram inftnoy - *t int petaria % uid que tendit uers’ uadi de Sprouift «
pifeat’am in Tweda ? que ptinebat ad Edenham « a diuifis de Kalch - vfq, ad
diuifas de b'gham - pd@as a t°s carucatas fre * pifcatZam dedi cis i efcambit
- xx" celdray f*menti ‘t farine - de illa menfura q fuit tempe regis BB aui
mei + q"s padi qonachi fire folebat i molédino tio de Rokefburg> - Et i
efeambiu t'um mareay q's hre solebat de {ma burgi nei de Roketburg> ,
Et i efeambin - xij™- celdvay bhi - q's hre solebat de molédino meo de
Edenha - cx dono PP regis aui mei» Q're volo + finif peipio ut plati
qonachi pifatas tres carucatas fre « et Pdéis dinifis t Pdcam pifeat’am heant
t tenedt » i libam - pura - *t ppetud clemofina - ita libe + q'ete + pacifice «
honorifice - fic' alias clemoias i regno meo + libins + q'eci? + pleni? - t honori-
fieei? tenét %t poflident + Cocefli a platis conach + q fi molédini coy de
Kaleh aut pp? inundades aquay + aut pp? gelu molere no poflit « ut aliq?
cafu fraéti fit ¢ ut molat ad molendind mei de Edinham bladi Gd cretit
fup tra pnoiaté de Edinham - t eoy uiétii lihe “t abfq, mult?a « pximi?
ad Hd q’d fait fup tremyl + nt filit dnieum blada mei - ita in ut ad
uitanda@ g*uamé hoium meoy de Edinha + né nifi p tref aut q‘tnor dics
ibi @onachi infimt molant - Cocefli % cis ut liceat ipis libe - * abfq,
Mitra blade q’d fup Pdéam Pram crellit 2 q? uoliiint afportare + Iiis

teft> -

Coftmat - Bni Alex* Reg? - de libtatibs *t cdfuet +

falé + jot as.

15 Alek dei gia rex Scoté - Omib3 pbis hdib; toci’ Pre fine clicis *t laici
Sciatif me cdcefliffe ecte se Qarie de Kaleh - % H*berto abbi ei’
eafdé libtates *t cdfuctudies q's abbes aiiceffores fui aii ipm tuerat . +
tenueriit - ita bi - t libe - fict abbes aficeflores fui cas uncg* meli? « *t libius

loci ds



--- Kelso1_page132.png ---
20 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

habueriit t tenuerit - Et ubiciiq, ex* dominia mea i tota ‘tra mea natinos t
fugitiuos hoies fuos inuenit ? illos iufte t {ii dilaéde heat - Vude phibeo
fini? - %t fup mea plenaria forisftura - ut nemo illos ut catalla fua iiufle de-
tineat n® ipm ut @iniftros ci? ppe be iniufte veset - Tet -

Carta Regis Alexandri ne quis namum capiat fuper Abbatem -

Alex dei gta rex Scoté - Juft> « vieeco - t ofiib3 phis hoibs toci’ re fue
falf « candam? *t fit Peipim? ne q's nami capiat sup abbem de Kaleh -
neq, inf neq, ext* ras ecte de Kaleh - p'ufg® ife abbas - ut cinift' ei?
reqrant® de r‘titudie faciéda + "t ipi de r‘titudie facitda defebint « Si q's &
baliuoy + uf alioy héini froy Inc | Pepto iro pt*ire pfumpfit 2 i plena fhiam
firam + ut suceetloy firoy se notlit incidifle + sict carta dni regis WiHi pat's
iri teftat? - Teftibs +

Carta Alex' Regis de cent solid in burgo de Roxburgh peipiend -
s g gh pelp

7 Alex dei gia Rex Scott - Omib3 pbis hdibs toci? fre sue clicis *t laicis falé »

Sciant pfentes * fut’ nos diuine caritatis intuitu + p falute aie fire dedifie
cdcefliffe - Le carta fira cdfmafie deo t ee@e Marie de Kalch « t won - ibid
do Suient + t inppetud Suituf - cent sot + singlif annis peipiendos de fma
burgi firi de Rokefburg - i cfeambiti vaeeay t porcoy - t corioy q's folebat
peipe in ualle de Nyth + Et iefeabium corioy - % sepoy de Karrié + % i
efeabid corioy "t sepoy de oceifide aialium ad op? nfm fea ex auft‘li pte
maris Scocie + Et i efeambidi dium elemofinay - *t libtata - % pellia arietii t
agnoy + t omit alioy aialia déos Monachos cdtingenciit in domo %t coq'na
fira + Q*re volum? 9 *t Peipim? ut Ppaiti firi de Roketburg singlis annis déis
aonach hre faciat patos conti sot ad pentecoft> - Teltibs -

deletur.


--- Kelso1_page133.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 21

Ad balliuos suos de deis « ¢ « ¥ foluéd «

18 Alex dei gia Rex Scott - ppofitis fuis de Rokefburg - falé « adam? vob *t
q@onachis de kalchou

Peipim? - q*tin? de f'ma burgi fri de Rokefburg
singlis annis ad fmina Pentecoft: hire faciatis centit folidos q’s cis dedim? ;
efeambiit elemofinay fuay + Et phibem? f'mi? ne aliq' dtis monach + dos
conti folid « ult® dem tmina detinere pfumat - Et 7 hui? rei teftimonid has
tras jiras patétes uob t‘nfmittim? - Teftib; -

De céi°uerfia in? nos % ipos de Welros p Wiltm Regem -

19 Vills dei gfa rex Scott » Epi
vicecoiti - pofitis - @inifi’s - t omibz pbis hdibs toci?

+ Abbtib3 - Comitib; - Baronib:
fre fue falé - Seiat

Tull + yor v6.

pistes t futtiq ci cotrowia p Miltos annof duraff; in? domos de Kalch -

de Qelro¥ + de diuifis in? Welros « %t boulden « tram @onachoy de Kalch -
tandé dns p*p* - ecleftinus p tras suas m* significaut - t i remiflioné péGoy m*
iniunxit ut fa diligenti ing'fiéde de diuifis illis - q°d iufta e inq'rerem ¢
ptibs aflignare « Johs % T'T" sti Stphi 7 celio monte pibid eardinalis « dum
legadde funZet? in fra mea me inftan? inde peat? eft « % auctoritate aay id

m! iniixit - Tandé ueni ap* Welros + anno ab incarnage dni - w°

t laicis ci Smo fierct de diuifis iH «

i odtanis epiphie - plentibs Tiltis elicis
Wids q' tite fuit abbas de Q)clros - habito tractatu t cdfilio p cdfenfa couent”
+ et Ofbert? abbas de Kalch p confenfi capli fui cépmiferiit i me * affida-

fe
ueriit gq ftarent déo meo fup diuifis iH « Et q id q°d ego sedi ing'fiGoem

mea inde diem? ex ut'que pte fit *t imuiolabilit - tenerét - Cig, p%ea
diligent@ inq'figicem p pbos * antiq’s hoies pat'e inde feciffem : pties i
Sfeneia mea guenire feci « Tandé v a 4 Selesehir

pfencia mea ptes cduenire teci - Tandé venerit ad me ap" Seleschirche - anno
+ die dnica p? claufi pafeha - t ibi i plena

ab incarnaGbe dni « ce? + iiij


--- Kelso1_page134.png ---
20

1p

2 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

curia sentencitdo pniciaui - ftentibs cficis + laicis q fra illa unde cdtrowtiia
erat + {uit @onachoy de Kalch - t Ge debuit de iure + p dinifas illas - p q‘s
» suam + s+ p nem? qd feiffa fuit in?
domos illas p Regem Dauid aut mei - t p supficiem métis i cui? fimitate

@onachi de Kalch afferebat tra i

fecit foffas fieri - t h° fuit uerG d@m mei q°d inde dixi- ‘t de inre dre debui
p teftimoniai pboy %t antiq’y hdini pat'e - Volui 4 ut monachi de Kalch -
cdcedent conachis de Welro¥ inppetut duas bouatas fre-t duasac’s pti-t
palt’as ad - ceec + ones § hebat idé monachi de Kalch - i p*nwveneflete - t h°
cdceflerat dei monachi de kalchon - t h® m? Eminata fuit h logla die illa -
Qe uolo *t Peipio qtin’? dinife pdée sict Plata eft Mmi t inniolabitr fut%is

B A we ee ge ep ae ae .
tempib3 tencant® - ‘t ne ptécio ultiuf Sr diuifas iH nt pPdtas domos andiz

Tetir -

Cart « Reg « Haleoliti - de tofto in Ruglene «

Malcolm? Rex Scott - Dapito suo t vicecomiti de Cludefilale « + omib; aliis
pis hoibs s
% fe Warie de Kalch -  @onachis ibid deo Suientibs t in poftum Suitur
ynii tofta in burgo meo de Ruthirglen plenariti tenenda - Ita libe- t q'te- sie*

nif toci? Pre sue - Salé - Sciatis mei ppetua elemoiam deditfe deo

ipi aliq’d toftiialiq? alioy burgoy meoy libius - t q'eci? tenet + Hiis tefi- -
Deinde dat nob ead libtate q’ddam tofti i Inuerkethin i alia carta «

Qalcolm? Rex Sr ec&a de Ynirlethan -

QYalcolm’ rex Scott - Epis- Abdbibs . comitib;- baronibs « Juft- - vicecom -
ppofitis - minift's - eunétisq, aliis pbis hdib3 toci* fre sue - sal - Seiat efici
t laici Pfentes ‘t pofti me i libam % pmanenté elemofina dediffe *t h*e carta
mea pf"mafie deo - t ecte ste Warie de Kalch t - moi - ibid do Suientib;


--- Kelso1_page135.png ---
aw

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 23

cetam de Infilethan et dib3 r*titudibg fuis t ptincciis - Tenéda ita libe «+
qete - sic’ aliq® ecéa i regno meo libius + *t q'ecius + tenet? - *t poflidet? -
Precipio % ut dea de Intilethan ecta i q' p'ma notte corp? filij mei p? obitit
sui qeuit + vt tant refugia heat i di tritorio suo q‘ntii habet Wedale aut
tynigham - %t ne aliq’s ita sit tefins 2 ut pact pdée ecée *t mea + sup uitam
 memb* sua / audeat violare -

Sk Eceta de Cultre -

Vilts dei fa rex Scott + Omibs phis hoib; toci? tre sue salt - Sciat fifentes
*t futu® me dediffe * pcefliffe «t hte Plenti carta of fle deo t ecte ste Marie
de Kalch - t eof - ibid - do Suit? - ectam de kultre ins" Abirdene -
tenenda i liam % ppetua clefam - cit dedis  oblagvibs oiodis « *t ea dibs
aliis ad ipam eetam iufte ptindtibs + Ita libe + qtete + plenarie *t honorifice
sic alias cc@as *t elGoias fuas « libius - q'eci? - pleni? « t honorifictei? + tenet
*t poflident - Hiis Teftibs -

Danid Rex & cecta de Sprontt> -

Eczam de Sprouftoa dat nob rex DD efi tra ad candé ptinéte - Pno Johe
Glaf% epo sil dante t cof*mate - peea idé rex dat nob i eadé uilla yna
carucata tres Et» x + ac’s ‘t caifuras carucate ptindtes - *t tres ac’s de p'to +
Et Reuedene cii suif r'tis dinifis sie’ e& ung* meli? i suo ddio huit - i tris 7
aq's + et pafi?as de Sprouiftoii - *t mora ad faciend tnruas communes hdib; de
Reuedene sie* hdibs de Sprouifioh - Ite. Rex dat nob i eadé uilla dnas bo-
natas tre inx® pitetbrige + jn efeambio duay bouatay re i Bereuuyeh q's ei
ad sui magnit negociti accomodauim? « sic i carta sua teftat? « Ite Serlo clic?
dni Walcolmi Reg? dat nob % carta sua conftmat dimid carucati tre T cad


--- Kelso1_page136.png ---
24 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

uilla de Sprouiftofi q’m dedit ci + Malcolm? Rex diis suuf- saluo Suicio
ipius regis + s+ qbsdam calearib3 deauratis singlis annis - Et carta ci’dé
regis q'm dedit et Sr eandé fra penes nos tem? + If Rad de uair dat nob
und bonata fre i cadé uilla + Qe uidelics fra iacs px? loco inx* fra q‘m dedit
vmfrido hai suo - Et hane bouata conftmat - W - Rex sufficien? . Ite
Euftachi? de Vefey - t Wargareta uxor ei? - s - filia Willi regis cofimat os
fras « pofleflises « paft’as - inra - liftates « ta i ecetiis g* i aliis i tota tra
sua + sedin tenoré donatoy suoy - Et conceflim? cifdé t hedibs suif capllam
i Sproniftofi - sii Oi dipno t det'mento mat'cis ec&e - iii} - defi - Ite ide
Enftach » % Wa i st. sot i

molédino de Sprouiftoii ad luminare de Kalch p de@is molédini ipius uille -

+ ut eoy hiedes reddét nob singlis annis -

zy

Cat - Wii reg - libtat firay i villa de Molle -

24 Tie Rex Wits conf’mat ofts tras + poffeflides » paft?as « liftates » "t iura i fl 7
uilla de Wolle - sie carte donatoy teftant?  conf*mant -

Corn - Reg Danid fup quad“m pifcaria in villa Berwyei -

25 Danid Rex Scotto® - Omibs phis hdibs toci? regni sui salé - Sciant ofis tam
pofti g* lentes me céftmaffe - *t he Plenti carta eorroboraffe donii iHd q°d
Bernard? baliol ded* ec&e de Kalch «  abbti - t monachis inibi deo famulan-
tibs - vidclies q‘ndam pifearia q’m habuit i Tweda + Q“re volo "t peipio ac
Plenti sépt’a cont'mo g fini * ratii dona Pdém inppetudi heatur - sie tre “t
carta ipms bernardi teftant? - F -



--- Kelso1_page137.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Ti DB Rex de vna carné tre ap" Swi «

26 Tté rex - BB - dat nob i villa de Berewyé vnai carncata tre - t yn maifurd pexewsx

7

wD

earucate ptinété- iux® ectam sti Lanréeij - t altam maifura i burgo . t+ x1 -
sot- de cenfu ci’dé burgi unoq’q, anno- t dimid ptem vni? pifeat®e q° uocat
Berewieftrem - 't septima molendinoy -

QYaleolm? Rex sr tt Dodyn % Walef -

Malcolm? Rex Scott « Juft: - vicecom + jipditis - winifi's t omibs pbis hdibs
toci? tre fue falt - Sciatis me geeflife % p h‘ne carta mea oftmafle abbti de
Kaleh « t monach ibid do Suientibs donaédem q‘m pr fis eis p falute aie
sue dedit + s+ tra Dodyn - t tra Wallef> filii Arnabol - qm fir mea eis fimitr
dedit -t oceflit «ad tenend de me  hedibs meis + lihe . *t qete -*t honorifice -
sicuti aliq” ceta meli® *t lihins aliq‘m eltam habet t tenet -F+ Ada - Vdding «

Daniel -

De mult alijs tris 1 Berwieo -

Tee tem? i cadé uilla iltas alias ‘tras « *t in tritorio de Orde ex dono Jordani
tlandrenfis dimid carneata ‘tre ci tofto °t crofto «s+ i inferiori uilla » Et ex
dono Johis de Huntedun r‘toris ecte de Durefdere q‘nda_pifearia q* uocat®
foleftreim - ci dimodis ptinéciis suif +


--- Kelso1_page138.png ---
26 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

tenewss. Henrie? Comes Sr tofto Dodini -

29 Henrie? comesfili? Regis Seot « Epis - ADbibs

coinift's t dibz

- Juftié - Baronibs . vieecom -

f hdib; francis t Anglicis - clicis -% laicis toci? tre sue

Sciatis me dedifle - t pf'mafle Ernaldo abbti de kalchou illa toft dodini de
Berewié qf eft Sr Tweda ad tenend de me i feudo + Volo itaq, finit Peipio
q'tin’ illa Pnoiatam tof teneat t heat ita plenaric sic* pdés Dodyn illa uneg*
plenari® tenuit t hit + et ita lihe % qicte ifta toft de me tencat i feudo sie"
potiellioes ecée fam + Hiis Teft> -

Rex Wiks oftnat iflud dona pris sui Johi Abba -

sue lihius t q'eci’ tenet i

Carta Reg Wiki de + xI° - § - i Berwieo -

otto® - ppditis fais de Berewyé salt + peipio vob funit

anuati hre

faciatis conach de kalchon aut eoy niiciis + xl + sot de

fina burgi mei de Berewyt
xx + sot ad fefta sti Cudibti i antiipno - sic! carta Re Danid ani mei
tetiat® - P+

xx + sot ad fefta sti Cuthbti i q'd'gefia

Ve 7 roe pf - os ar
Cates? vxoF - Walti forgrid + de + ij «mre +

31 Omnibs xpi fidelibs pfens se'ptii vifuF vel audituF - Q)arioria vxer Walti de

florgrund burgens de Berewié filia t heres q’nda Johis Hanyn burgens de

yrs + Oe - ot ~ ~
Berew falf i dno - Nouitis me nd vi + nd metn + nd coacta s3 fpontanca
volitate mea cdfenfiffe vendidoi f&e Religiofis viris Abbati "t conuétui de kal- jor. as.
= Walt, ae .
chou p me ‘t dim Waltam viva: met sup qrdam annuo redditu duay @ar-

cay puenicntia de ‘tra qm Johes de Norwag tiie tempis tenuit i villa de


--- Kelso1_page139.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 27

Berewyé put i carta jira q'm iidem Religiofi exinde de nob habét pleni? Berewss
otinet® - Et q con® bni*modi vendiédis pacta i aliq? nd uenire p me seu p
aliqué alia noie meo - vt p me vel pe’aébe mea - vel mandato tactis facleis
ew“ngeliis corpale pititi sac‘mentii - yolés et edeedés p me *t hedib; meis q
q’ciés ot* hui®modi fem med t viri mei + acti fit mandatii - sen pe’atit-me
hedes meos teili ad refeeéin sen repacbem ceve be Maric de kalchon- t abbati
t cOuentui cinfds ecte i - x] - lib¥ stlingoy solucnd inf* menfé ap! kalehon a
die q? ptigit me vel hedes meos vel aliqué noie fro con® pmifta vel aliq’d
pmiffoy vt Paicit? ptire + Et q q'enmg, index qué dei abbs t Conuent?
voluint elie poflit me % hedes meos tam ad obiuanda dia *t singla q° i pacto
vendi@is hni’modi ptinent® ? g" ad soluéGem déay - x1 - libray - "tad fatif-
faciend cifdé abbti t Connentui {up dapnis suif intée
déo taxand ‘%t declarand p sentencia exoiea@dis maioris in pfonas firas sii

xpens fuo simpliei

moniéve t q‘lib; caufe cogniéde de die i diz fulminanda compellere ‘t eo-
heere pacto vendiédis hni’modi i suo robore nichomin? duraturo - Concedo
infup p me * hedibs meis q pades abbas seu q'ciiq, ci? ballinus ap* Berewyé
tras ‘ teneflita fira iacétes “t iacctia fup le Nefle int tra q°¢nda Henrici de
St'uelyn ca venello ex pte aufi"li - t tra pda Nicholai cfici ex pte aq'lonali «
% extendenté se a fronte vici del Nes vfq, ad tra Yfabelle filie Johis Hanyn
Vs° orienté q's dés vir fis ego cifle abbti % Couentui i plegiagit obli-
gauim? Sr pdea vendiéve licite sii ot"die@e mei vt fieda meoy sen cuiveumq,
altins auctoritate sua pp'a valeat ing‘di detitie +» don* Pdeas - x1 libF «
vna ci dapnis intefle t expen$ vt pdém eft plenarie lenatiint fou peepint de
eifdé - Si aliq’ndo q‘din vio + q’eumg fiatu filo « vello cont" pmifla vt
aliq’d mifloy seu fiedes mei cont“uchint sen febint 1 hac pte» t q de lui’
modi fris *t tenementis dtis abbti t cdnentui i plegiagia obligaé alieni alien-
aédi fou vendiédi faciende ex nite / me nd céfentire pmifi - *t fidelit pm'to - *t
obligo p iuramenti mei nifi hoe de déoy abbtis ‘t Conuent? pcefferit volun-
tate - Reniicians 1 hac pte omi exeepédi senat? confulti Vellaiani - ‘t legi
Julie omi accioni % defenfioni ac omib3 impet“tis ant impet“ndis a q‘eumq,


--- Kelso1_page140.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU.

2

7

Benewr. curia t om iuris remedio candici vel civilis q°d cont* plens sc'ptii i aliq® sui
pte obiei potit fine dici - In cui? rei teftimonia pfenti se'pto sigilli: mea ap-
potui - Et q sigilli mea min? eft nota - sigilla veitabilia pattm de Jedde-
word + t de Drybureh abbatii Pfentibs apponi peuraui - Hiis tet -

Carta WiHmi Reg - Sr toft? Dodini i villa Berwyei -

32 Vits Rex Seoti - Epis - Abbibs - Com Baronib; - Juftid . t omibs pbis
hdibs toci? tre sue francis - “t Anglis - clicis + laicis falé - Seiat pfetes t fut7i
me cdcefliffe t hae carta mea conf'maiie Joti abbati de kelchou illam Toft
Dodini de Berewy@ q° eft sup Tweda ad tenend de me i fendo+ q'm %
Toft comes + H.- pr Ms dedit ernaldo abbi - Volo itaq, *t firmit peipio q‘tin’
illa Pnoiata Toft teneat t heat ita plenarie sic' pdés Dodin illa ung* pleni?
tenuit ‘t Tit «+ ita libe t qlete ifta Toft de me teneat i fendo sie? pofleftides
eete sue liberi? t q'ecius tenet in eléoiam sic’ carta Comitis Hen pat's mei
teftat? t confitmat - Telt> -

Cofinat « Reg. PH - de q'd pifear - in Twede -

33 David Rex Scoti - Omibs pbis hdib3 toci’ regni sui sali - Seiatis des ta
potteri g*pfentes me conf'mafle t hae pfenti kartula corroboraffe donii illud
quod Bernard? de Balyoly dedit eete de kalechoh - t abbati ac @onach inibi
deo famulatibs videl3 q‘nda pifearia q‘m huit i Tweda - Q’re volo t peipio
ac pfenti se'ptura conf'mo q firma % ratum dont pdém inppetud hearur
sic’ tre t carta ipius Bernardi teftantur - Teft> -


--- Kelso1_page141.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 20

De duabs qareis i q’d tenemét: if Berwyé . Berewyr

34 Omibs xpi fidelibs pions sc'pta vifut vel auditut - Waltus de fforgrnnd 2.19
burgen$ de Berewyé %* Qarioria spéfa fua filia t heres q’ndam Johis Hanyn
burgenS de Berewyé sali i dno + stpitna - Nottitis nos vnanimi eofenfi +
affenfu p q‘dam suifia pounie nob i ardna neceflitate fira t pauptate pbata

2p manib; soluta ad fnftetaédem firam liboy firoy +t ad reedificand q‘fdam

‘fas nfas denaftatas ct dirutas+ac % ad redimend q“fdi alias fras firas de manu

fira clongatas - ‘t p filta tempa ab aliis oceupatas ‘%t detentas p arreragiis

firmay firay - vendifle - cdceflifte - t hoc plenti se'pto firo confmatle abbti

% Couentui de Kalchou -t dino q'eta clamatfe t p fufti et bacula tam i curia

dni Regis ap* Berewyé- q* i euria déi dni abbtis vtpote dni ciufdé feodi surfii

vy + quem peipe ofreuim? de tra q‘in

reddidiffe ila annua redditi duay car

Johies de Norwag q’nda tenuit in villa de Berewye + Q° quidé fra iaes int

ontali + %t tram Richardi coci ex

‘tram Jacobi de Beleford carnificis ex pte
pte occidentali « t extendit se i longi a fronte vici carnitict vfq, ad tra Gilbti
de Dabar ex tnftifo iacenté in pte postiori - Tenend * habend * peipiend
déis abbti t Couentui a q’eiq, déam ‘ram tentte annnati ad duos anni
‘tminosvidelic; medictaté ad fefta sti Cuthhti 1 menfe Warcii - alia meditate
ad fefta,
diftricébb; faciend p déo ammo redditu ae aliis qbjeumgq, pfuctudibs in

pda uilla de Berewyé hacten? vfitat® t ex nite viitand sii

i Cuthhtii menfe SeptembF - adeo libe - qtete + ed omibg libtati

i ullo retinemento «

Reddendo inde annuati nob fiedibs firis yna libra eymini vel duos denat ad

felta sti Jacobi i Nundin
videl3 q n° nos n° heredes firi né aliq's alius ex pte fira vel noie fire aliq’d ins
vel clamiai i Pd@o dnuo redditu inppetuai exife valeam’ - Nos u° pdci - W -
% +t hedes firi pdém anuum redditi duay carcay paeis abbti + Con-
uctui ot* des gentes - warantizabim? - acq'ctabim? - t defendem? inppetua - Et
si otingat nos vt hedes jiros sew aliqué alifi vice fira - noie fio « @andato -

a ee wg
is de Roketburg p omibz que exigi potunt - Ita


--- Kelso1_page142.png ---
30 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Brxewsx. ofenfn + pe’acde vel ratihabicide fira cont* Pmiffa vel aliq’d Pmitloy alig*ten®
venire ? Cocedim? p nob *t hedibs firs nos fiedes firos tehi ad fabrica
repaGoem ant emendagem ee be Marie de kalchou in q'd'ginta libt
stlingoy + Snbiciendo nos *t hedes fires inrifilicédi t cohercioni cui%eumgq,

indicis eectiatticl qué dei Abbas t Couent? clige voluint vt poflit nos * hiedes
Tiros sii Monide eanfe cogniGe + ac _lib3 fitpitn indiciali pfenti fe'pto da-
taxat vifo p sitiam exoicaddis fen intd@i in pfonas jiras de die i diem pmul-
ganda compelle t cohcere ad obfuand dia pdt * q’mlibs artienli in
he sc'pto contentii + ac % q*ufg, cifdé abbti t Conentui de déis q‘d‘ginta
lib¥ noie cete sue + t nichlomin? sup dampnis fais intée ct expnfis put eis
plaetlit i hae pte taxand plenat filit satiffém - Pacto vendidis hni’modi
annni reddit? nichilomin? i fuo robore duraturo » Et ad maior’ i pmiflis
fectitatd tras firas sou tencmeta iacétes sen iacttia sup le Nes int tra
q’ndam HenF de St'nelyn cit vencllo ex pte anfi‘li . t tram q’ndam Nichot
clici ex pte aq'lonali t extendent® se a fronte vici del Nes vfg, ad wa
Yfabelle filie Johis Hanyn ¥s? orient® cifd abbti t Conuentui i plesi
vt ballin’

suuf q p tempe fuit lihe valeat déas tras ‘t teneméta ingredi % plena

ort

obliganim? "t tenore pfentis sc'pti obligam? - Ita g des abba:

> feu ve-

saylinam cape %t ipas bre *t tetle abfq, licencia petita t con“dic
clamaéde fivi vel hed firoy don® pdeas y“d'ginta libt dapna Vintée *t expnfas

plenarie lenattit feu pecpint de eifdé + si nos vel fiedes iri con pinifia vel aliqed

Pmiftoy vellim? ut déin eft - Reniiciando in h° f%o p nob t hedibs firis omi

adtioni excepdi + defenfioni - ac omib; impet*tis aut impet‘ndis a q“cumq,

juris remedio canonici vel ¢

enria ‘t off ilis q’d cont® plens septa in alig®

sni pte obici potit sine dici - In eni? Rei telt> -


--- Kelso1_page143.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 31

Coueed in? nos * HA lauird sr fh 1 Waldef* -

25 Anno gfe w+ co? P- vif?» Ad fefta sti Qartini i yeme + fia eft h Benewss
conten int Roberti abbtem de Kalehou % ei%dem loei connentit ex vna
pte-tRofum lawird de Berewyé -t Edam {pontfi ci? %t Hugoné filia t hedem

da RoBi lauird ex alta + videlics q d@ abbas t Conuent? de Kalehou

peipient finglis annis
uilla de Berewyé ufq, ad tmina duodeci annoy plene cdpletoy p q'da sima
pecunie q‘m dz abbas t Conent? dtis Rovio lauird « ~ Ede sponte ste « ae

hugoni filio dei Rofii + hedi i sua magna neceflitate p manibs paeanerat - Et fot. 20.

feiend eft q abbas * Couent? déos vigi

videl3 ad fefta sti Cuthberti in q“d“geS decé solidos - t decé solidos ad

inti sot de redditu tray dei Rogerii_ in Waldefyat i

id peipicnt ad duos anni tminos +

feftii ciufdé séi in autiipno p pp'um Suientem $ phno + p'neipalit afiq’m dés
Rofins vel aliq's alius aliq'd noie suo vel snoy ad déos tminos de redditu
déi viei +s » Waldefgat peipiat libe sii aliq® otdiedbe vitiori dilagbe cauil-
lage t malo ingenio - Et seiend eft q p'm? ann? d@oy duodeci annoy
incipiet ad Natale dni + anni gie w+ ec }*- vij' « Ita g déi abbas t Couent?
peipient p'mos decd solidos ad feltii sti Cuthbti in q“drag’ px° sequis - ita
ad q°dlib3 fetta sti Cuthhti decem solidof ufq, ad tmini duodeci annoy plene
cdpletoy - Et notand eft q si otingat q p guerra q abfit uf alicui? potétis
niolécia vel aliq? cafu dz abbas t eduent? reddit? viginti folidoy pacifica

+ at Oe AAR PR Ean -
pofleflide gande faint impediti. dém redditi ta diu i manu sua tencbiit don*

dia dapna fua *t iadturas que p simplex dém sui dic&t se ineurriffe reeupa-
nerint + Ad hee q'dé dia t singla Puoiata Suanda * fidetr tenenda t waran-
tizanda + tam dés Rogius lanird gq" Eda vxor ei? t sponta - + Hugo filius
cide Rogii + heres tattis faeftis t fide media se obligatlat « qete ab di
onere % exaceione + impenéde + seu demanda - t omib; burgi- sine burgi de
Berewyé siue altius - [fectis] % sequelis - t omibs g“uaminibg q° otinke porit
roe debiti pprij ut alieni - sublidij regij seu eui°etig, obligaédis 1

re dotis ut



--- Kelso1_page144.png ---
Berewy

30

52 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

maritagij « ut fcij de Ede spate dei Rofiij lanird ut spife aliewi? hedit suoy
ptindtis ut ptine valétis - Simili? de q%eiq, re p q‘m de déo redditu vigiti
solidoy aliq’d dampni ut impediméti déis abbti t cénentui pofiit cuenire ¢
pmittat dti Rofius lanird % Eda spola ei? t Hugo fit dti Rofij t heres déos
abbm ‘t Couentii Suare indépnes - Simitr obligatiat dei Rog lanird t Eda
spafa ei? ta p se g" p hedibs snif set fhiedes fuos t tota tenemeta fui i
Imrgo "t ext® dia mobilia %t immobilia sua h dia sup“dta fideli? Suare -
subieizdo se t hedes suof inrifdicGdi dtoy abbtis % couent? de Kaleh vt illi
anctoritate pp'a scpe déos Rofiti - Eda - t Hug. hides illoy i capitlo suo
de Kaleh sii e® cogniéée t fi*pitu indiciali poflint exoicare - It cdceficrit
dai RoBius hugo fit ei%dé *t heres p se *t hedibs suif + ut si aliq’ndo o*
itt cGneném cont“hire attéatlint tot tenemétd sui in Berewyt *t ex*i
nfs dtoy abbtis * Couent? sii aliqe reteneméto i pura t ppetua elemoiam
cederet inppetud + Et ad maioré sec’itaté dti Rogins lauird *t hugo fit ci?
heres jifenti se'pto i modi eyrog“fi ofeéio penes abbtem * Couentii de Kalch
igilla sna appofuerat - Dé u° abbas t Conent? pti ifti? ouendis in
modi eyrog“fi céfedée t penes d@os Rogium - Edam fponfa fud «"t hug filit
dei Robi  heredé refideti sigilla capitli sui [et] sna appofuertit « Hiis Teit- -

refidéti s

Qreta Clamad® Johis de Granth*me de tris i villa hwyei -

Oonib; lye septa vifuF vi auditu¥ « Johes de Grantham filius t heres Emme
filic ‘t hedis Salomonis del hoga + satm ctna in dno - Noftit vnitifitas tra
me qetit clamaffe * cSccfiiffe « abbti t cduentui monaftii de kalehou + tota
ins t clameti p me fiedibs meis - q°d tui vt hre potui in tris illis q's
Radulph? de Berneuilt q’nda tennit de cifdé in uilla de Berewyt - et cdecdo
gq [fi] aliq? tempe dis abbti t conentui a1) quéciig, dicenté se hre ius in eifdé
«{ttio moueatur? ego t hedes mei pdtas fras con” des mortales warandizabim?-

aeq'ctabim? - t defendem? - Ita q si ptigit p defectu warancie - aeqetaddis


--- Kelso1_page145.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 33

feu defenfidis di abbas + Conuent? dapnii aliq’d vt iact’am ine’rerit ¢
mee q's heo i villa de Berewyé + vt tire poto déis abbi + Couentui plene sii
ot*dieée cui’qna remaneat - don’ de pmiffis +" dee carcis q’s B manibs m*
soluint fit sati¥tm - Nee liceat it vt fedibs meis medio tpire déas tras
vende - vf alienare « qfi fevo inftinéa aliq’y 7 f%m met i hae pte nulla heat
fmitaté - Et vt dia Pmifia * sindla fidelit t inuiclabilit obluent? / subicio
me % fiedes meos inFdieédi cui’cumg, q'm ad h? dai abbas t Conent? clefint -
ut me ad obfuagem dium Pmiffoy p q’meumq, volitint coh@em me

cdpellat - Et huie sc’pto sigilla mei vna eit sigillo eomunitatis de Berewy?

appotui i hui? rei teftimonia - Hiis F -

Qreta Clam « Alex! de Riparia de t¥ i Twedmyde -

Onunib; ad q°s plens septi pueilit - Alexander de Riparia Sali in dno -
Sciatis me nd coactione alicui? - s3 mera %t spontanca voliitate mea q'etii
clamatie inppetu& de me * hedib; meis duo meo Ricardo dei gta Dunolineli
Epo dni Regis cancellario vni Thofti in Twedemud ef fonte sti Qichact
q' effi cod@ Thofto t vna acra tre t dimidia que iacét inx" pifearias de
Wdehorn - % bla
Dunolnen$ Epé dni Regis eancellari? pidém Thofti * Pdeam aeram fre *t
dimidia conferat deo «t be Marie de Kalchon « %* abbi t @onachis ibidé deo

kewel + tali condiGe g pdts dis tis Ricard? dei gia

Suientib3 in pura t ppetua elemofind - Vt auté h mea q'cta clamato de me
*t hedibs meis ppetua optineat finitaté - Plenti septo sigilla mea appotui -

Hiis ¥ +

Berewrn.

fol. 2A.


--- Kelso1_page146.png ---
34 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

benewrx. Cofirit - Reg + Atx' + fup edude* in? nos t cdmui Berwyei + de feptia pte

@olendinoy -

38 Alex dei gia Rex Seoti - Oimibs pis hdibs toci’ tre fue salé - Sciatis nos
cdcefliffe t Pfenti carta cof'maffe cuenddem fam in? dnos Abbtem
Couenti de Kalchow ex pte vna - t @aioré - }pofitos -ac comunia de Berewyé
ex alta + sup tota septima pte molendinoy de eadé villa - Tenenda * nda
déis maiori - * jipofitis ac cOmunie de Berewié ac omibs suif succctforibs de
déis abbe t Couentu *t fuis fuceefforibs adeo life - qete + plenarie - t honori-
fice fict in se'ptis coy exinde cdfectis ex vt‘aq, pte pleni? iufte cdtinet? -
Teft: -

Cont? - Waleolmi Reg - fup donaGe pris fui de ‘tra de Dodin - t at -

39 Q)alcolm? Rex Scott - Julticiis - vieceoth - ipofitis « oinift's «t omibs pbis
hdibs toci? tre sue salf - Sciatis me edcellifle - *t p hane mea carta conftmafte
Abbti de kelcho - t @onachis ibidé do Suientib; donagim q%m pat itis eis p
salute aie sue dedit +s + tram Dodin - tram Walthef* fit Arnabol q‘m
mat mea cis fimilit dedit t cdeeffit - Ad tenend de we * hedibs meis - libe +
*t q'ete - t honorifice sic' aliq* ecta meli? + liberi? aliq'm clemdam ht * tens -
Teli -

Carta Hériei comitis de illa toft- Dodini in villa berwyei -
40 Henrie? - comes fit Reg Scot - Epis - ADbib3 Comitib; - Jutiit - Baronib; -

vid + winift's -t omibs fidelibs suis hdibs frand- t Angt - elicis +t laicis toci?
tre sue salm + Sciatis me dediffe * cdcefliffe Ernaldo abbi de kelcheo illa


--- Kelso1_page147.png ---
41

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 35

Toft- Dodini de Berewyt + q° eft sup Tweda - ad tenédii de me in feudo -
Volo itaq, *t firmit Peipio q"tin? illa Pnoiata toft- teneat *t Heat ita plenarie
sie’ Pd@s Dodin illa ung® plenari? tenuit "t huit -*t ita libe t qtete ifta toftam
de me teneat in feudo ? sic poffellides ecte sue libius t qeci? tenet i clemo-
fina - Teft> -

Donaeio Ada Norh - comitiffe de tofto Walef + de vna earueata ‘tre apd

bwyea .

Ada Norh - Comitiffa « Omibs hdib; t fidelibs suif ta pfentibs q" futnF - salt -
Sciatis me donafle % ecdceffifle dno deo t cete ste Qarie de kelchon + +
@onachis ci’dé loci Toft Wallefl ap’ Berewyé - totii viq, i Tweda flunii -
Et tea vnd carneata tre - q'm snp“dés Wallefh tenuit ap’ eandé uilla - p
salute aie Comitis Henriei dni mei -t p salute aie mee %t omit Pdecettoy
firoy + t dinm fidelid dei defitoy - like t q'ete + % in ppetua clemofina -
Teltibs «

Refignacd Nichi d@ q@oyfes Sr cotag i badigt’ -

Pateat vnitifis p pfentes q ego Nichols dés @oytes de Bondyngton + dedi -
cocefli « ae p me % hedibz meis t meis aflig‘tis inppetud q'etti clamani dno
Walrano abbti de kaleh t eiufd loci Conuétui toti ins mei q’d hui yng"
vel hre potni in illo cotagio eit orto y’d Tyock vxor Andree q’nda tennit de
me in villa de Bondyngton put iacet int tram dtoy dnoy ADbis t Couent?
ex pte orientali » t tra ined ex pte oceidentali +t abbuttat sup" vid regia -
ltaq, n° ego né aliq's fiedum meoy feu aflig"toy aliq'd iuris seu clamij in déa
{ra potunt de ecto exife vt vendicare + In cui? rei teftim sigilla mei pfentibs
appofui » Dat» ap* Berewiek in vigta sti Clemétis pp* anno # - t - Edwardi
fit Edward fit Henf - p'mo - Hiis Teft- .

Berewyn.


--- Kelso1_page148.png ---
36 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

texewsx, Carta educt? erga Wim @accone st tt + i Waldefg> -

He

Vnittis pfenté carta vifnt vel auditu# - Walran? pmiffide dia Abbas de
kalchon - % ci%dé loci Comnent? falé efnam in dno + Noitit vnitifitas via nof
ex vnanimi confenfu firo dediffe edcefiiffe t hae pfente earta fira coftmatle
WiHlo d@o wafceon illa tram fram in burgo Berwiei in vieo de Waldeue-
gate a pte auft'li q° q’ndam fuit Elye Palmere iacenté int tra q°nda Henrici
de Wyteby + ex pte oecidentat - t tra q’nda Johis de Bonbiry ex pte ori-
entali in eodé vico ci suif r'tis dinifis % ptiné
WiHo + fiedibs, suif de nob % suceefioribs iris

Habnda *t tenéda sup"éo

in feodo % heditate e& dib3 jut.
suif ptineneiis libtatibs *t ayflamctis q@bseiiq, ad sup“UZan tram. spttantibs
ut sp*tare de inure debentibs / adeo libe  q'ete in offib3 sict cam tennim? ut

tetle potuim? saluo inre eui*libs ? Reddendo inde nob * suceeflorib3 firis
p'mo anno coufeeddis penciti tres solidos stlingoy p eq‘les medictates ad
fefta sti Cuthbti in Q*d'gefia t in autiipno / phno mio pdze soludis ineipi-
ente ad fei sti Cuthbti in quad’yefia + Anno ge w+ cee? « vif? - % q’libet
anno sequéte aumentido duodee@ denarios vfq, puenit ad p'tina firma ili?
tre videlics sexdecem solidos ftlingoy ¢ et deinceps reddent annuati id@ Wilts
t hedes sui P pda {ra sexdecem solidof vt pdém eft ad tmios pnotatos p
medietates eq*les ut pdicit? - faciendo fimitr p eadé offiimoda Snicia dee tre
inedbeneia sedim leges *t pfuetudies di burgi - Et vt ifia donacio t oceflio
fira in forma Psepta ppetud heat firmitaté pfenti carte in moda eyrog“fii in-
dentate in? nos t pd@m - W ~ parti ss + penes ipm WiHin remancti -
sigilli comune capitli firi / parti v° eiufdé penes nos remanéti ¢ sigilla pfati
Willi patent sit appéfa - Iliis teft> -


--- Kelso1_page149.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 37

Vendito fre in Waldefgat> p Thm de Ravinithe? - Benewrx

44 Onib; xpi fidelibs ad q°s pfentes tre pueitint - Thomas de Ravinthe?
. 7 Oe Oa ~, = . ~ .
in dno » Nowit vnitifitas vfa q ci ego tanto ere alicno Gem ollatus ? q eredi-
torib; meis satiffieri no poflet ? nt tra mea in Waldefgat> in villa de Berewy?

q'm tée solam® fini in manu mea vendet? / atq, opulf? Gem indiciatr p

balliuos dni Regis t ecid dni abbis de kalchou modis omiihs ad satiffaeéom
hni’modi debitoy edfideras q alinnde pecunia hre nd potui ? nt de dea tra ¢
ipam fram cf omib3 edificiis t aliis ptinéciis suif ad déam tra sp*tantib; ut
sp*tare valentibs - iaccnt int tra q’nda Stphi de Hofe ex pte orientat - *t tra
q’nda m@ichact de Abirdeii ex pte occidental - p® ditlfas *t sufficientes obla-
Ges fas in curia ad exohacom hui’modi debitoy déis abbti t Couentui de
kalchou tang® capitalib; dnis ciufdé feodi vendidi % pfenti sc'pto meo of
maui p met hedibs, meis vel aflig‘tis - Et ius q°d hui ut tre potui i déa tra

ci edificiis  ptingciis suis p me *t hedibs meis vel aflig'tis ex tiie vt ex nie
p fuitti + bactm mera *t spotanca voliitate in plena curia dé@i dni abbis ap"
Berewy? furfa reddidi  qeta clamaui p sexaginé lib? stlingoy at j} inanibs
totatr solutis - de qua pecunia plene “t integ* reputo me pro pagato - Excep-
Toni n6 nutlate né t"dite t nd reeepte pecunie penit? t exprefie reniciando -
Et si otingat me ut licdes meos con" ifta vendigdem * q'etii clamaSem seu
aliq’m alidi vice fira noie firo mandato pfenfu pe’adde ut ratihabiGe fira in
aliq? fae nt venire ¢ Obligo met liedes meof ad sohdem quat viginti libray
fab'ce eee de kalehou note dampnoy intée soluenday anteg* in aliqua
Sbiciens me *t heredes meos iufdicd@ni t cohGni dui Archid

lite andian
laudofi vel ei? offi q' p tempe fucrit q poflint me * fedes meos sine caufe
cogniéde t strepitu judiciat p siiam exoicadis in pfonas firas de dic in
dig fulminanda compellere t colicere ad obfuandai dia ‘t singla pmita «"t ecia
«pufg, eifd abbti % Couentui de déis qua? viginti lib¥ noie ecte sue plenarie
filit satiffem - pacto vendiGis hui*modi nichomin? in suo robore duraturo -


--- Kelso1_page150.png ---
Berewyn.

38 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

fillo pponédo obftante - In cui’ rei teft> sigilla met psentibs eft appent -
Dat apd Berewyt die Vehis px* p? fefti sti Jacobi apli- Anno dni O° -
ce’ Nonag + Hiis Teft> -

Concenfio Emme de Bernevyle vxoris Radulphi de cadm 8r omib3 nob
dat p etidm in villa berwici -

Oris xpi fidelibs Ptentes tras vif
de Berneuile -salé in dno - Nobit vnitifitas tra me nd vi vel metu copulfam

F vel auditu? » Emma yvxor Radulphi

mere t sponte de mea liba voliitate p falute aie meet aiay ofium ante-

cefloy -t succeffoy meoy + Confenfiffe donacdi fee a Radulpho de Berneuile
o meo ‘t q'eteclamaédi deo t ecte be Marie de Kalchou % @onachis
sup omib; tris - redditibs t pofleftio-
liq’? tempe huim? vel hre

cari

ibidé deo Snientib; t inppetuti §

rita

nibs q's idem Radulph? t ego in villa de Berewy

potuim’ +t déam donagdem p me % meis ratificafle + %t ins mei qd in
eifdem habui q'ett clamatie - plenti sc'pto conf'matie - Q"re volo t con-
cedo ut dei monachi omes déas fras + reddit?  poffeffiones in libam + pura -
 ppetna elemofam abfq, clamio mci vel meoy inppcetuii heant - teneat *
poflidedt put carta memorati Radulphi qariti mei sup eifdem gfecta pleni? *t
cdfenfui - conceflioni -  q'eteclama-

melius tefiat’ t conftmat + Et ne pde
Gi aliq? tempe q‘cnmq, wachinacione seu voliitate ot"ria poto obuiare -
sac“mento sponte "t corporatr pitito in manu dni H. dei gfa déi ADbis de
Kalchou affidaui + Sbicits me inFdicdi archidiaconi laodonie q' p tempe fait

eae 9 sx ; ere, ae
seu ci? officiat vt alt ipoy poflit me p sentencid exoicacidis in pfond mea

ine caufe comniéde ferenda - t p totti deeanati de Qerikys singlis diebs
dnicis ‘t fettis solempnit publicanda ad ofiia milla firmit + fidelit. obi-
nanda si neecfle fit compellere - Renticio infup in hac pte ausilio Velleiani -
Regie phibiGoni *t oiibs tris impet'tis t impet'ndis t ofl ta inf civit g*
i d potit obici pt* iftnd fem vel pfens inftrumentt -

canonici remedio %t
In cui? rei teftimonid pfenti sc'pto sigilla nei appofui - Hiis Teft- -

fol. 23.


--- Kelso1_page151.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 30

Donato Ade filii Hudding? de tris in Huddigat’ in villa Berwyei -

46 Onib; has littas vifuF vel auditu® - Adam fit Hndding> de Berewié salé in

47

dno - Nolit vnilifitas ¢ra me diuine pictatis intuitn « t p falute aie mee *
ominm anteceffoy t succefloy meoy - ci [confenfn] amabille sponte mee “t
coargarete filie mee dedifle t conceflifle t hac carta mea confmatle deo * ecctie
ste Warie de kelehon - t @onachis ibidé deo Suientibs medictaté toci? tre
mee in Hnddinggate de Berewyé - ta inhabitata q* habitata ex pte aq'lonari
exit? einfdé tre cit toto exitu + Ita tain q margarcta filia mea hebit dimi-
dictaté aifiaméti cinfdé exitus - Ec p dinifas
Tenenda * poflidenda in lifam * pura t ppetua clemofind soluti t qeta ab
oni calipnia sict tra illam q‘m emi a pat® meo - *t fie meo p%genito denariis

as cora burgenfib; ciufdé ville -

meiis + In cui? ppetue donaédis teftimonid - teftes sit tales - videl3 - Wilts
brune @agr conialia - Wagr lanrené vieat de Berewié + alij -

Carta The batayle fup quadam tra in Waldefgat* inf berwycii -

Oniibs has littas vifuF vel auditu¥ - Thomas Batail fit q’nda Wii Batail
burgen8 de Berewy@ salé ctnam in dno - Noffit vnillitas tra me dedifte -
conceflifie « surfii reddidifit - q'eta clamafie +t hoe pfenti sc'pto meo oftmatle
deo t be Warie de kelehon - t eiufdé loci Couentui illam fram mea que incet
in Waldefgat* in? tra que eft dni Robti de Ro3 que fuit q’nda WiHi albi -
* tram ci’dem Connent? de kelchou in Briggat + p quad stima peeunie q"m
us in magna neeeflitate mea j manib dederit - Habend *t tenend s' *t sne-
cefloribs suif inppetui adco libe +t qrete + fieut aliqua fray snay in villa de
Berewy? libins * q'ecius tenét  poflidét - Reddendo inde annnatim hedibs
Luce blake duodecim denarios - ad duos anni tminos + medictaté videlic; ad
fetta sti @ichaclis + % alia medietat@ ad pafch - Ego v? Thomas % hedes

Berewtn.


--- Kelso1_page152.png ---
40 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

iis @onaftio de kelchou % ei%dem loci
Couentui inppetua warantizabim? aeq'etabim? t defendem? con* omes
mortales - Ego anté - F - in signi hui? donaddis « q'cteclamaédis + t
confmaddis p me t fiedibs_ meis pfenti sc'pto sigillum meum appofui -
Hiis Tefti

Oe or. :
Borewrx. mei Pd@am tram ed omibs ptin

Connéeio in? nos % Thott Batayle Sr earneata t¥ *t croft edifi® in
hondigé -

cal

Anno dni «°. ce®- Ix°- vj°- Ad fefta sti Wartini i hyeme f*ta eft hee edven-
cio in? dnos Abbm % cduentii de kelchou ex pte vna % Thoma dem Batail
Durgenfem de Berewye ex alta + videlics q dei Abbas t Conuent? dimiferat
tot snam carncatd tre ci edificiis t crofta "t aliis ptindciis  libtatibs suif
q® habét in teneméto de Bondington ex dono pie @emorie Danid Regis
Scotoy « Tenend t habend st t hedibs suif vel aflig‘tis vfq, ad tind viginti
annoy plene completoy adeo libe sic déi Abbas "t Couent? candé tram
tenueriit p carta Regis Danid - vel tetle debnerat » Dés v°. P+ t hedes
sui vt afligti reddent singlis annis déis abbi t cduentui de kelchou - vel
coy to actornato tres areas argenti ad duos anni ‘tminos « videlics + ad
fefta sti Martini in hyeme viginti solid t ad pentecofien viginti solidos -
‘imino p'mne soluédis faciende incipiente ad fefta sti Qartini in hyeme « Anno
dni. @+ ce? + 1x° - vif? + Domos v? *t edificia meliorabit t sutientabit -
finito tmino ea déis abbi t eduentni cd déa ra reftituct + Et si edtingat q
di
durante tmio suo dt abbas t Concnt? inpentas si quas in meliorate domoy jz. 24,
fetit + p vil bonoy viroy déis E+ + fedibs suis vt aflig‘tis in fine fmini

reftitndt » D@i v° abbas %t Connent? warantizabit dam fram ci ptingciis deo

¥. + hedibs fnis vt aflig‘tis vfq, ad tmina afidtn - Et feiend eft q tin?

dcoy viginti annoy finict? ad fefta sti Qartini in lyeme - Anno dni Q)°.

Et fiedes sui vel aflig’ti domos % edificia mclioratlint moderate ?


--- Kelso1_page153.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 41

ce® + odtog - sexto » In cui’ rei teftimof ptef huic se'pto in modi eyrog" fii
confecto figilla sua mutuo appofuerat - Hiis teftib; -

Qa Petr? caps de hwyk nob tiuriabat? Sr qd fF % at reb3

Omnib; ste qat's ccctie filiis t fidelib; - de Jeddeworde - t de Drybureh
abbes + eed de Tewydale efnam in dno falé - Qandata dni pp*-
Innocencii Peij fufcepim? in hee verba - Innocenci? epé Suus Suoy dei -
Diledtis filiis de Jeddeworde - t de Drybureh abbibs t Decano de Tewydat -
sti Andree - * Glafguen$ diog falé . t apticam bei - Sua ad nos dilecti filij
Abbas *t Couent? de Kalchou q‘rimonia deftinarat - q Petr? capHs de
Berewyé - % quida alij sti Andree diot sup quada tra . reb3 aliis cont"
infliciam ininviant’ eifdem - Qve'ca diferei Fre p aptica sé “pta @Mandam?
q‘tin’ ptibs cduocatis audiatis Gam - %t q°d infta fait appHone p*poita flatuatis-
facientes q°d fiattlitis p cenfura ecctiafticam firmit obluari » Teftes ant qt
fuerfit noiati si se gia - odio - vt timore se Sbt‘xcrint ? p cenfura eandé
appHone ce dient cogatis ¥ Vitati teftimonia phibere - € si nd ons hiis
exequend pottitis intée + duo ufm ea nichomin? exequant? - Dat laterafi -
Decimo kat Januarij - Pontificat’ fri aiio oGtauo decio « Hui? ig? augtoritate
@andati legitimis ediétis ptes citari fecim? ad pfencia fram - Demi p? milta
ediéta ordie indidrio ppdita + ptibs in fencia fira offitutis « ca abbas
kalchoen$ pe’ator Conent® sui lfatorie oftitut? intenédem sud cont Juoné
capHm ppoiiet + Juo ia dés - sano duét? ofilio + mera *%t lida volatate cit deli-
fade cord nob in inre confeffus cf + sc nm ins in Pra de gf ab abbe
Couentu q'ftio mouebat? hre - tam iuri q°d se dudit dicebat fire g* potleflioi
cui p'us infificbat rendeians ? dam fram in man? abbis cora nob refignauit +
Nos g' ut ca que indiciali?) pee sit - ci confefli in iure p odtpnatis fieant? -

ppetua optineant firmitaté - Pram memorata pdzis abbti tt Couentui i inppetud
ordinanda - anéritate dni - pp*- sali dif€nim? - Saluo q Baés Juo caps p

F

Bemewyx


--- Kelso1_page154.png ---
Berewr.

50

=

42 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

pdéos abbm ~ Connenta in poffeflioné pdee fre de nono induétus - pictatis
intuitu potleftionem ei? note abbis t Couent? dai vixerit optincbit - ecleb“tur?
diuina sp&uit p aia Danict « "t aiab3 dium fidelit: defidioy « Reddendo abbi
 Couentui singlis annis vna libra incenfi cit firma ab eadé ra debita » Q°
+ tad

cedente vel deccdente + pada abbas "t Conent? de tra memorata lib
vtilitaté sua difponét - ad diuina celeb‘ada p quemda capHm ubiciig, voluerit -
panima dt Danict - *t p alabs dium fideliti defaGoy inppetuii- Et ut pimifla
noticiam heant enidencioré -"t robur firmitatis - nos Pfent? pagina sigillorum

iiroy inpreflione cdmunimus -

Refignaé « Riti Gwalefi Sr tot $F sua de hwik -

Onmnib; vifu® vel auditu has littas - Rié Gwalef salé - Sciatis me in
teftaméto reliq'le » ‘t q'cta clamafte deo * eectie ste Marie de Kelchou - +
q@onachis ibidé deo Suientibs + tota tra mea de berewyé - q'm de eis tenui +
cit furno “t omib3 ad eam iufte speétantibs - vt de ea fedm voluntat? sua
libe difponat inppetud - Et si aliq? tempe aliq® carta ab aliq? meoy sup ipa
fra ot” Platos conachos flit plata ¢ irrita penit? heatur * iillas vires optineat
Et qm sigilla nd habui + B’nard? de HMaudene - % Waltas de Lyndefaie de

Rokeil’e - t de Berewyé tiie tépis vicecomit ad peticioné mea figilla sua Imic

{e'pto appofucrat in teftimonitt - Hiis F -

Confirti « Hugoii de Balioile « 3 donaéde Berfi - de bal + de Wdhorii -

Ounibs fee cat's ecetic filiis *t fidclibs vilut vt anditu® has littas . Hugo
de Balliol cna i dno falé - Nout vnitiitas fra me cdcefliffe 7 hae carta mea
ofirmafte deo 7 ecctic ste Warie de Kelchou 7 monachis ibidé deo Suientibs
donagem 4 B’nard? de Bailloil cis feeit de quada pifcaria que ptinebat ad


--- Kelso1_page155.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 43,

Wudehori - t uocat? Wudehorneftelle in flamie de Tuede « Q"re volo nt pd@i Berewss
coonachi pifearia illa teneat inppetud « 7 in libam pura ppetna clemofinam
poflideat » Ita libe q'ete honorifice 7 plenarie fict aliq‘m aliam elemotina jou 25.
liberi? q'cei? honorificenci? 7 pleni’ tenét t poflidét - 7 fict carta B’nardi de

Bailloil teftat? 7 ofirmat - Et eand@ pifearia cifdé monachis cout* omes hoies

p pofle mco warantizabo « Hiis

Carta Bernardi de Bay? Sr pifeat de Wdhome i iwyk «

52 Bernard? de Bai « Oinibs fidelibs ste ccctie filiis tam fut2is g* plentibs
falé « Notii fit vob me dediffle « t Conccfliffe deo t ecctie {te Marie - t ADbti
de Kelchou t f¥b3 ibid® deo Suientibs aq‘m pifcatorii in Twede - que
ptinebat ad Wudehorn + p anima « H + Comité - *t filij mei + 7 aiiceffoy 7
fucceffoy meoy in ppetud elomofina - 7 ad pifcand ci retib; coy ablq, oi
difturbacGe + Annuétibs 7 Confirmantibs dnis meis - videlic; - Dauid Rege
Scoté - 7 Walcolmo 7 Wilo nepotib; ei? - Et hoc idem teftantib; - 7
Wydone filio mco 7 B’nardo - 7 aliis -

Carta Hng - de Bayloile sup cad pifeat -

53 Omnib; fee at's eectic filiis fidelibs vitu¥ ut auditu¥ has tras - Hugo de
Bailloil etna in duo salt - Sciatis me dedifle 7 conceflitfe 7 he Plenti carta
mea confirmafle deo 7 ecctie ste Qaric de Kelchou - 7 monachis ibidé deo
Suientib3 aq‘m pifeatoria in Twede q® ptinebat ad Wndehorn 7 nocat?

Wnudehornefiell in ppetua elemofina - 7 ad pifeand ef retibs coy abfq, omii
difturbaéée » Hane auté clemofinam feci cis p falute anime B’nardi de
Bailloil q' candé pifcaria cis contulit - 7 p falute aie mee - 7 dinm aficefloy 7


--- Kelso1_page156.png ---
Berewyn.

44 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

fucceftoy meoy« Q're volo ut Paz @onachi Pdéam pifearia teneant ita ibe «
¥ ¥ i P I

q'ete - honorifiee + 7 plenarie - 7 in puram 7 ppetuam clemofina poflidcant
sie aliq’m alia elemofina in Regno Angt libius q'eci? - honorificenei? 7
pleni’ tent ut poffident - Et cam cont* ofies hoies eis p pofle meo waran-
tizabo - Hiis Tett> -

Carta Rigi Duneliti epi sr Wahorii t Redhowh -

54 Ricard? dei gta Dunelmen$ Ep? - Bui Regis Cancellari? - Omib3 pfentes

. sone ww a 6 1.9% On,” o
lickas infpectut uf anditu - salf in dno etnam - Nouwit vnittitas fra nos
diuine caritatis intnitn coceflifle «7 pfenti carta fira ofirmafie + Deo *t be Marie

de Kelchou » Abbti 7 @onachis ibid deo Suientibs pifearias de Wdehorn -
7 de Redehov « cii omib; ayfiamétis ad jdéas pifcarias ptinentibs - fiet Carte
donatoy suoy q’s inde fint Fonabilit teftant? - Dedim? ¥ pdeis abbti *t
«onachis de kelchou ibidé deo Suientib; vnd Thoftum in villa de Twedemne-
lud videlic; - q’d Alexander de Riparia qiiq, tennit + vna ci fonte sti
Wichact qt cft in codé Thofto - *t tres ac‘s fre in Pritorio de Twedemue - que
sit {up* ripa fluminis Twede ptigue pifcariis de Wdehorn - 7 de Blakewel -
ci Communia ‘t omib; aifiamentis q‘nti ptinct ad tantii fre in cade villa de
Twedemue + in pura t ppetuam elemofind - Q"re volum? *t firmit Peipim?

Pdéi abbas ‘%t «monachi de kelchou heant ‘%t poffideant pe rifearias -

gy? 1 I 1

c Oy~ 4. Om ee er-aer ~

Thoftum fdém - *t pdéas tres acras tre ci omibs ptinenciis fuis ut pdém
i ] 3 I

efi + libere q'ete - *t integre inppetunm - Vt auté hee jira donacio *t edceflio

ypetud optinedt firmitate ? Pfenté pagina figilli firi munimine roboranim? «

pp I } pag! g

Hiis teftibs -


--- Kelso1_page157.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 45

Qreta clamat » Willi Waleti Sr pifea¥ de le Redhoweh - Brenwrs

55 Omnid; fee mat's eectic filiis t fidelibg vifn¥ vel auditn#® has litas Wills
Wafets salé . Seiatis me intuitu caritatis concefliffe * hae pfenti carta mea
ofirmaffe deo t cectic ste Maric de Kelchou + monachis ibide deo Suientibs
kewiffiond - t q'eta clamagew q'in » DD + de Houlib’ne - t Rohit? de Petia
% Wabilla ma? Sufanne vxoris illi?- + Alexand de la Riner « % Watildis coat
ei? Hugo Qulard «  Waltus fit Baldewini . Wis fit Robti~ Walfns
fit Radulphi de efifexe de ciceflione vxoy suay eis fecunt de pilearia de

Redehouh - Tenenda s* inppetuii - ita lie  qtete + honorifice « plenarie fic!
carte coy teftant® t ofirmant + peea oeelli cis q libet fine inpediméto mei ut

fiedii meoy heant ftalingt faa fap fram mea de Twedemne fict hue ulq,

habuerait » Et palos faos figant fup cand@ fram ad retia sua ficcanda fic!
Pp BS I

unt + Hiis Teft> +

haeten? fee

i qret clamaé dei Wili Sr le Redhouch -

56 Omnibs {te cat's ecctic filtis t fidelibs vifwF ut anditn® has tras Wis
Wafets {alt - Noflitis me intnitu earitatis remifife qetam clamafic omem

caliipnia qn hre me dicebam 1 pifearia de Redehouh deo % eectic s

‘ee Maric
F A, aga ioe 7 ef ae
de Kelechou %t monachis ibid@ deo suientibs + Ita qu ego n° hedes mei n

aliq's p me de ceto aliq‘in caliipnia monebim? inppetiu adtifas Pdtos
«onachos de kelcho de aliq® pifearia que fit ut flit int pool + pifearia feilic;
de Orde +t pifearia de Blakewel - Hane auté remiflioné % q'ctam clamaéoem
fine malo ingenio tenenda affidaui p me % p fhedibs meis « Tf u® monachi
recepunt me *t uxoré mea * ficdes meos in finitatem dom? sue pticipes

fedunt dium bonoy que in eoy fient cectia de ceo + Hiis teftibs +


--- Kelso1_page158.png ---
Berewyn.

or

an

46 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Qrta clamato Dauid de Houburne sup pifca¥ de Orde t blakewele -

Omnib; {te cat's ecctie filiis t fidelibs vifu ut auditu? has littas - Dauid
de Houhb@ne salt - Nowitis me intuitu caritatis remififfe  q'etam clamafte
deo * eectie {te Varie de kelcho +t conachis ibidem deo Suientibs omem
calapniam q'm tre me diecbam erga eos - Ita g n‘ ego né hedes mei n°
aliq’s p me de ecto monebim? aliq‘m ealiipnii inppetua aditfus Pdtos
qonachos de alig® pifearia q° sit ut fllit in? pool pifearia feilie3 de Orde - t
pifearid de Llakewel - Hane auté remiflioné t q'etam clamaédem sfi malo
ingenio tencndam affidani - Ipi u° reeepunt me - *t uxorem mea - hedes
meos in ffnitaté dom? fue t pticipes fetunt dium bonoy que i coy fient
ecetia de ceo» Hiis Teft> -

Qreta clamaé Robi de pefale Sr + le Redhouth -

OiTibs fe cat's ccctie filiis t fidelibs vifuF ut auditu® has littas Rob de
Pefale salt « Notlitis me intuitu caritatis de conceflione Sufanne vxoris mee +
%t WMabille cat's illi? remififfe % q'eti clamaffe ome ius q’d habui ut fre
potui in pifearia de Redehouh deo *t ecctie {ée Qarie de kalchou t monachis
ibidé deo Suientibs » Ita q n® ego n‘ hedes mei nf aliq's p me de ceto aliq'm
calipniam mouecbim? inppetui ads? pPd%os monachos de kelchon de alig’
pifearia q? fit ut fit int pool pifearia - s - de Orde - t pifearia de blakewel -
Hane auté remiflioné * q'ctam clamaéGem fine malo ingenio tenenda affi-
daui - Ipi u® recepunt me *t uxoré mea fiedes meos in fratnitaté dom? fue
*t pticipes fecerit dium bonoy q° in coy fient ecctia de ceto - Hiis Teltibs -


--- Kelso1_page159.png ---
59

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 47

Qreta clamaé - AlXi de la Riuer - sup pifea¥ - de le Redhouch -

Alexander

Omnibs fee cat's cectic filiis ¢ fidelibs viluF vt auditut has
de la Riuer - falé - Notitis me intnitn caritatis ex conceflione Qatildis «at's
mee remififfe t q'etai clamatic ome ius q°d habui ut hre potui in pifcaria de
Redehoue deo % cectie sée Marie de kelchou - t monachis ibidé deo Suien-
tibs - Ita q n® ego nf fedes mei n® aliq's p me de ceto mouebim? aliq’n
calapniam inppetuit adits? dos monachos de kelchou de aliqua pifearia q*
sit ut fait in? pool pifcaria - s - de Orde - + pifearia de blakewel - Hane auté
remiflioné t q‘eta clamaéBem sii malo ingenio tenenda affidani « [pi u? rece-
punt me % hedes meos in fratnitaté dom? sue t pticipes feceriit dium bonoy

«f in eoy fient ecctia de ecto - Hits Tettibs -

Qreta clamaé Q)atildis de la Riuer & déa pifearia de la Redhouch -

Oniids {Se wat's cectic filiis t fidelibs vifut ut anditn# has littas - Catildis
de la rinere falé » Nowtitis me intuitu caritatis de conceflione Alexandri filij
inet remififfe  q'eti clamatle one ius Gd habui ut hre potui in pifcaria de
Redehowh Deo + ecctie {%e Marie de kelchou « % Monachis ibidé deo Suien-
tibs + Ita q n° ego n° hedes mei n° aliq's p me de ceto alig’m caliipniam
mouebim? inppetud adils? dZos @onachos de kelch + de aliq® pifearia q° sit
ut fit in? pool pifcaria - s - de Orde - t pifcaria de blakewel - Hane auté
remiffioné t q'etam clamadédem sine malo ingenio tenendam affidani - [pi u’
recepunt me *t hedes meos in fratuitat? dom? suc % pticipes feCunt dium

bonoy q° in ecctia eoy de ecto fient - Hiis teftibs «

Berewys.


--- Kelso1_page160.png ---
Bewewyn

6

62

LIBER DE CALCHOU.

ng
om

li ret cla DD de Houb*ne sr cad pifeat -

Onnnib; fee @at's ecctic filiis t fidelibs vifut ut anditu¥ has tras Dauid de
Houhb’ne sali - Notitis me intuitu caritatis remififfe % qeti clamaffe omne
ins Gd habui ut hre potui i pifearia de Redehouh Deo t Ecctic fée A)arie de
kelchou +t @onachis ibidé deo Suientib; - Tta g n° ego né fiedes mei né aliq's
p me de ceto aliq‘m calipniam moucbim? inppetud adtis? Pdéos cmonachos
de kelchou de alig* pifearia que sit nt {fit int Pool - pifcaria -s - de Orde « *
pifearia de blakewel - Hanc auté remiflioné t q'ctam clamaédem sine malo
ingenio tenenda afiidaui - Tpi u° recepiit me t vxoré mea - t ficdes meos 1
frafnitaté dom? sue +t pticipes feCunt omniti bonoy que i coy fient ecctia de
ecto + Hiis teft- «

Ti tet clat Wittmi Mafeti & ead pifcat +

Onnmnibs fee cat's cectie filiis * fidelibs vifu¥ ut auditu® has littas Wis
Wafets falé » Nottitis me intuit caritatis remififfe *t qietii clamaffe omne ins
qd habui ut bre potui in pifearia de Redehouh Deo * cectie fte Warie + de
kelchou - * @onachis ibidem deo Suientib; + Ita g n° ego né fiedes mei né
aliq's p me de ceto alig’m calapniam moucbim? inppetuii adtifus Pdzos «o-
+ de

nachos de kelchou de aliq® pifcaria q® sit ut fit in? pool + pifearia
Orde « et pifcaria de blakewel - Hae aut remiflionem « t q'eta clamacSem sine
malo ingenio tenenda affidaui - Ipi u° reeeperat me ‘%t vxoré mea *t hedes
meos in ffnitaté dom? sue * pticipes fe€unt omnia bonoy que i eoy fient
ceetia de cefo + Hiis teftibs -

fol. 27.


--- Kelso1_page161.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 19

Cat - Witti Wafeti sr cad « Bearwrs.
63 Onnnibs {e cat's cectie filiis *t fidclibs vifut ut auditu® has litfas - Wis
Wafets falf - Sciatis me intuitu caritatis ocefliffe * hae plenti carta mea
ofirmaffe deo * ecctic fe Qarie de kelehou - %t conachis ibidé deo Suientib;
remiflioné t q'eta clamagdem qm BP de houhb’ne t Robert? de Pefehale «
+ Wabilla ma? Sufanne vxoris illi?-*t Alexand de la Rincre “t Qatildis mat
ci? cis feCunt de pifearia de Redehouh - tenenda s' inppetué

ita lie « rete,

honorifice t plenarie sict earte coy teftant® t confirmat - ptea geelli eis q
libe % sine inpediméto mei ut hed’ meoy heant fealingt faa fup ‘fram mea
de Twedemue - fict hue ufq, habnerit + et palos fuos figant fp candé ‘tra

ad retia fua siceanda fict hacten’ fedant - Hiis Teftib -

Carta Ade fit vddig- de t¥ in vddiggat: -

64 Ovnibs has tras vifuF ut anditu® - Adam fit Huddyng: de Berewyé falé in
dno + Nottit ynitilitas tra me diuine pictatis intuitu «t p falute anime ince t
omnii antecefloy et succefloy meoy * cit aflenfu t voluntate Amabilie sponte
mee +t Qargarete filie mee dediffe t coneefliffe hac earta mea conftmafie -
deo ct cectic ste Qarie de kelchou - t qonachis ibidé deo Suientibs

medictaté toci? re mee in Huddinggate de berewyé tam inhabitata g"

habitata - ex pte aq'lonari exit? ci?dé tre efi toto exitu - Ita tu y Wargareta
filia mea hebit dimidictaté aifiamenti ci’dem exit? - t p diuifas feas cora
burgenfibs ci’dem ville - Tenenda * poflidenda i liham % pura ‘t ppetna
elemofina solutam “t q'etam ab omi calitpnia sieut - Pram illa q‘m emia pre
meo et fie meo p'mogenito denariis meis - In cui? ppetue donacionis
teftimoniai - Teftes fit tales - videlies Wilts bron magr qonialia - Wagr
Laurené vicari? de Berewit » Symon Qaunfel - t alii qui pfenti septo

G


--- Kelso1_page162.png ---
Benewvn.

50 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

figilla fua vna ed sigillo meo in teftimonii appofnerdt - fea fuit h mea
donacio dic Jouis px* p? fefti omium fGoy + anno gfe @° + cc? + xx° yij? -

nnllo pt"dicente vt reclamante -

Qreta clam - Hugo Qulard t soéoy ei? Sr pifea¥ apd Berwici -

Onmibs fe cat's ecetic filiis t fidelibs vifut vI auditu¥ has litfas - Hugo
Qnlard - Walé fit Balduini - Wits fit Robti . % Walt fit Radulphi de
Efife Seroc: +
Criftine » Gunuilde - filiay Aliz de Twedemne remififfe t q'eta clamaffe
deo t ecctie ste Warie de kelcho * monachis ibidé deo Suientib; omiem
calipnia q‘m hre nos dicebam? erga cos - Ita q n° uos uf hedes fri n® aliq's

li. NoWitis nos de conceffione vxoy firay feilic; Qatildis

9 eg ae me = ap. Dax
p nos - de ceto monebim? aliq'm caliipniam inppetud adutus pdéos monachos
de alig® pifearia que sit ut fuit int pool - pifcaria - s - de Orde - *t pifearia de
Blakewel - Hae anté@ remiffioné * q'cti clamaédem sine malo ingenio
1 iS
tenenda affidauim® - Ipi n° reeepunt nos - *t vxores jiras - t hedes firos in
a BA ee Qo a . ;
fnitaté dom? fue ‘t pticipes fe¢unt dium bonoy que i coy fient eectia de
9 .
ceto + Hiis teft> -

li eoyd sup le Redhouch -

Onib; fee cat's cectie fillis t fidelibs vifu¥ ut auditu¥ has tras - Hugo
Wulard » Walé fit baldewyni - Wits fit Robti. & Walt fit Radulphi de
Efttexe falé » Nollitis nos de conceffione yxoy firay +s - Watildis - Seroc- -
Criftine - Gunnylde filiay Aliz de Tweddemue remififfe t q'eti clamatte
id de Redehouh - Deo 't eectie
ste Q)arie de kelehou - t monachis ibid deo Suientib; + Ita q n® nos ut hedes

onine jus q°d huim? ut hre potuim? in pifea

Pad . Q . = . *, * = 3}
fri n® aliq's p nos de ecto aliq’m caliipniam mouebim? inppetnii adufus

fol. 28.


--- Kelso1_page163.png ---
>
a

LIBER DE CALCHOU. Bye

Pdéos monachos de keleho de aliq® pifearia q° sit ut fuit in? pool pifearia -
s+ de Orde - t pifcaria de blakewel - Hac ant remiffioné - ‘t q'eta clama-
Gem fine malo ingenio tencndam affidanim? - Ipi_u° recepunt nos *t fedes
firos in ffnitaté dom? fue - * pticipes fe€unt omium bonoy que i eox fient
ecctia de eeto - Hiis teft-

Qreta clan - vxoy Bdtoy viroy Sr déis pifeaF -

7 Oniibs fée at's ecctie filiis * fidelib3 vifuF vI auditué has littas

Watildis - Seroc- - Criftina - * Gunnilda filie Aliz de Twedemue - salé -
Noititis nos de conceflione viroy firoy - s+ Hug Wulard - Walti fit balde-
wyni + Wii fit Robti-  Walti fit Radulphi de cftfex *t hedii roy nemifitte
% q'etam clamafie deo t cectie ste Marie de keleho t @ouachis ibide deo
Suientib3 dem calipniam q‘m hre nos diecbam? erga eos + Ita gq nu nos né
hiedes firi n° aliq's p nos de ceto moucbim? alig’m calipnia inppetud adfifas
pdéos monachos de aliq* pilearia que sit ut {Wit in? pool + pifeariam + s+ de
orde - t pifearia de blakewel . Hae auté remiffionem % q'etam clamacdem
sine malo ingenio tenendam affidauim? « Ipi u? recepunt nos *% fiedes iiros
in fFnitatd dom? sue pticipes fe€unt omium bono» q in coy ecelia fient de

ceo - Hiis teft> -

Ti dicte @iiet - sup le Redhouch -

Onib; fée Gris ecetie filiis * fidelibs vifu¥ Ol auditu¥ has tras - Watildis -
Seroe: - Criftina - "t Gunnilda filie Aliz de Twedemue - salé - Noilitis nos
de conceflione viroy firoy + s+ Hug Q)ulard - Walt fit Baldewyni » Wiki
fit Robti + Wali fit Radulphi de efifexe - % fiedum firoy remififfe qeti
clamafle offie ius Gd huim? ut hre potuim? i pifedria de Redchouh Deo

Besewrk


--- Kelso1_page164.png ---
52 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Brrewrs. ecte ste Qarie de kelchou - % @onachis *dem deo Suientib; + Ita q n° nos
n® hedes firi n® aliq's p nos de ceto aliq’'m calapnia moucbim? inppetuii
adfifus PdGos onachos de kelcho + de aliq® pifearia q sit ut {tit in? pool
pilearia - s - de Orde + t pifeariam de blakewel + Hane auté remitflioné *t
qetam clamaédem sine malo ingenio tenenda affidauim? - Ipi ue reeepunt
nos ‘t ficdes firos i ffnitaté dom? sue +t pticipes feGunt dium bonoy q° in
coy fient eeta de ecto - Hiis teftibs -

Ti. Rob « de Pefale sr pifea¥ de orde *t blakwele «

69 Onnib; {Ge wat's cectic filis t fidelibs vilu¥ ut anditu¥ has tras - Rob
de pefale « falf » Notitis me intnitu caritatis de conecflione Sufanne vxoris
mee + t Qabille cat's illi? remifitie t q'etam clamatte deo t eectie ste A)aric
de kelchou +t wonachis ibid’ deo Suientibs omem calipniam qm hahe me
diecbam erga eos + Ita q n° ego nf fiedes mei n® aliq's p me de ecto
mouebim? aliq'n calapnia inppetud adtifus pdzos @onachos de aliq® pifearia
qf sit ut filit in? pool pifearia - s - de Orde + pilearia de blakewel « Hac
auté remiffioné % q'eta clamacionem sinc malo ingenio tenenda aftidaui « [pi
u° recepunt me %~ vxorem meam "t hedes meos in fratnitaté dom? sue *t

pticipes fount oftium bonoy q° i coy fient ecctia de ceto - His teftibs -

Mabilla Gr Sufaiie - sr le Redhouch «

70 Omnibs tée cat's ecctie filtis * fidelibs vifuF ut auditur has littas - Qabilla
mat Sufanne vxoris Robti de Pefeale- Salé- Notiitis me intuitu caritatis de
oceflione Robti de Pefehale Getli mei - t Sufanne vyoris ei? fedis mee -
remififle t q'eti clamafie omne ius gd habui ut hre potui in pifearia de
Redchouh Deo * ecetie fEe Qaric de kalchou + t @onachis ibidem deo Sui-


--- Kelso1_page165.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 5B

: © ne ali D0 alia% ao ee
entibs + Ita q u® ego n® fiedes mei n' aliq's p me de ceto aliq’m caliipnia dersrx:

eA = ap. an ono

mouebim? inppetuii adufus Ppd&os Monachos de kelchou de aliq* pifearia q
., Oe « op - oa
sit ut fuit int pool - pifcaria . s - de orde - % pifea
remiflioné "t q'etam clamaébem sine malo ingenio tenenda affidaui + Ipi u°

ia de blakewel - Hic aut

recepunt me t fiedes meos 1 fraPnitaté dom? sue + pticipes felant omium for. 29
bonoy q° in coy fient ecctia de ceto + Hiis Tettibs -

Carta Cofpat'e> comié Sr ecctia de home ci duab3 carueatis tre Grenlaw -
lambedé - t é «

te wat's ecctic filiis + fidelib; - Cofpat'cius comes - salt - Notii sit
uob omibs ta plentib; g* futu me dediffe t hac penti carta of'maite ecctie
ste Marie de kelechou % @onachis ibidé deo Suientib; T libam - % ppetua
elemofina p animab3 Regis DD - t Henf filii ei? dnoy meoy - * p aiabs
pat's mei t mat's mee - t p aia mea *t aiab3 omium antecetloy % succefloy

meoy + Ecctiam de Home ef duabz carucatis tre » t cf p'to q°d uocat®
Harafirodar in Tritorio ci%dé ville - et eectiam de Grenlawe ct capella de
Lambedene - % fra adiacenti + 7 Ecctiam de foghou ei vna caruecata fre -
* q’ndam tram q° vocat? - bothkiHfcheles ficut Hugo furd? ea plenari? tenuit
in Prat patt?a » Hee ig? oitia pide ecctie concedo * conf'mo ita libe (fete
de met de hedibs meis tenéda - ficut aliq'm elemofina aliam meli?- libius« *
qteci? tenet - Ita ut ns hedum meoy de pda eceta nifi folas ofones exife

Pfumat ad aie falutem + Hiis teftibs -


--- Kelso1_page166.png ---
(QERSEKIS.

“1
1

oA LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Coftnae - Pate: - comitis fit Walleui coft « Sr ectif de Home + Grenlau -
Labed - Halib’t . foggou . t t-

Vnififis f%e cat's ecctie filiis t fidelibg - Pat'cius comes filius Walleui
comitis + salé Notun fit vob omibs ta Bfentibs q* futu me ocefliffe t hac
plenti carta ofirmaffe ecctie ste Marie de keleho t monachis ibidem deo
fuientibs in liam % ppetnam clemofina p falute aie mee - t paia pat's mei -
% paiab3 omium Pdecetloy ‘t fucceffoy meoy ecctiam de Hom ci duabg
carucatis fre + ed p*to q’d uocat® Haraftrothar in Pritorio ciufde ville - 7
ecctiam de Grenclau : cit vna carueata tre + ’t ei capella de Lambedene -
ci capella d Halyburtun *% tris adiacentib3 - 7 ecctiam de foghou ea una
carucata fre - 7 bothkillef feeles p iftas diuifas - de furfa fontis de kalde welle
ufq, in vacella in q’ riuulus padi fontis defcendit - 7 ab illo vacello # fict
rinulus ille cadit in bothkil - 7 inde ? sic bothkil cadit i Witheddre - 7 p?
de Witheddre ? yfq, ad magna viam q° vadit ult* Spereeldoun - 7 p eandem
viam ufq, in pdm fontem de kaldewelle +7 cOmunem pafturam in? eos - 7
fealingas hotum mcoy de pinkerdun + Hee g* oitia pdée ecte de kelcho -
Pddis @onachis ocedo % ofirmo ita libere % q'ete de me de hedibs meis

tendda fient aliq'm aliam elemofinam libins t quieci? tenent + Et ego cis

- Ow, . e De = .
omes has pnoiatas clemofinas warantizabo - 7 defendam adutfus oiies hoies -
Hiis teft-

Yr . © ee
Wallenus Comes sup eccta de home - duab3 carucat tre ‘t aliis -

Omnib; fee watris ecetic filiis fidelibs Wallews comes sali - Notum fit

uob omib; tam pfentibs q* futuF me concefliffe 7 hac pfenti carta confirmafie

cectic ste Marie de Keleho «7 conachis ibidé deo Suientibs in libam *t ppetua

elemofina p falute aie mce - 7 p aia pat's mei - 7 p animab3 omniii aficefloy


--- Kelso1_page167.png ---
1
ng

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 55

 suecefloy meoy ecctiam de Hom cit duabs carrncatis terre - t cit p'to q°d
uocat? Haroftrodar in Tritorio ciufdé uille - t ecctiam de Grenelawe eit vua
carneata fre + 7 ci capella de Lambedene - 7 et capella de Halyburtun - 7
fris adiacentibs 7 cectiam de ffoggou ci una carncata Pre - *t bothikillef
{eheles ci {uis reétis dinifis - Hee g' omia fid@e eectie 7 Pdzis monachis con-
cedo 7 pfirmo + Ita lihe 7 qtete de me g hiedibs meis tenenda fieut aliq'm
elemofinam aliam liberi? 7 qeci? tenent - (f ego oiies has Pnotatas elemo-
finas gwarentizabo % defendam aduifus omes hoies « Hiis Teftibs

Patei? fil? Cofpat'e’ Sr eccta de Grenlan - Lambeden - *t halib» -

Oonibs f&e qat's ecetie filiis 7 fidelibs - Pat'cius fili? comitis Cofpate] -
ONO Np . o 7
salt » Nouint ofies tam pofti q* pfentes me p salute aie mee + 7p aiab3 patris

mei Walleui Comitis - 7 vxoris mee 7 oiium

mej 7 at's mee - 7 fii
aiicefloy 7 fiedum meoy conceflifle 5 plenti carta mea cofirmatie cectie ste
Qarie de Kelcho + 7 monachis ibidé deo Suientibs in libera 7 ppetuam clemo-
find eectiam de Grenlaw - 7 capellas de Lambeden 7 de Halyburtun ab eadé
pendentes ei vna dimidia carneata tre q’m cadem cectia de Grenlaw p'mo
habuit - 7 cit roftis 7 croftis 7 ‘tris 7 decimis 7 omib; q° ad ifiam eectiam 7
ad pnojatas capellas iufte ptinent + t ptea unam aliam dimidia carncatam
fre - q’m Adam pite'pte cectic de Grenlaw q?ndam dedit + p cate dinifas P
q's idem Adam eam pambulanit - ci tofto 7 erofto ad ipam tram ptinentib;-
zad ipam dimidia carucata fre heant pattura ad centum ones - 7 o¢to bones +
7 q'tnor vaceas + 7 vnii aure + 7 volo ut hee offiia pdéa heant - 7 teneant -
7 pollideant ita libe - 7 q'ete - 7 honorifice - sient aliq® dom? Religionis in
toto Regno dni mei Regis Scottoy alig‘m elemofina libi? «7 qeci? + tenet 7
poflidet - Hiis tettib -

Mersenis.

fol. 30.


--- Kelso1_page168.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU.

coceseas, Wits fili? Pat'cj - ne fiat 7 piudit nfm q capella coftruXit i ent sua ap

grenclawe %é -

Oonibs fee cat's cectic filiis 7 fidelibs tam pfentibs q‘m futuF vifuris ut
andit’is has tras - Wis filius Pat'eij falé - Nott ynitifitas fra me cdceffiffe -
z hae pifenti carta mea oftrmatle p me 7 p hedibs meis Deo 7 eectie se

Warie de Kelcho 7 monachis ibidt deo Suientibs q coy ecctia de Grenelawe
nulki fentict lefioné co q capellam m" peefferait habe in euria mea ap* Grene-
lawe ubi dinina ualeant andiri - {3 indépnis erit in omib3 7 p omia - Capel-
lan? u® q! cidem capelle feruict ? fidelitatem pftabit @at'e} ecetie q in nullo
1 i I a) q
p capellam illam ledetur + £5 coat ecctia ofiimodas oblaciones plenarie reci-
pict + 7 fine aliqua diminucide que ibi puenient - tam a me 7 familia mea g*
ab hofpitibs m* ibidem fnpuenicntibs - Si v? g abfit capellan? meus fidelitatem
. . - Or - + 2
wate} ecctie nd fernauit / volo 7 cdcedo ut a capella illa p eos amoneat® «
Hiis teftibs -

Carta WiHi fit Pat’cij sup -ij- bouat tre. vii toft *t croft « in tenemét- de
grélane -

Onnnibs has litfas vifuF vel audit‘is- Wis fit Pat'cij efnam i dno fali - Seiatis
dinine karitatis intnitu - et p salute aie mec+ et p animab3 pat's mci 7 mat's
mee + 7 pentum meoy « 7 oii aiiectioy 7 fuceefloy meoy + me dedifie - 7
rta mea ofirmafic - Deo 7 Eete fe Qarie de Kalchou -
ADbi ct @onachis ibidé deo duientibs i puram 7 ppetuam elemofina - Toftum
+ Croftum q Adam Caflin qfiq, de me tennit in villa de Grenelawe - et duas
bonatas fre de dominio meo in Whitefide - illam uidclies ptem de Whytefide
¢f eft otigua pdtis Tofto 7 Crofto fitus aq'lon® - Que due bouate fre inci-

pit a magna via q® iacs ex oceidentali pte ville - in longa 7 latum verfus

ocellifle + 7 hae pfentj



--- Kelso1_page169.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU.

aqlonem 7 orientem don‘ compleant’ plenarie due bouate tre Q're volo *t
firmi® cdcedo + vt Pd@i abbas 7 monachi Pnoiatum Toftum 7 Croftum - 7 pdéas
duas bouatas fre - ita libe - q'ete + lionorifice 7 plenarie inppetuum teneat 7
poflideant ? fient aliq alia clemofina in Regno Seocie libius + qteei? - pleni? -
7 honorifiecneius ab aliquib3 viris religiofis tenet? 7 pollidet’ - Et vt hee mea

karitatiua donacio fut’is tempibs ppetuam obtineat firmitaté ¢ pfentem cartain

figilli mei Munimine coram multis roboraui + Hiis teftib -

Conti « Pat'cij @ilit> - fit Patricij comitis sup donat aiicefioy suoy -

Vnittiis ste mat's ecetie filiis *t fidelibs tam pifentibs q° fut?is has tras vifur
uel andit’is + Pat'ci? wiles filins t heres dni Pat'eij comitis de Dumbar - 7
Cecilie filie Johannis - falé in dno + Notint ofies tam pofteri q* pfentes me
caritatis intuitu + 7 p falute aie mee - 7 p aiab3 pat's mei 7 cat's mee 7
omnia aficefloy 7 suecefloy meoy + coneefliffe 7 hac pfenti carta mea con-
firmafle - Eectie ste Qarie de kelkou +t cponachis ibidem deo Suientibs +t
inppetuii Suit%is - Eectias de floghou - de Home - t de Grenelawe « ei Pris «

decimis + obuencidib3 «7 omibs * singlis libtatiby « 7 oiiby * singlis ad cas
iuite sp‘tantibs vel sp‘tare de iure debentib3 - put in eartis bone memorie

Cofpatrici} Waldeui . Pat'eij . % Pat'eij -

aui mei Comiti de Dumbar pleni®
; _ ~ oR ied = ne & r
otinctur - *t teftat? - q’eumgq, noie cenfeant? - Et fimilit oifes illas ‘tras q's
diis Pat'ei® q’nda diis de-Danetex* t diis Wilts fili? ciufdé - diis de Gren-
lawe in eadé villa dé@is Abbti t connentui de Kelkou dederat * pcefivrat
put in cartis eoydé pleni? continet® ‘t teflat? - 7 @axime illam tram in
Grenlau q'm déi abbas * conuent? habét de dono dei dni Wiki filij Patriei
qndam dni de Grenlau « q'm Lyolphns Eqnicius q°udam tenuit fubt? eecle-

fiam de Grenlan - iux® cimitium ex pte auft"li dée eete - ita in longum
verfus occidentem ficut cimitium se extendit « de g* cont?nertia fuit in? me
- , >, VO =
ex vna pte t déos abbm *t conuenti de kelkou ex alta » Et finili? coeedo
tg

CQeRSERIS

* Grenlaw,


--- Kelso1_page170.png ---
(znsexis,

58 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

lingas de Bothkit
cum oimibs iuftis ptinenciis fuis % ptine de iure debentib; put in cartis
Cofpat'cij - t Pat'eii afid@oy comiti de Dumbar’ pleni? ptinet? + teftatur -
Quare volo t concedo p me t hedibs meis * aflignatis - vt déi monachi *
coy fucceffores d@as cectias - decimas + ois tras afid@as ct omib3 fuis

*t hae pfenti mea carta déis abbi * conuentui conf*mo Se

libtatiby * ayfiamentis - t omibs suif iufte ptinentibz -  eciai antedéas

sealingas cum suis omib3 ptinenciis ut ptinere valentibs ficant inppetui in

param * ppetuam clemofinam - adeo lie + qtete » * plenarie « fient in cartis
comitum de Dumbarr antiq?y - q's ratifieo omes t accepto + pleni? ptinet? t
teftat? - fine clamio ‘t inpediméto aliq’ mei t meoy - 7 fedum meoy vel
aflig*torum mcoy - 83 volo 7 coneedo p me * fiedibs, meis *t affig"tis / vt
dti Abbas + Connent? de pfatis ecctiis - decimis - rerris t Scalingis t omib3
ea} ptinenciis + t de omib; sup“déis c:nodum sud faciant omib3 modis
guibzeung, ijdem sibi ‘t monaftio suo sine inpediméto mei vel meoy vel
alicui? in‘ suecedentis eelius *t vtilius viderint t clegint expedire inppetuum -
Et vt hee mea conceflio % confirmacio ppetuam habeat firmitatem pfent@
eartam figilli mei munimine coram Mitis roboraui -

Carta Witt fit patrié + Sr q°d tofto in villa de Grenlaw - * aliis simitr
donagib; +

78 Vnififis {te wat's ecctic filiis * fidelibs tam pfentibs q® fut?is viluF vel

tot re eye soe . ra 7 Oe On

audit’is has tras - Wills filius patricij etnam in dno falf - Nouit vniufitas
ra me intuitu caritatis-t p falute anime mee « t €¥ - Comitifle vxoris mee
dedifie t cdceffiffe + hac pfenti carta mea pfirmaffe Deo + ecctic s¢e Warie
de Keleho % monachis ibidem deo Snientib; Toftum illum in Grenclawe
quem Lyolfus eq'eius tenuit fubt? eeclefiam ita longum vers? occidentem fict
+s 1 om, Oe a pat 9

cimitium se extendit - Et ptea in cadem villa q'ng, acras tre +  vnam

SD aan . 00 7 oO
Rodam c'ea Caucheftlawe - feilic; pximas int tram ecte -t tram Thome fit

fol. 31.


--- Kelso1_page171.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 59

Gilbti . % in? Pram Thom de Coupland « Pram q'm Nigellus tenet - Q’re mersexis.
volo vt fd@i @onachi Pdtum Toftum ‘t pdéam fram ita libe - ete - plenarie «
‘t honorifice teneant - % pollideant in Jibam  puram - * ppetua clemofinam -
ficut aliq‘m aliam tram libins - qeci? - pleni? . + honorificenci® tenét *t

poflident - Hiis teftibs -

Carta Cofpatrié comit sup ecctia de Grenlane ea ptinenciis -

79 Omnib; ecctie catholice filiis fidelibs ? Cofpat'eius comes + salt « Nouitis
offices 7 Plentes 7 fut®i me deditle 7 hac pfenti carta confirmafie eectic ste
Qarie de Kelcho - 7 conachis ibi deo Snientibs p anima Regis . dd. +
comitis Henrici filij ci? - 7 p aia mea - 7 pris mei 7 atris mee - 7 ante-
cefloy 7 succefloy meoy ecctiam de Grenlawe ci omib; ad eam intte
ptinentibs in liam 7 ppetuam clemofina + salua tenura Nigelli elerici «
qt de pdéis monachis Pnofatam ecctiam libere teneat omib; dieb3 vite sue -
His teftibs -

Carta Pat'eij comitis Sr tof. crofé - *t ij + bouaé tre in villa de Grenlaw -

80 Patrici? Comes de Dumbarr - Vnitifis xt fidelib3 tras has vifuris uel audit’is
fal in dno» Nofitis me conceflifte 7 hac Pfenti carta mea cofirmafte - Deo
7 Ecelie fte Qarie de Kalchov - 7 monachis ibidem deo Suientibs illud
Toftum 7 Croftum « ‘t illas duas bouatas tre i tritorio ville de Grenlawe -
q's Wits fit patrié p falute afc fue t p animab3 pentit fuoy illis dedit -
Tenendas t habendas s' inppetuum in puram 7 ppetna elemofinam - ficnt
carta déi WiHi patrié teftat® t confirmat - . Hiis Teftibs -


--- Kelso1_page172.png ---
Mensexis

cn

BO LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Lia Pui Pat'eij filij * hed Pni Pate com - g ii ipedict nos -

Per hoe se'ptum pateat omibs pfentibs * fat®is has litfas vifuF uel aud

g ego Pat'cius oiles filins 7 heres dni Patricij Comitis de Dumbar - 7 Cec
filie Johannis pmitto fidelit «7 p hoe septum me aftringo - q ego naiquam
inpediam n¥ aliq's noic meo inpedict comodi Religiofoy viroy abbis t con-
uent? de Kalehov infra teneméta mea toto tempe vite mee - nf in {piritualibs
né in tempalib; n° inpedire pmittam - $3 fouebo - % manutenebo cos 7 bona
coy p pofle meo - ac cos + coy tendtes firmarios - 7 Suientes - 7 coy fies - 7
contifos plentes t fut?os fine inpedimento mei 7 meorum inppetuum + bonis
fuis Pfentib *t fut®is gaudere permittam 7 peurabo - Nee ynq‘m p me vel p
aliqué de meis inpedient’ q? minus ijdem de omib3 bonis fuis pfentibs t
fut?is eomodi fui p libito voluntatis coy fecure fate » ordinare potunt ut
fup"dém eft inppetua - In cui? Rei teflimonia }Mentibs littis sigillum meum
appofui - Hiis Tett> -

eectia de Grenlaw *t dimid earud -

Carta Wittmi fit Pate

Vnillis (te tris cectie filiis 7 fidelibs vifuF uel andit’is has tras - Wilts fit
Patricij sali - Nowit vnitlitas fira me cécefliffe- 7 he pfenti carta conf inafie
Deo 7 cectic ste Warie de Kelehou + 7 monachis ibid@ Deo Suientibs
Eectiam de Grenlawe ci dimidia carueata tre q'm pino habuit « 7 ei alia
dimidia carueata tre q’m pea Adam pfate ecctie dedit p eafdem diuifas p
q's eam Adam pambulauit » 7 ci toftis 7 eroftis ad }aidtas tras ptinentibs -
in libam 7 ppetuam elemofinam - Volo itaq, ut ipam cectian 7 tras Pde
ndé eeeliam

ci eapellis 7 tris ad eapellas ptinentibs - 7 otib; aliis ad eq

inte sp‘tautibs - ita libere - 7 q'ete + plenarie - 7 honorifiee tencat + poflideant ¢
ficut alig‘m aliam elemofinam libius 7 qecius - honorificenei® « 7 pleni? tenet

fol. 32.



--- Kelso1_page173.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 61

: 5 . a ae <i :
7 poflident - Pretea dedi eis 7 cdecfli domi q'ndam ci tra eidem domui @ensexis.
‘a doa Hyim ufus orientem + ficut fofla iacet y“m ego

teftibs -

adiacente q° eft inx

cis aflignaui «

Carta epi sti And? Sr cecfiis firis in le )"fekis i pp'os vs? «

83 Rofius dei gta ep? fei Andree - Vnilifis fee «at's ecetie filiis + fidelihs
tam plentibs q" futtis falé in dno + Notit vnitilitas tira nos dediffe 7 con-
ceflitie 7 efali anétoritate pfentis se'pti pagina ofirmaffe ecctic fe Warie
de Kelchou + t monachis ibidé deo Suientibs in liba t puram « % ppetna
elemofina cecfias qs habent 1 efatn {ti Andree - s - eectiam de Walkaruition «
Eecliam de Home ci pochic fue integ'tate - ta ipins ville g* yni? Gordoun -

@ +t capella de Halyburton -

Eectiam de Grenlay ci capella de Lambede
Ecctiam de fogghou + Eectiam de Sympring - Eectiam de Langtoun -
Eectiam de Worwerdene + Eecliam de Gordun - Eectiam de Keth - * xx -
fot finglis annis de capella de Keth Huei . Eectiam de Kaledouer -
Radulphi de Clere + Eectiam de T*uerlen - Eectiam de Cranefioun +
Eectiam de Penchatledh - Prenoiatas g* ecetias t cay eapellas et omibs
cay ptinenciis t rectitudinibs *t ci q'bslibs tenuris qs in epatu sti Andree
jufie poffident -  pfonata eaydem ecelefiay plibate ecetie de Kelehou - 't

anctoritate jira inppetunm dam? *t ofirmam®

@onachis ibidé deo Suicntil
s cectias ad pp'os vfus fuos - %t ut heant libam

yt pd@ monachi habeat pd
adminift"edem *t difpoficioné eaydem eectiay - % cas in Manu sua retinedt «
* lieeat cis q’s voluint eapellanos in cifdé eectiis retinere - Q're volum

% peipim’ - Archidiaconis « Officialibs » Decanis * aliis @inift's firis i quoy

adminift‘cione pdice ecectic pdtoy @onachoy sit ¢ ut ex eapellani eardde
cectiay deceflerint + nd inpediant alios q°s idem monachi yolnerint in cis

ce elebrare - Saluis epalib; nob 7 succefforibs firis - [iis teftibs -


--- Kelso1_page174.png ---
62 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

eisd cectiis -

Crasenes. Tt Carta Hug epi sti And

i Andree coinifter humilis - « vnittfis {te mat's cectie filiis 7
dericis ‘t laicis ta fut®is gq” pfentibs salt in dno - Nollit vnitifitas
neft* nos concelliffe 7 pfentis se'pti carta auctoritate efiali confirmafie eectie
ste Warie de Kelfho + "t @onachis ibidem deo Suientib; in libam * ppetua
elemofinam Eectias q’s habét in epatu noftro - Seiliez - cetam de Walcare-
weft: - Ecctiam de Home - cit pochie sne integ'tate ta ipius uille g* vni?
Gordun - Eectiam de Grenlawe ei capella de Lambedene « 7 de Haliburton -
Keetiam de ffoghov - Eeclefiam de Symp'ng - Ecetiam de Langetyn -
Kectiam de Whorwordefi - Ecchiam de Gordovn - Eectiam de Keth - et
Y

inti folidos finglis annis de capella de Keth hervei fedm cdpoficioné q’ndam
auctoritate bone memorie + J» Glafg- epi - 7 - O- proris de Paffeled int
platos monach de Keleho «7 H’veinm Ware
Eectiam de Kaldov

li-- fic in se'pto coy ptinet? -

Radulfi de Clere + Eectiam de Crennefton - Eectiam de

QO 0 — ae
Penecathland « Has g* pnoiatas ceetias 7 eapellas 7 oiies ear, obnenddes ci

tris + decimis « % of

cay ptinenciis 7 reétitndinib; t pfonat? eaydem
ecetiay ci q'buflibet tenis q's in epatu firo infte poflident - plibate ecctie de
Kalchov - t pp's ufib3 t fultentaédibs monachoy ibid deo Sniencia efiali
anétoritate inppetnii dam? 7 conf'mam? - Saluis nob 7 fuceefforibs firis
Synodalibs t Jure epali - Hiis teftibs -

Carta Symofi fra8 &r cectia de Keth tt t Nemore nob concefS p cid
Sym -

r

niverfis fe Mris cectie filiis t fidelibs - Symon firafer - Salé - Nonerint
ta pofteri q* pfentes me dedifte 7 cdcefliffe *t hac pfenti carta mea confmatle
ecée ste Maric de Kelcho -"t monachis ibidé deo Suientib; Eeelefia de Keth


--- Kelso1_page175.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. G3,

ci tota illa tra t toto nemore ab auft'li pte rinuli q! e*rit iuxta ecetiam + s + Ker
p Pde rinuld q! e’rit iux" ceetiam vig, ad Kyrekeburne *t inde ufq, ad vian jor. ss
qf vadit ad Hadyngton - *t inde vfq, ad Kyrneftoder fient ego eam pambu-
lani int Petra cfieum Cofpat'cium de Drem - t de Kyrneftroder vfq, in
Reauedene - t de Reauedene vfq, ad pfati riuula q! e’rit ius“ ecctiam + +
illam tram ex orientali pte vie iux* ecelefiam ufq, ad fupcilium montis vfq, ad
querea q eft fap riauln + Hane auté tram 7 toti nem? q°d [eft] infra dinitas
iftas dedi pdte ecetie de Kelchou in libam 7 ppetuam elemofind « ut faciant
ta de toto nemore g* de tota tra pda sict de suo pp'o q°’deumg, voluerint -
Concedo % Pdtis monachis t hdibs fuis in pdta tra de Keth manentib;
cOmunia % ayfiamenta tre mee de Keth 7 in foeali t in paft’ra ett Fonabilt

inftauramento 7 ayfiaméta bofci mei et hdibs meis - 7 vt ipi oonachi «teti
fint 7 libi de mult’a ta de tota decima ipius pochie g* de fua pp'a tota
segete qi ipa tra coluerint vt habuerint - 7 ipi 7 holes eoy liberi oio ertit
de ope molendini 7 fiangni - Volo itaq, ut platt monachi de Kelchou hanc
pdéam elemofinam ita libe t integre 7 honorifice teneant t in ppetuam
elemofinam poflideant - ficnt aliq'm aliam elemofinain libius pleni? t meli?
habent 7 poflident - 7 ficut hee carta tefiat? - Hiis teftibs -

loren* - t ede vxot ci? - Sr eecta de Keth t# t Nemore -

Cofth - Hu

s eectie fillis 7 fidelib; vifu® vel auditu¥ has tras - Hugo
monis flrafer {alé in dno - Nouerint des

386 Vninerfis fee ai
lorens t Eda vxor ei? filia 7 heres
tam pofteri q" pfentes nos edceflifle 7 hac earta jira pfirmatie deo 7 Ecctie
ste Marie de Kelchou 7 q@onachis ibidem deo Suientibz donacdem q'imn
Symon firafer eis fecit de Ecctia de Keth + ei tota illa tra 7 toto nemore ab
auftrali pte rinuli q' crit iuxta ceetiam + s+ p Pd@m riuula q' e’rit ius"
ecctiam vfq, in Kyrekburne - 7 a Kyreheburne afeendendo ufq, ad viam
de Hadyngton - 7 p viam de Hadington ufg, Crolforde - t s° p ficam de



--- Kelso1_page176.png ---
Kern.

nD

=

O4 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Crofforde afcendendo vfq, ad duos magnos lapides 7 s* in tnffifum cni’dam
Wateelli vfg, ad orientale latus vni? chefte 7 ab illa vfq, ad aliam cheft‘m
vers? auftrum - 7 inde in t‘nftifun vfq, ad q'mdam hogam lapideam - 7 ab
ila ufq, ad punla pontem lapideum q eft ab occidentali pte petarij - 7 s° p
ficam defcendenté viq, ad mat'cem ficam in chirneftrother - 7 a qat'ei fiea
ufg, in Renedene - 7 p Reuedene ufq i chirkeb’ne - 7 illam tram ex
orientali pte vie iux“ ecctiam viq, ad fupeilid montis - 7 p fupcilitt montis
viq, ad qnerei q° eft fup riuula - Hane a tram 7 totai nem? q°d eft infra
dinifas iftas conceflim? pdée ecetie de Kelehou in lifam + ppetnam elemo-
finam + ut faciant tam de toto nemore g* de tota tra pdéa ficut de fuo ppto
q°deumq, yolilint « Concedim? % Pdtis monachis 7 hdibs fuis in Pdea fra de
Keth mancntib; comunia ayfiaméta tre fire de Keth 7 in focali 7 in paft’a
ed fonabili inftauraméto 7 ayliaméta bofei fri ei hdibs firis - 7 ve ipi
@onachi q'eti fint 7 libi de mult’a ta de tota decima ipius pochie g* de tota
pp'a faa segete q'm in ipa tra ecoluerint vt habuerint . 7 ipi 7 hoies coy
libi oo erat de ope molendini 7 flagni - Volum? itaq, ut plati monachi de
Kelehou teant pdéam elemofind ita libe 7 qete 7 integre 7 honorifice
teneant 7 in ppetuam clemofinad poflideant ficut aliq’m aliam clemofina
libius pleni? 7 melins habét 7 poflident - 7 fieut hee carta 7 carta Syinonis
Frafer teftant? 7 ofirmant - 7 hee dia eis warantizare cont" oes hoies 7
fidelit 7 sii malo ingenio obfuare affidanim? - Hiis teflibs -

Cofirt « hernei fit - Philippi Warefcalli Sr omib3 donaé - Symofi - frak - de
cecta de Keth - t# - t nei -

Vnittis te cat's ccctie filiis * fidelibs has tras vifuF nel audit’is - Huei?
filius philippi qarefealli salt - Notiint omies ta pofti q” pfentes me cari
intuitu coceflifle t hae plenti carta mea conftmafle deo +t ecetie ste Marie
de Kelehou t monachis ibidem deo Suientiby donaédem q'm Symon frafer



--- Kelso1_page177.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 65

cis fecit de eectia de Keth ci tota illa tra 7 toto nemore ab anft'li pte Kee
riunli q? c’rit iux" pdeam cectiam +s» p Pde rinnld ins“ cectiam nfq, in
Kyrcheb’ne - 7 a Kyrchb’ne afeendendo vq, ad viam de Hadington q° ett
iux™ doma Robti Coth ab aqlonari pte + 7 p candé viam de Hadington fic!
fuleus traitur 7 ernces pofite funt vfq, in Crofforde 7 s* p tieam de Crotforde
afeendendo fic’ fule? t"hit? ufg, ad duos magnos lapides + 7 ab illis duobs
lapidibs 1 t‘nflifin » cui’dam vacelli ufq, ad orientale latus vni? magne
chefte - 7 ab illa fic’ fule? trahit? vq, ad aliam cheffam 7 in t'nfufim ufq,
fianilawes - 7 a ftanilawes fic' fale? trahit? fq, ad puuli: ponté lapided 7
s‘ p fieam defeendentem ab illo ponte ufq, in chirneftrother - 7 p magna
sieam de Chirneftrother tfins aqlon@ defeendenté ufq, i Renedene 7 p
Reuedene ufq, ad pdtin riuulu gt e’rit ins“ cectiam pnoiatam + 7 illam jv. 34

tram ex orientali pte vie iux" ecctiam ufq, ad supeilid montis - 7 p supeilit
montis ufq, ad querei qf eft fp vinlum + Hane anté tram 7 tot nem? qed
infra dinifas iftas continet? 7 concefli pdee ecctie de Kelehon 7 @onachis
pnoiatis i libam 7 ppetnam clemofinam ut faciant tam de toto nemore g*
de tota tra pdéa fie! de fuo proprio q’deumq, voliiint - Conecdo F Pacis

monachis 7 hdib; fuis in fd@a tra de Keth manentibs cdimunia 7 ayfiaméta
7 é ] 3 7a)

tre mee de Keth 7 in focali 7 pati’a ci Fonabili inftauraméto 7 ayfiamenta
bofei mei ct hdibz meis - 7 ut ipi monachi qrti fint de mult’a ta de tota
decima ipins pochic g* do tota faa pp'a segete + qm in ipa ‘ra colucrint + vt
habuerint - Et ipi 7 hoies coy liberi ofo erat de ope molendini t Ragni #
Qe volo ut pifati coonachi de Kalchou hane pdéam clemofinam ita lihe « 7
qtete - integre - honorifice - teneant 7 in ppetuam elemoiam poflideant # fic!
aliq’'m aliam clemofinam Iihins pleni? - imelins habent + 7 poflident » Hiis

teftibs «


--- Kelso1_page178.png ---
Kean

PD

66 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Carta Johis de Keth Qarefea Sr cdt®uertia 12 nos 7 cfd de g'bsd tt apd
Keth 7 donaé « cid Sr ecctia de Keth 7 at -

Onuunib; hoe feptum vitu¥ ut auditu¥ » Johes de Keth Qarefeallus ctna
in dno falé « Nowit vnitfitas fra gq ea controufia diu Wterct? in? me ex
vna pte - 7 Abbtem 7 Conuenti de Kalchou ex alta sup q‘dam pte tre :
iacentis int siluam coydem @onachoy 7 aq‘m q® defeendit de eectia de
Keth q® vocat? Rutherthalev + 7 alia pte tre furfum cectiam de Keth verfus
aq'loné fict ¢ces polite sit 2 tandem fab hac forma amicabilit sopita q'euit -
videlic3 q ego p me 7 hedibs meis inppetua renunciaui toti iuri meo q°d
me diecbam tre in pddis tris - 7 eafdem Tras cdcefii Pdéis conachis
inppetua poflidendas - Pretea conceffi Deo 7 Ecctie ste O)arie de Kelchou
+ wonachis ibidé deo Suientibs 7 fuituris 7 hac carta mea ofirmaui in libam
puram 7 ppetuam clemofini Eectiam de Keth ei tota tra 7 nemore ad
eandé cectiam ptinentibs p din

in carta pat's mei Heruci Warefealli
contentas + Concefli F d@is @onachis libtatem habendi molendina i déa ‘tra
ttangna f'mandi pontem faciendi vfq, ad cectiam de tra fua de Hundeby -
Et yeelli ¥ cis 7 coy hoi

i Pdéa tra de Keth manentibs cmunia 7
a, - . O40 . a. ~
ayfiaméta tre mee de Keth put i carta Pd? pat's mei continet? - Hane a
coceflionem 7 pfirmaédem feci pdéis monaeh p falute aie mee 7 p aiab;

omnia aiiecfiorum 7 sueceiloy meoy ut teneant 7 poflideant dia pnolata in
liham puram 7 ppetuam elemofind adeo libe qtete 7 honorifice fient al
clemofina 7 Regno Seocie libius q'eei? 7 honorificenei? ab aliq’b; viris
Religiofis tenet? 7 poflidet® « In cui? rei teftimonia plenti se'pto sigilla meat
appofui + Hiis tettib; -



--- Kelso1_page179.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. oF

Cot'maé Heruci fit - Philippi Qarefealli $r eectia de Keth # t? 7 nemore » Kern

7 aliis -

39 Vnitlfis fee aat's ccetic filiis 7 fidelibs - Herueus fit Philippi Warefealli
saltm - Notlint omies tam polti g* pfentes me conceflifie 7 hae ptenti
carta conf*mafte cectie ste Marie de Kelchou - 7 @onachis ibidem deo
Suientibs ecctiam de Keth ci tota illa tra 7 toto nemore ab autt‘li pte
riunli q' crit iux* ecctiam +s - p pdém rivula q! crit iux* ecetiam ufq, ad
Kyrekeb’ne 7 inde ufq, ad viam q° vadit ufq, ad Hadingtoi - 7 inde ufq
ad Kirneft’ther sict Symon frafer eam pambulauit int Pct'm cliam >
Cofpat*ciai de Drem + 7 de Kyrneftrother ufq, in Reuedene 7 de Reueden
ufq, ad plata riuulum q! c’rit ivx* ecctiam - 7 illam tram ex orientali pte
vie iux* ectam viq, ad supcilidi montis - 7 p fupciliam montis vfq ad quered
q® eft sup rivulum + Hane auté tram 7 totii nem? q?d infra diuifas iftas eft
concefli Pdée eectie de Kelchou in libam y ppetuam clemofina ut faciant ta
de toto nemore gq de tota tra dia fict de fuo pp%o q°d volitint - Concedo
Peis monachis 7 hoMibs fuis i Pdta tra de Keth manentib; edmunia 7
ayfiaméta tre mee de Keth 7 in focali 7 paftura ci Fonabili inftauraméto 7

ayfiaméta bofei mei e& hdibs meis 7 ut ipi monachi q'cti fint 7 Tibi de mult?a

tam de tota decima ipius pochie q* de fua pp'a segete qm 1 ipa tra eolttint

vi habuerint - Et ipi 7 hoies coy libi ofo erat de ope molendini 7 ftagni -

Volo itaq, vt plati monachi de Kalchon hane pfatam elemofinam ita lide 7

qrete integre 7 honorifice tencant 7 in ppetuad clemoim poflideat 7 fict aliq’m

alia elemoiam libius pleni® 7 meli® habent + poflident - 7 fict h carta teftat® «

Hiis ¥ -


--- Kelso1_page180.png ---
68 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Kern, Cofirt - Walcolmi reg’ + sup Ectia de Keth -

90 Qalcolm? Rex Scot - Epis - Abbtibs - Comitibs + Baronib3 - Jutti
+ Omib; fail, pbis hdibs fre fue ef

vicecomitibs - ppofitis - in
salt - Seiant pofti tam g®
cetam de Keth cectie fee Marie de Kalchon 7 abbti 7 @onachis ibidem deo jut. 35.

laici. lentes me dedifie 7 hac carta mea pfirmafle

Suientibs p aia pat's mei 7 Regis Dauid ani mei 7 Pdeccfioy meoy i clemo-

finam ppetua libe 7 qtete poflidendam vt libius q'cei? aliq’mm aliam clemofinam
py PASS) 1 J

pata cectia de me tenet 7 poflidet + Hiis Tett- -

Cofirm Reg> » WiHmi Sr eadm ceetia de Keth 7 pti -

01 Vis dei gta Rex Scocie Omib; pbis hdibs toci® tre fue cf
8 oP 5
ant plentes 7 fut’i ine yeefliffe 7 hae carta mea confirmafie deo z ccte

7 laici

tris - decimis 7 omib3 inflis ptinenciis fuis - Tenend i libam 7 ppetuam
clemofina + ita libe 7 q'ete plenarie 7 honorifice fieut [carta] Symonif frafer
tefiat® 7 cOfirmat + saluo Suicio inco - Hiis tett- -

Coceftio Gilli de vinfranvyle &r déa cectia de Keth -

92 Onnnibs amicis fais 7 omibs eee catholice fidelibs - Gilbtus de vmframwile

salf - Sci cocefli donaddem q‘m A)alcolin? rex Seocie fecit eet {te

tis q eg

Warie de Kelelion fup ectam de Keth + 7 ego q‘ntum ad me ptinnit ipam

ctiam de Keth pdée ecetie de Kelchou donaui 7 hac carta i ppetaa elemo-

ina cofirmaui cit tris 7 pateuis 7 omib3 ad eam infte ptinentib; - Hiis Tett -


--- Kelso1_page181.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 69

Cotirti Bni Alext Regis Scot sup dicta eeetia de Keth ¢ t? 7 Nemore+ ker.

93 Alexander dei gta Rex Scocie Omibs pbis hdib; toci? tre sue elicis 7 laicis -
Salé - Sciant Pfentes 7 fut°i nos cdcefliffe 7 hae carta jira ofirmafie deo 7
ecte fe Marie de Kelchou 7 conachis ibidé deo Suicntibs donaéem q‘m
Symon frafer eis fecit de ec@a de Keth + ea tota illa tra 7 toto nemore ab
auft"li pte rivuli q' e’rit iux™ dicta ecctia p rectas diuifas contentas i
oftmad&e Heruei filij philippi @arcfealli 7 cu comunib3 ayfiamentis bofei
ipius Heruei ef hoibs fuis 7 hoMibs Pdéoy wonachoy de kalchon in tra coy
de keth manentib; + Et ut ipi oonachi q'eti fint 7 libi de mitura ta de tota
decima ipins poehie g* de sua ppta segete / q‘m i ipa tra coluint vt
habuerint - 7 ipi monachi 7 hoics coy libi ofo erat de ope molendini 7
fiagni- Q're volum? ut pdzi @onachi de Kelehou hie pdzam clemofinam
habeat 7 teneant ? ita lihe 7 q'cte integ® 7 honorifice fie! carta Paci Symonis 7
conf'macio pred@i Heruci inde f&e Pdéis onachis de kalchov inte teftant? -

faluo 8uicio firo - Teft> -

Coftmaé - R - efi sti Andi Sr donat Reg: Waleolmi« de cecta de Kehit 7 at -

4 Onmnib; {ce wat's ceetic filis - R - dei gfa Ept ft Andree falé - Sciant ta
polti g® pfentes me ecdceflifte 7 hac pfenti carta ofmatie donagoem Regis
Qaleolmi q‘m dedit ee&e s@e Marie de kalchou p falute aie fue 7 aiicefloy
fuoy Ectam videlie; de Keth et omib3 ad cam iufte ptinentibs - 7 q‘nti ad
me ptinet in ppetuam dediffe clemotina saluo inre epali - volo itag, 7 Peipio
ut Pdictam ecctiam ita libe 7 q'ete poflideat ficut aliq'm ecctiam in epatu
meo lifius 7 q'etius poflidet - Hiis Toft: -


--- Kelso1_page182.png ---
70 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Kern. Sedacio edtroulic int nos 7 Heruct Warchad de cecfia uille sue de Keth .

9

oe

Nonerint omes fifentes 7 fut?i cont°tiliam 7 qfrelam gq? diu agitata eft int
Abbtem 7 @onachos de Kelchov 7 Herucii marchad de cectia uille fne de
keth tali? €e sopitam 7 ad talem finem pduetam - Abbas 7 Baz wonach de
kelchon qtetam clamancrat ei 7 hedibg fuis querela q’m tebant adtifus
ecctiam faa - ipe auté Herucins p amore dei 7 be uirgis marie 7 p falute aie
fue 7 aficelloy fuoy 7 fucceffoy dedit {id@is monachis de kelehou in liham z
ppetua clemofinam + xx" folid unoq’q anno in ipa ecctia de Keth libe >
q'ete ab oii Suicio 7 ofuetudie vidclics - x - folid ad Pentecoften «7 x - ad
fefta {ci Wartini - Ita 7 q predieti @onachi nichil ampli? de ipa cectia cxi-
gent n' de bona voluntate ipins vel fiedum fuoy + 3 nd licebit Pato H?uco
vt succefforibs fuis ifiam ectam alicui loco religionis dare n* pdzo loco de
Kelchou - s3 p? deceffnm fientis plone q' singtis annis Pdéam penfioné -
xx". folidoy exfoluet ifie H'ucus ut fueceffor eins clico en fdtam eectiam
dave volflint ad Abbaté deducent q! fidclitatem de pdea penfione annuatim

foluenda abbti 7 @onachis imrabit - 7 vig, - s+ abbas 7 H?neuf enndem
clieum efo pfentabat a q° curam aiay accipiet - Hee cdpoficio 7 ocordia fea
eft ex vt%q, pte sinc dolo 7 malo ingenio cord hiis teftibg - J» epo Glafg- -

R - abbe de Jeddeword -

Jocelin? ept Glasgy - 7 prior de Pafley indices a pp* delegat Sr déa
controtls* .
96 Vnitilis {%e cat's cectie tiliis 7 fidelibs - Jocclin? dei gfa Glafguen8 ept 7
Ofebert. ptor de Paffelay + salt - Nouint omief tam pfentes g* fut2i q eum
nos a dno papa indices delegati effem? ad detminand controfifiam q® div pt. 6.
agitata eft int @onachos de kelehon - 7 H?ueum marefeat Regis Scocie + s +


--- Kelso1_page183.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. ret

de ecetia de Keth villa ipius Heruey qtm pati wonachi iure eapelle pete-
bant afferentes cam debere ptifle ad ectam faa de alta de keth vt‘mq, ptem
aii Pfenciam firam ouocauim?» Cumg, abbas de Kalehou pductis teftib
suflicientib; parat? fuill; omiia pbare q? ex pte fua ppofucrat / nos paci 7
edcordie fiudentes t‘nfactioni opam dedim? « xt ad hoc tandem Sino duet?
eft 7 in co finit? q Pdés H°ucus dedit 7 gceflit ecte ste Warie 7 monachis de
kelchou in liham 7 ppetuam clemolina - xx - folidof filingoy vnoq?q, anno de
ecta faa de Keth libe q'ete ab i pfuctudine 7 Suicio - Ita q pfati monachi
nichilamplius exigent i eadem ecctia nifi de biiplacito ipius H’uci ut hed
cius - pfona 4 qf in plencia in ipa cc@a inflituta eft inf x1 dies [poftquam]
repat'auit fidelitaté 7 iuramti sup“Uzis onachis jittabit de Puotata penfione
cis annuati ad duos fminos pfoluenda- x + vid3 solid ad Pentceoflen - 7- x -
sot ad fefti sci Q)artini - Onies F q* poft hance pfona p heruct ut p heredes
ei? in ipa ecetia de keth inftituendi sit aiig® ponent? eandé @onachis jifatis
fidelitaté 7 simile illis iuramenti pftabit - Nec liecbit ipi I?’uco ut here-
dibs ci? pdgam cectiam de Keth alij loco religionis dare ut predéo loco de
kelchou + Hane t"nfacGem Tneus fide intpofita sii malo ingenio pepigit
se obferuatura 7 hedes fuos fimitr - 7 wonachi ealchoenfes candé ex pte
sua se obfuaturos pmiferat eoram hiis teflib3 -

Neg mw 8 ~ 7 a ~ aa +
Cofirtt conde: in? nos 7 dém huca - p- R.- epm sti Andi.

Ricard? dei gia Ep sti Andree vniulis {te Keetie filiis 7 fidelibs salt -
Noucrint omes tam pofti g* pientes me geefliffe 7 hac epali auetoritate
of'inafte compofigdem feam int Abbtem 7 @onachos de kelchou 7 iimeun
carefeallii de eectia de Keth ville ipius Heruei q‘m @onachi paz petebant
iure eapHo dieentes eam debere ptitte ad ece®am fuam de keth + videlies q
ipe H?ucus donauit ceclie 7 conachis de Kelehou in libam 7 ppetuam ele-
mofina viginti solid vnoq?q, anno ita q nichil ampli? evigant i ipa ecetia de

Kern.


--- Kelso1_page184.png ---
Kerr

> Vnitiis ste mat's ecetic filiis 7 fidelibs

72 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Keth lihe 7 qete ab omi ofnetudie 7 Suicio + pfona & q! in ipa eectia de
Keth in pfenciay inflitut? eft inf* xl - dies q? in iftam puinciam velit fideli-
taté 7 inramentii platis @onachis pftabit de jidéa penfione eis annuatim ad
duos ‘tminos pfoluenda - x - videlic3 solidos ad pentecoften - 7 + x - solid ad
fefti sti cartini - Oiies 7 q' tempe meo vi fuccefloy meoy p H°ueum vt
hedes ei? in ipa cectia inftituendi sit afig* inpfonent® eandé conachis pdeis
faciant fidelitaté - N* licebit ipi H*ueo n° hedibs ei? Pacam ecctiam de keth
alicui loco religionis dare nt Pdto loco de Kelehou - volo itag, ut t'nfactio
ifta rata sit 7 ftabilis - 7 vt Pd2i @onachi de Kelchou Pnoiatam elemofina

libe + q'ete heant 7 poflideant » Hiis tett- -

Carta Symoii frafer &r cecta de keth » ty Nemore «

mon frafer sali - Nottint ta poftti

gq” jifentes me dediffe 7 ocefliffe 7 hae pfenti carta mea ofirmatfe ecctic ste
Warie de kelchou 7 @onach ibidé Suientibs‘ecctiam de keth ei tota illa tra 7
toto nemore ab auft"li pte riuuli q' crit inx* ecctiam + s + p pd@m riuulun
gq) rit inx” aq"m [ecclefiam] «s+ Kirkeb*ne
ad niam de Hadington q eft iux* domi Robti coth ab aq'lonari pte-7p
candé uid de Hadington sic sule? trait’ 7 eruces pofite sit ufg, i Crofie-

ford - 7 8° p sicam de Crotfeford afcendendo sic* sulc? t*hit? ufq, ad dnos

7a kirkeb'ne afcendendo ulq,

magnos lapides + 7 ab illis duob3 lapidib3 i tnfttfum eni’dam vatcelli vig,
ad orientale lat? yni? magne cheft® 7 ab illa sic’ sule? t*hit? ufq, i aliam
cheflra - 7 inde in t‘nftfum ufq, ad ftanilawes 7 a ftanilawe siet sule? trahit®
ul, ad pula ponté lapided - 7 s* p sicam defeendendo ab illo ponte uf, in
chirnetiveh » 7 p magna sicam de chirneftre {4 aq'lonem defeendenté ufg,
in Raueden + 7 p Raneden ufq, ad fid@m rimila qt eit iux® cectiam
pnoiatam - Et illam tram ex orientali pte vie iux* cectiam ufq, ad supeilia
montis - + p Sreiliti montis ufq, ad queret q* eft sup riaula - Hae auté >


--- Kelso1_page185.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 3

totum nem? q?d infra diuifas iftas eft dedi|jdée eectie de Kelehou in libam 7 Kern
ppetnam clemoiam ut faciant tam de nemore q* de tota ra Pdéa fict de fuo
pp’o q’denmg, volflint - Concedo  Pdtis monachis 7 hdibs fais in Pdza tra
de Keth manentib dia cdmunia ayfiaméta tre mee de Keth 7 in focali 7 in
pattura ci Fonabili inftanraméto + 7 ayfiaméta bofei mei ci hdibs meis + 7
ut ipi monach q'cti fint 7 libi de mitura 4 de tota decima ipi? pochie g” de
pp'a sua segete q‘n in ifia tra colucrit 7 habuerint - 7 ipi 7 holes eoy thi
ojo erat de ope molendini 7 ftagni - Volo itaq, ut pfati monachi de Keleh
hane pd@am clemdam ita lie 7 qtete 7 integ® 7 honorifice teneat 7 1 ppetua
aliq'm alia clemdam libins pleni? 7 melins tint 7

elemoiam poflideat sic’
poflidét - 7 sict hee earta teftat® - Hits Tettibs -

De iftitndde Reéoris i déa cectia -

99 Vitam cartam pf'mant t*s reges + s - Waleolm? « 7 Wis fr ciufdé Waleolmi
z rex Alexander de Vbo ad uerba + Ita puenit in? nos 7 linet de Keth sup
ec@a ville fue vids q addueet? ad nos ille q' pfona ert - z iurabit q abfq, malo
ingenio 7 fidelit reddet nob finglis annis - xx" solid ad pentecoften 7 sti
Martini +7 nichil ampli? exigem’ in ca + 3 nd lieebit déo H®aco né hedihs
snif déam elemofina alicni loco religiofo dare nifi nobis - Et vq, + s+ nos 7

ipe debem? eundem q! inftituend elt efio pfentare +

Conuéeio it nos 7 Diim Rotm de Keth &r Hundeby keth -

100 Vnitilis xpi fidelibs hane cartam vifut ut auditu? - Robert? de Keth miles
coarefeallus Scocic falé in dium Saluatore - Noflit vnitifitas tra q ci
cont°tifia mota fuifiet in? me ex pte vna ? 7 Religiofos viros Abbaté 7
conuentit monaftii de kelchou ex alta sup Miltura tre suc de Hundebyketh

K


--- Kelso1_page186.png ---
Kern.

T+ LIBER DE CALCHOU.

rrr) axe ae
ac sup molendino in déa tra indo 7 stagno eiufdé molendini ad tram meam
de Keth firmando ; n° nd 7 sup q*dam p’pftura fea p eofdem religiofos sup
‘ . Bn = a 2

tram mea de Layfinifton® « Demi ego ofidans fa Pdeceffoy meoy 7

elemofinas d@is religiofis p ipos donatas illibatas 7 integras - volens obfuare ¢

q°y clemofinay pticeps in omib;, defido de 2 multura 7 ius mult’e omium
segetii infra fram sua de Hundebyketh pdéam efeenciii - 7 omium bladoy
snoy vndecumgq, pucnicneid fiue ex pp'a fua cult®a fiue hofum fuoy inf déam
fram maneneid - ac ius 7 licenciam conft"endi st molending inf” d@am tram
fuam de Hundebyketh n° no firmandi stagni déi molendini fui ef concurfu
aque sup* tram meam vbi 7 q‘ndo volucrint ae reficiendi ftagnum pdém
q’ciens op’ habuerint 7 s' viderint expedire - Do + concedo - 7 tenore
plenciti of'mo déis abbi 7 conuentui 7 eoy succefforib; inppetuii + Tenend
7 hnd cifaé religiofis in libum puram 7 ppetu’ elemofina » Volo ¥7 coneedo
q ci déi religiofi sen holes fui inf* déam tram de Hundebyketh manét

¢ > 5 O. pe a ~ 2

tras fuas ‘tre aimee puguas arare voluint : licita sit cis boues déas tras fuas
> e 7) Oe o p +, .

arantes + 7 7 carueas fuas uolite 7 renolue {yp tram mea fine inpediméto

i bladis e*fcentibs fup

mei ut hedum meoy + ita tat # q filla dampna fa

x. D _ ra ~ =f Spas rae
déam tram meam + Omes fimili? donaGes 7 eléofinas pdéis religiofis p
Pdeceffores meos p*us fZas tam i cectia de Hundebyketh q in tris « decimis -

7 fuis ptinéciis - in bofeis - pafiuris - pafenis + moris - 7 marifiis . aq!s -

comunib;

viis + femiti

ayfiamétis ad dam cectiam 7 tras fp*tantibs

p me 7 hiedibs meis cifdem religiofis oecdo 7 tenore plenciii oftmo + Volo

ordinandi -

infup 7 ocedo q pfati religiofi de tra fua de Hundeby 7 de Ley

afledandi - 7 difponendi {i pt’bagbe aliq"li mei vel licdum meoy deceto
libam Ticant facultatem - Ita fn q inf* déam tram de Leyis nHam faciant
manfioné n' fm vna bareariam - Has auté donaddes 7 caritatiuas fmacdes
volo

fei cifdem religiofis p falute aie mee 7 aficefloy 7 succefloy meoy + q's
q hijdem religiofi tencant 7 habeant in lifam puram 7 ppetna elemoia ita
libe - qtete + 7 pacifice fict aliq’m alia cléoiam in Scocia a q°ciiq, tenét seu
poflident - qs ego 7 ficdes mei pdeis religiofis yt" omies hoies 7 feias


--- Kelso1_page187.png ---
101

102

LIBER DE CALCHOU.

warantizabim’® aeq'ctabim? 7 inppetuit defendem? + In eui’ rei teftimoni’i

hane eartam sigilli mei munimine roboraui - Hiis teft- -

Carta Reg: - Wiki de - xl - 8 + in Berwico -

Villtis Rex Scott - jipofitis this de Berewyé sali + peipio vob q'tin® faciatis
Abbatem 7 @onachos de Kelchon tre + xl + fot q’s debent annuatim hre de
f'ma mea de Berewié sie‘ carta coy q’m inde habent teflat? - 7 ad tminos
ftatutos + Teftibs -

In? nos + lambini afa sr t¥ de Drafane -

Onmnibs tee cat's cectic filiis 7 fidelibs Arnald? abbas tot’g, connent? de
Kelchou falé - Sciatis nos cSmuni eoniilio five dedife 7 vecflitfe 7 h'e pfenti
carta ira pftmaffe Lambyno Afa fram de Draffane 7 de Dardarach p fuas
rtas dinifas in libum firma fendi . s - fieut wafcellus cadit a mutfo de
Carnegogyl defeendit i aq'm q° voeat® Candow 7 ita Candoit afeendendo
vfq, ad riuulii q' voeat? fmalbee - 7 ita ili rimulii afeendendo vfq, ad
rtam tnftifam de rivulo illo vfq, ad wateclla ila sb Culnegray « 7 ita
fic’ wafeellus ille defcend' 7 Naythane - 7 ita fic’ Naythane defeendit in
Clade « Tenend s' 7 hedibs fuis de abbe zconnentn de Kelchou in fendo

7 heditate - libe . 7 q'ete + plenarie - 7 honorifice - i mol@dino - i aq's -

7
i fiagnis - 1 bofeo - 1 plano - i p‘tis- i pafeuis - 7 i omib; aliis ayfiaitis -
Reddendo if annnatim duas mareas argenti 7 dimid - s - dimidictaté i
Natiuitate {ti Johis Baptilie 7 dimid ad fefta fei Martini - Nebit 7 pdés
Lambin? 7 hiedes fai fd@am ‘tram tm soluendo gtetam ab oi Suieio- Et
euriam de blodewite 7 de byrinfake 7 de aliis talibs puis q‘relis- Et ocedim?
ci capella 7 illa tra - 7 in ca fingtis chdomadibs tbs dichs Suicit + s3 1 foftis

p'ncipalibs ad mat'm eectiam suam veniant + Hiis teftib; -

Arvares.

fol. 38.


--- Kelso1_page188.png ---
Apuares.

10:

3

76 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Henric? abbs sr Dratan aidicé -

Onmibs {Se cat's cectie fit - 7 fidet - H - dei gta abbas de Kelehou falé -
3 7 g

Sciatis nof cémuni ofilio 7 affenfu capituli fri ocellitle 7 lac carta fira
oftmaffe - A - filio Jacobi in libera firma fendi tram de Draflan 7 de

Dardarach p fuas reétas diuifas ficnt ptinet? in carta q’m hem? de Wito
Cumyn ex yna pte - s - ficut riuulus defcendit a @offa in Naythan - 7
de Naythan in Clade vfq, ad rinula q' defeendit in Clude ad Holyn de
Patatlin Vfus orient » 7 s° furl p riuuli illa vfq, ad vetem foflura + 7 de
yeti foffura vg, ad viam illam q® vadit int moffam 7 duram tram vig,
polneanetke - 7 ex alta pte sic! wafcellus cadit a mofla sb Karnegogyl 7
defcendit in aq"m q* vocat® Candot - 7 ita Candott afeendédo yfq, ad rinuli
q vocat® Smalbeg - 7 ita rinula iftum afeendendo ufg, ad r‘tam tnfifan
de rinulo illo ad wafcella fub Culnegray - 7 ita fict wafcell? ille defeondit

in Naythan - 7 ita fieut Naythan defcendit in Clude - Tenend st 7 heredibs

fuis de Abbe 7 conuétu de Kalchon in fendo 7 hieditate libe - 7 q'ete
plenarie 7 honorifice i molendino + in aq's + i fiagnis + in bofco i plano in
ptis i pafeuis 7 i omib3 abis ayfiamentis - Reddend + inde annuatin nob
duas mareas argenti 7 dimid ad duof fminos - s + medietaté ad Natinitate
sti Johis Bapt" 7 medictaté ad fefta {ti Martini - Hebit auté pdés A. ;
heredes fui dtam tram tantum soluendo q'etam ab offi Suicio + 7 euria de
blodewyt 7 birthinfake - 7 de aliis talibs puis qfrelis - Concedim’ q cis
capellam i illa tra 7 in ea fingtis ebdomadis t'bg diebs Suicii - 15 i fettis
piucipalibs ad mat'cem suam cectiam venient » Hee auté pdta geedim? pdto
A+ 7 hedibs fuis adeo libe + q'ete + 7 plenat tenend - fic ipe 7 pat ci?

libius . 7 qlecius - 7 pleni? tenueriit - Teft> eap* -


--- Kelso1_page189.png ---
104d

LOS

LIBER DE CALCHOU. we

Ooi? abbs sr villa de Donane -

Vnitr

Kalch fali - Nottint ofis plentes 7 futu¥ nos cdceflifle

fee mat's ecée filiis 7 fidelibs - Oibert? abbas totusq, Conuent? de

z hac carta fra
of'maile Confiantino filio Gilbti prefbiti de lefmahag - 7 heredib; suif
villam de Dowane p suas r‘tas dinilas + ef fra q’m Ofbert? in ea tennit » y
ct duob; collibs vig, ad dinifas de Ardack in auft‘li pte - Reddet auté nob
fingtis annis p hae ‘tra viginti folid « s + decem ad fefta {ti Johis baptifte - +
decem ad fetta f:

i Vartini - oolet { ad @Molendina ném ifie 7 hoies ei? 7
@olendina facient - fieut ecti hoies dri + werchct* de filiabs hdinum suoy
habebit + 7 de filiabz suif dabit nob Mehet* - 7 de puis q'rimoniis hint:
suoy hiebit euria suain siet Jacob? de Drafian «7 Gilbert? fit Saludis - € si
fang's effufus fuit in tra ci? ipe foriittm hebit de hdibs fait. 7 nos de hoibs
iris + Hane anté tram p pdéas divi

libe de nob 7 qtete tenebt - in bofeo -

in plano + in pratis 7 pafenis « sic vicini ei? pdzi tram si

7 & tenent - Hits
teftibs

Johs Abbas sup pua Drafane eit fuis dinifis -

Vnitlis Ste Matris
Kalkon Ste Marie Sa
confenfu totins capti fri dedilie 7 edecfiitle 7 hae pienti carta cdfirmafte
Robto fit Warnebaldi 7 heredib3 fuis villam de pua draffan cum fuis re
diuifis in fendo 7 hereditate - Tenend de nob libam 7 quietam ab omi fuieio -

eetie lit 7 fid - Johes abbas totnfy, coitus Eeetie de

lf + Noucrint offies tam pofteri g® pfentes nos edi

3

Redd + nob annuatim pro tra jidza dimid march - argenti - ad duos termi-
uos videt3 - xl + dena¥ + ad feftum sti Johis Bapte - > - x1. def ad feftum
sti Wartini « Hits teftibg -

Apnarns


--- Kelso1_page190.png ---
7s LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Henrieus abbas sup Foleardifiune et ectera -

106 Vniliis ste watris Eectie fit . 7 fid - jifens feriptum viluris vt andituris -
Hen dei ga Abbas de kelkon , totufq, eiufdem loci cuentas ; ctnam in
dno Salé + Nottint pfentes 7 futuri nos de edi confenfu 7 atfenfu Capti tri
concefliffe *t hae pfenti carta jira confirmafle Ricardo fit Solph 7 heredibs
{uis folearift® qua Pater fuus tenuit ; 7 anteceflores fui tenet p fuas rectas
diuifas p quas Pater cins 7 anteeeff fui illam hueft de nob ; tenendam
eandem tram ; fibi 7 heredibs fuis ; de ecetia fira Kalk «i ppetuum - libe «
jn @olendino - et stagno / 7 in sartando 7 fot. s9

quicte - 7 honorifice « 7 plenai +
7 in bofeo + 7 in plano ; in Pratis , in Pafenis ; 7 in aquis - iu coris - 7 in
+ Hane aut Terram conceflim?

omibg aliis ayfiamentis ; infra pnoiatas dinifas
ci; 7 heredib fuis tenend de nob in feudo ; 7 hereditate ; libe¥ 7 qnicte ,
liberius 7 quicci? - A + de Draffan - ut aliqui , qui in capite tras fas /
fire de Kalkon ipe 7

de nob tenent + 7 poflident - Redd nob 7 Eecti
heredes fui finglis annis p d@a fra; duas marchas argenti + s + medictatem ad
feflum beati Johis Bapte - 7 aliam medietatem ad feftum sti Qartini - F -

Capit? +

Arnaldus abbs fup terram de Daneglas ea dinis- -

tus

Arnaldus abbas ; totufg, Con

e @atris Kectic filijs 7 fidelibs ,
Sali. Sciatis nos; cdi contilio firo ; dediffe 7 cdcefliffe ; 7 hae
a fira pfirmatie Theobaldo Flamatico ; fram ‘tram fup dnuelglas
fas + s + de furfo de Polnele » ufg, ad aquam de

107 Ownibs
de Kalk-
pfenti ea:

7 heredibs {nis ; p rectas dini
duglax + 7 de furfo » de Polnele ; ultra fe latum mos , ad longum fau + de
ie / ad hirdelan - de illue ; ad theuifford - in mofminin - cleorroe « 7 fie
ad longi nig™ ford « 7 ita nt via iacct ufq, erofleford + In feudo + 7 heredi-


--- Kelso1_page191.png ---


--- Kelso1_page192.png ---


--- Kelso1_page193.png ---
Qk OF ante Bae file AFR ArnaBieATie to,’
Ame Ne ahrePPrn av into rma <Ghe nts) fldns.
teow sien) tiny fy » Murelelia ahah pus ~ wtent# Mpa)
ODe fuse S Police nfs a¥ Agquani R-Dealay. De forfd,
BS ohreler ules ~- Brute 108 14 Doncgiow Auf Seale aS Te
Rl Bellic aS tBomfP B.S) m0 acta oboe, a ead Brg
wg pr. cia ne Yaa ade arf PrO.gn fleBaz Rowers
RRre a nieter pferuteicn 2 non eer} aero pelqmos a
Oey y plano Dy tthe Sy 112-2) OTS

a Bike Oa agate satay B Penterofien Diya expos afthrine
Qa Jaber Cinta fr. Gib magne, Blather
Me RAL Site dis a fas afi,


--- Kelso1_page194.png ---


--- Kelso1_page195.png ---
oa)

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 70

tate « libere 7 quiete - plenarie 7 honorifice - In molendino + In aquis + In
ttagnis - In Bofvo - In plano; In pratis ; In pafeuis «7 in offtibs aliis attia-
métis + Reddendo inde annuatim duas marchas - ynam - s+ ad feftum sti
Martini + aliam ad Penteeotien + Hiis teftib; Balwino de digit [ Bigir] -
Johe de Cranford - Gylbride mae giderede ; Gilmalagon ; Wac kelli ; Gillsto

clico , 7 thltis alijs «

Henrie? abbas sup le fineurrok> eum dinis~ -

Omnibs Ste Watris Eectie fit - 7 fid - H - abbas de Kalk + + ci%dem loci
Couentus ; Salé » Notitis nos dediffe 7 plenti carta cofirmatle Gilemo¥ fit
Gileonet ; 7 heredibg fuis [quandam p]tem tre de fincurroé ; p illam diuifam
+++ auticim Pris fui + ct p lacum qui eft inter eum et

que eft inter illum

7
nos + 7 fie p traftifum a dinifa Sabides ufq, ad rivuhan de Auinhath «

7 fic p

viuulum viq, ad Gregeterff +a Gregeterf* w° p Neithan vq, in Clude - Redd
Johis

lis annis p hac tra + xx - folidos - Wedietatem ad feftum

Bapte + et medictatem ad feftum £6i Martini « Wolet aé ad molendinum nfm
ipe 7 hoies fui y 7 @olendina faciét fit ecti hoies firi- Habebit aut hehet de
fillab; hoium fuoy ; 7 de puis querimonijs hoium fuoy curiam fuam + fiz
Wils de Ardanch ; ut

fuit in tra ei? 7 ipe fo

‘obus de draffan ; ut Saludis ; q fi fanguis effutus
item hebit -

firis - Hae enim tram fm pdéas dinif

+ de hdib; fuis - 7 nos de hdibs

las lihe de nob 7 quite tenebit ; in

pafeuis - f@ vicini pdéi tram fuam tenét - Hiis

hofeo + 7 plano ; in pra
tefi> +

Aunatrs,


--- Kelso1_page196.png ---
Annares:

100

80 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

P at ata See t
Henrie? abbs sup quad pté tre in fincurroks -

O01

ciufdem loci Con™ « Salé in dno - Notlitis nos dediffe 7 Pfenti carta

3 ste watris Eeefie fit. 7 fid- Hen - dei gta Abbas de Kalkou 7 totus

re
matte - G. fit. Saludis ; 7 heredibs fuis quandam ptem ‘re in fineurroe p
diuifas iftas tenend Sic' Pollenoran defeendit in Clude - 7 fic p Pollenoran
afcendendo vfq, ueniat ad matriceim ficam inter Gilberftoun 7 Gilmchaguitt--
7 lic p reétas diuifas fm mat'cem ficam ; don* ueniat? ad rinuli 7 fie p rinulum
afeendendo ufq, ad nig® vadum q°d eft in bog 7 p catricem fica in bog
ufq, ad Elwaldifyate + 7 de @atrice fica ad Elwaldefgate ; ad puum rivulam
defeendentem inx* Culnegaber + 7 fie p Riunlum illun defcendendo vfq, in
foffam fup* Crofti Efberti - 7 de fofla illa p Riuulum puum defeendendo

vfq, ad magni Rinulum de Duuelarg - 7 fie p magnum Rinula de Dunelarg ;

afeendendo vfq, ad vadum vie que uenit de Lefmahag 7 nadit ad Lanaré -

illam afeendendo in dularg - vfq, ad gracilem Cracem - 7 inde vfq,

ad pxiam vallem - 7 p Rimulum de Ancellef - defeendendo in Clude - Red-

dent at ipe 7 heredes fui finglis annis p hac fra «xx - fot - fexdecim d- p

Mma tre + 7 quatuor p fratnitate ppetna » quas ifie G + 7 heredes fui fuc-

cefline reddere tenent? « {+ deeem folid - ad fefium sti Johis Bapte - 7 decé
ad feftum s@i Qartini - Wolet at ad qolendinii n¥m ipe 7 heredes fui - 7
molendinii facient fit ecti vieini eins - Ochet> hotum fuoy hebit + 7 ipe

quictus nd crit n° heredes fui de Q)’chet de filiabs fuis - Et de puis Grimonijs

-{+ de blodwits - 7 de Birthnfake fa curiam habebit « fi
vel Wi

de hoibs fui

Jacob; de draffan
hebit
dinifas ,

Ardach - & fi fanguis effufus tilit in tra cins ipe forit

aye 9 ¢
- nos de hdibs fris - Hane autem tram fedin pidea

ipe 7 heredes fui + in bofeo « in plano - in pratis + 7 pafeu omibs aliis

attiamitis lihe de nob - 7 quiete « Pdta redd - tenebt » Hiis



--- Kelso1_page197.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. sl

Otbertus Abbas sup quad part’ fre in Glenane -
ip quad p:

110 O. dei gta Abbas de Kalkov - 7 ciufdem loci Cofit? - Omnib3 Ste watris

111

ceclic fil « 7 fid - vifuris ut audituris has tras Salim + Sciatis nos de edi
cifilio - 7 affenfa Capli firi dediffe 7 edcefiifle » 7 hae earta fira céfirmatte
Radulpho sernienti firo de Lefmahag - 7 heredibs fais quandam ptem fre in
ni wafeellii uadit int

Glenan in feudo ; 7 hereditate » p has diuifas -
croftum frethetan ; 7 crofti Gilmagn ; Wae Aldie- 7 cadit in Haliwelburn -
7 fi qddam alind wafeclluin uadit inter ifm Radulphum + 7 tram que fuit
Gilerifte kide , vfq, in Naythan - 7 duos holmos fup Naithan- s- Daldroe> «
7 Dalfagad - cum oiib; ayfiamentis dée ville de Glenan; ad faa pp'a allia «
Tenend s' 7 heredibs {uis de Ecctia fira - 7 de nob in fendo ; 7 hereditate -
Redd dui de Lefmahagu fing
feftum sti Wartini «7+ xl- defi - ad mediam eftatem - Et app‘abiit tam ipi-

annis dimid marcha argenti. xl - dei « ad

R- q* heredes fui fram infra iftas diuitas vbiq, fartando ; 7 colendo fifi
difturbae ad opus fuum + Wolent 7 ife - R-7 heredes {ui ad molendinumn
de Lefmahagu - 7 dabunt multura ; 7 ofMia opa molendini eit hdibs firis
faciét - et alia fuicia - 7 cdfuetudines ; tam in arando q\ in aliis opibs 7
edfuetudinibs , fit alii hoies firi qui funt de Glenan « Teft* Caplo -

J olis abbas sup oétauam ptem de Currokis -

Vnitifis ste watris Eectie fit - 7 fid . Joties Abbas totufg, Cofitus - de

kalkov , Saltm - Seiant tam pfentes q* futu¥ ; nos deditfe » 7 céceflifle

Waldeuo filio boidini hdi firo + 7 heredibs fuis oGauam ptem de Corroe ;

eum fuis reétis diuifis - In tris - In aquis - In molendino - In feudo - 9

hereditate - Tenend de not libe « 7 quiete - Soliendo annuatim dimid

march - 7 increffitum quandam ptem tre que uoeat® » Cultirfegi# - que iacct
L

Asnates,


--- Kelso1_page198.png ---
82 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Asovres. inter Territorium de Duglas - 7 Corroe - Habebit ctia tam ipe q* heF fui
avfiamta bofei , f& aliquis alins ci’dem ville liberins habet - Dabit etiam
tam ipe q* heredes {ui duos folid p hericth - 7 iehet ; p filiab3 fuis fi pr 41.
dabunt + Hiis teft> -

Othert? abbas fuper terra de Currokis eit suif dinis- -

112 Vnitifis ste watris Ecetie fit - 7 fid - ta {ntni g® pientibs » Otbertus dei
gta Abbas de Kalkoy - 7 ei’dem loci Couent® » Salim - Notiint ofts tam
poli qq pfentes nos dediffe ; cdceflifle ; 7 carta fra coftmatte ; Danid filio
Petri ; dotam [decani] de Stobhou , qué in heredem eins recepim? - 7 here-
dib; fuis tram de Corroe , qna pater cius tenuit de nob ; p eatdem dinifas p
pater ei? tenuit » pleni? ei , die quo hee carta fira fa fuit - f+ via que

qu
uadit de Cranford ; ad Riuulum ; gui dr Kirkeburn - 7 p Rinulum illum in
Clude - 7 alia pte fit Duglas - defeendit in Clude de Craufford. Tenend fibi
7 heredib; fuis de Ecctia ira - 7 de nob in fendo 7 hereditate ; life 7 quiete ;

eum eifdem libtatib; ; cum quibs pater fums eandem tram tenuit - s + cum
molendino ; et blodwit + 7 birtinfake ; 7 nichet'
libertatibs quas Pater funs huit - et quas alij hoies ; qui in tra de Lefmahag
tram tenent / melius 7 7 liberius hent « Ipe to 7 hoies fui; qui fup iam

hoium fuoy / 7 eum alijs

fram fedent ; de botco aceipiat fin qd opus eis fi flit 7 ad ardendum - 7 ad
ipam ‘tram hedificandam - $3 nich inde dabunt nee uendent + Redd - at tam
ipe Danid g* heredes fui nob inde finglis annis duas marchas 7 dimidiam -
medietaté ad feftum Nat sti Johis Bapte - 7 aliam medietatem ad feftum
San@i Martini -



--- Kelso1_page199.png ---
L
ior}

LIBER DE CALCHOU.

R. Abdbs coceftit Danid fit deca - de Stobhou 7 fiedibs fuis libtatd fartadi Avnwes
inf* tra de le Currokis -

113. Vnitifis hoe feriptum vifn¥ vi anditn® - R - dei gta di@us Abbas de Kalkov
7 einfdem loci Coit? - ctham in duo Salutem + Sciant offis tam potti , q'm
edcellifle ¢ 7 hac carta fra cof"matie

pfentes » nos de cdi confenfa Cail
Dauid filio Deeani de Stobhou fideli iro 7 heredibs fais ippetuum libtatem
fartandi vbietiq, uoliint ¢ 7 q‘Tietq, nolttint put cis omodius {hit Infra
dinifas tre fue de Corrok’ + Coceflim? etid cis cuftodiam nemoris terre
illus ; jta Gd fi ipi aliquam ptem illius nemoris refuare noliint nis vicinoy
inde aliquid capict - nifi Abbas de

fuoy 7 cum eis coicabit + nec aliq
Kalkou ; vel Por de Lefmahag: aliq‘im de ipo alieni dare voluit - Teft-

Caplo +

ob. Abbas fup q'md pté terre de fineurrokis p suas diuifas -

114 Omid; sto catris Ecctie fit - 7 fid - J » Abbas totufq, Coit? « de Kalkou ,
Salim + Nottitis nos dediffe ; 7 plenti carta ofirmafic Gilmagu 7 heredib;
fuis quandam ptem fre de flineurrok> p illam dinifam ; que eft in? ilhim ,
~ Saludem fratrem fuum ; 7 p lacum qui eft inter eum 7 nos 7 7 fie p traf
uerfum a diuifa Salndes vfq, ad Riuulum a Wenhath 7 fic p Rinulum Gre-
geref* p Naithan vfq, in Clude - Reddet anf finglis annis p hae tra - xx -

folid . x - folid «ad feltum sti Johis Bapte «7 - x - ad fefium sti Martini -

Wolct af ad molendinum nim ipe 7 heredes fai - 7 molend facient « ft eeti ja 42.
hoies firi- Habebit aut hichet* de filiabs hoium fuoy - 7 de puis querimonij
hoium fuoy Curiam fua + sié Wils de Ardae - vel Jacob; de Draffan -
ut Saludes - Qd fi fanguis effufus ftit in Pra eins ipe foriffém hebit de

+ 7 nos de firis hominib; - Hane enim terram fm pdéas dinifas
oO

fis hoib;


--- Kelso1_page200.png ---
Aupates.

116

84 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

libere de nob 7 quiete tenebit - In bofco » 7 in Plano - In pratis 7
pafenis + fi vicini ei? Pdicti fram {ua tenent + Hiis teft: - Jacobo de

Drafiafi - 7 %-

Johames Abbas Sr terciam ptt de Auchinlek ci fuis dinifis -

5 Vniuerfis ste matris Ecctie fit - 7 fid - Johes Abbas ; Totufg, Cofitus de

Kalkou ; Salim - Sciant tam prefentes , gq" futuri nos dediffe 7 céceflitle
Waldeuo filio Boydini » héi firo 7 heredib; fuis feiam ptem de Auchynlec
cum fuis rectis dinifis «jn terris 7 in aquis ;7 @olendino ; in teudo ; 7 hedi-
tate , tenendam de nob libere 7 quiete ; Soluendo duos folid - 7 tres dena# -
finglis annis - 7 increment ; quandam pticlam terre que uocat’ Culten-
fegle « que iacet int Territorium de Duuegle
ipe q* heredes fui ayfiamenta Bofei ;

7 Curroch - Habebit aut tam

us ville de Grenrig - liberius
ht - Dabit ceia tam ipe g* heredes {ni duos folid « p herieth 7 hichet « de
filiabs fuis non dabat + Hiis teft.- Henri? de Reucden ; Gautio filio eins /
Vikillo de Hauden ; Wito fit ei? , Jacobo de Draffan » Enftacio de Ardath ,
Vio filio ei? - Lambrico  Hugone de Dunanth Fuleardo Rito filio Hen-
rici + Philippo + Henrico filio Elkilli ; Rito de Vinfravile - WiHo nepote
Archidiaconi Sti Andrec - 7 alijs -

Amnaldus Abbas ¢r terra de Dnueglas eum fuis r‘tis diuifis -

Onmmnibs ste cat's Ecctie - fit 7 fidet Arnald? Abbas - Tot®q, Connentns

_ de Kalchov ; Salfm ; Sciatis nos communi confilio fro dedifie - 7 conceflitie

7 hac jienti carta confirmafle Theobaldo flamatico firam ‘vam sup Duneglas
7 heredibg suif p reétas diuifas - feit de furfo de Polnele vfq, ad aq‘m de
Duglas 7 de furfo de Polnele ultra se latum mos ad longum fau ; de illue ad


--- Kelso1_page201.png ---


--- Kelso1_page202.png ---


--- Kelso1_page203.png ---
9) , b. F
nenreuse Se Lal. te -apme met Se is nos cera
oonflle nee Noa ee eonerffeffe 2 be pleut citys am rua co
ke flamano Hig Bans Al Siinew 9/2 Boreib, an vedas
Shunfag- FER fiurfo B pile Mf ad agin &Dubsis}a Se fis
Ye Prohicl? uke Se taeun ajo ad (enayeny 1 serlfic as Git
ted & hic ® a heunfforts Ww ogofrursine NP conve) a ste aS fon

apy Hugnins Sphe 7 fog ue (rat aco uf roffefor Ney te AY

ateNiratce:| (i271 Wee | Plewame @ Honor yc / x profeuSinno
‘A 4 - y, I, he oa “ 7

Dqme om flag a bofee in ies Ae prans ) Manio5a 1"
emule ales Asfidhnenenes Resende ih Tex eal Masanragy

Nona Sills apples apayeutty Afar 18 goons bac ape
( ‘


--- Kelso1_page204.png ---


--- Kelso1_page205.png ---
wn

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 85

hirdelau ; de illuc ad Theuifforde in Wofminine ; el Corroc
sigrum forde , 7 ita ut via iacet ufq, Crofleforde ; in feudo 7 heditate ; libe
7 avete ; plenarie 7 nonorifice ; in @olendino - In aquis - In ftagnis ; In bofeo

in plano ; In pratis ; In pafenis ; 7 in omni

ayfiamentis ; Reddendo
inde nob annuatim - duas marcas vnam seilies ad fetta sti Martini , aliam ad
Pentecoft - Hiis Teftib3 -

Toiis Abbs Sr dimid carué - tre i uilt de Qidilh'm -

Onnmnib3 ste cat's Eectic filiis « Johs Abbas Eectie
3 4
Tot?q, Conuent? ciufdem Eectie Salim - Nouerint oiic jien

e Warie de Kalehou ;
s 7 futnt +
i pfenta dedi? hdi fro Hotberno 7 hedibs, clus dimidiam

cdmuni capitli

carucati tre in tritorio de Widdilham + Ipe v° ho fir legitim’ deueniet » 7

vp
1 Pentecott> 7
medictaté ad fetta sti Qartini - 7 pearia fua fuciet t'b3 dieb3 in autiipno

Slis annis + ocio folid - Wedietate

ipa tra reddet nob fin

vnoq?q, die citi dnobs hdib3 +7 t in anno carued sud ad arand nob inuenict -
Telte codé Capitlo -

Tneipitit Carte de Gord - p Richer de gord + incipicndo a eimitio vfq, ad
Lipftane -

Gonpuse

Vnififis fe cat's ecetie filiis 7 fideliby Richer de Gordun salut - Nowint jo 43.

omes pentes 7 fnturi me dedifle 7 concefliffe 7 hac carta mea conf'matle

ecctic {te Qarie de Kelch 7 @onachis ibidem deo Suientibs - 7 eectie séi
Wichaet de villa nea de Gordun in libera 7 ppetua 7 pura rlemofinam tot
tram a Cimiterio vfq, ad lippeftan satdotit - 7 inde vig, ad e’iam {aédotis -
7 inde vfq, ad foffam q‘ndam g‘m Wattus clicus de Gordun fecit p Croftam
Robiti Rikeloc* ufq, ad Gateyeth - 7 s° p Gateyeth vig, ad uiam q° uenit de


--- Kelso1_page206.png ---
Gorpese.

lly

86 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Gordoun + 7 p niam illam furfum vig, ad Damdihe - 7 de Damdhie vers’
auftram vfq, ad uni magnit lapidem - 7 ab illo lapide vig, ad atm magni
lapidé - 7 s* ad foffas repletas lapidibg - 7 fic vit, ad ext*mitatem curie Alexand'-
7 fie p curiam eins ufq, ad aliam ext’mitatem euric fue «7 fic afeendendo vii,
ad Cimiteria - Et vnam acram tre fup Toddelanue 7 ynam aera de prato in
Hundleiftrower - vt Pati c@onachi fdzam ram ita libe qtete « plenarie « 7
houorifice jn liam + 7 param - 7 ppetuam clemofina teneant 7 poffideant
sicut aliq'm aliam Elemofina in Regno feocie - libins « Quieci? pleni? - 7
honorificenci? tenent 7 poflident + Concefli ctia cajillano eoy q'meumgq, in
pdéa ceetia de Gordonn ponere voluerint ? cOmunia aifiaméta ci hominibs
meis ju patra - In bofeo + In plano + In mora - 7 Petaria ; 7 jn omibg aliis
cdmunibg aifyamentis uille mee de Gordoune + Hiis teftib? -

Carta Ade de gordon fit Ade de Gordune fr q'md t¥ ap’ gord - p btas
g 1 Pg! P

div

Oinid; fee wats cectic filtis has littas vilu¥ vel auditu¥ « Adam fili? Ade de
Gordoun - falfm » Notlitis me ex aflenfu 7 voluntate Amabille vxoris mee 7
heredi meoy + dedifie - conceflifle - 7 hac mea carta conftmafie Deo 7 ecctie
ste Warie de Kalch - 7 monachis ibidé deo Suitu¥ in libera + pura +7 ppetna
clemofiam - p falute aie mee + 7 omium aficcfloy - 7 suecefloy meoy + tot

‘tram q® otinet® int has dinifas - videlies a vado q! dr Bradeford afeendzdo p
Rinum de Edene viq, ad noi foflatam - q’d fem fuit in @arifeo vers? aqui-
Joné + cadem dic donaédis mee - 7 s° a nouo foflato in tranfttfem p marifewn
vers? orienté vfq, ad antiqi follata extenti nfq ad dinifas de Home « qd fof-
{atti imnouatii {nit cadem die - Et ab illo foffato in tranfuerfa ners’ anfiram
p marifenm ufq, ad dinifas de Home + 7 8° p dinifas de Home defeendendo
p marifenm vers? occidentem vfy, in Edene + 7 8° p Edene vig, ad pdi@um
yadum + Tenendam 7 poffidendam de me 7 heredibg meis in libera 7 ppetna


--- Kelso1_page207.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. ay

clemofina - Et pretea dedi ptatis monachis 7 concefli pafturd in marifeo meo Goxvexe
q: dr Wettftrother -
ufg, ad annii completa - Anno v° elapfo ?
bit? « Ita q pdée -
i Pdiéa paftura cit aial

Peer eter Bly pn SLA ao a .,
eonachi tota tram infra diuilas pnotatas contenta sine alicui? edmiiione in

xi. vaecis 7 eay exitui siue bobus et aialib; meis

xit” cay de pdéa paftura amoue-

: 9 7 en ond
<®- vaeee + fiue bones ut plocutit eft cOmiieabiit ubig,

bs meis - 7 mea efi suif ibidé inppetudl - Vt auté pdei

illa finda - Et pafi?am pdéam ita integre - libere - Q'ete + plenarie - 7 hono-
rifice de me 7 hedibs meis in ppetua elemofind tencant 7 poflideant fient
aliq’m aliam elemofina liberi? - Quieei® - pleni? tenét 7 poflident plenti
septo sigillum mei in teftimonia appofui - Et ego 7 heredes mei oniia
ifta Pnolata Pdéis wonachis warantizabim? 7 defendem? inppetua - Hiis

teftibs -

ta Alicie de Gordune filie dni Thome de Gordune Sr donadde aficeltoy

SNOY +

120 Omid; xpi fidelibs plens septum vifuF vel guditn# - Alicia de Gordun filia
7 heres q’ndam Pni Thome de Gordun militis juntoris Salm in dno -

Oe “On ~. . sos . . oe :
Nowit vnitifitas tra me in legitima viduitate mea mere 7 sponte dinine cari-

tatis intuitu 7 p falute aie mee 7 aiay pat's mei 7 Ade de Gordun q’nda

sponfi mei 7 ominum aiicefloy 7 fueceffoy meoy dediffe + coneeflitle 7 hae

plenti carta mea p me 7 hiedib; meis uel afiignatis couftnatle in liber’ puri
ibide

7 ppetna clemofina deo 7 Ecctie beate Warie de Kalehou 7 wonach
deo fernientib; - 7 inppetud fernituris oities fras + reddit? + aifiamenta -
libtates - iura - 7 poffefliones « ofies 7 finglas déis Ecetie 7 @onachis a dno
Ricardo pauo meo fine a dno Thoma q’ndam auo meo - fine a duo Thoma
qndam patre meo + qualiteung, + vbicuma, - 7 q‘udoeumy, coneeflas 7 con-
f'matas / put inft"menta ipoy fup pmiflis confedia pleni? « liberi? « 7 meli®
teftant? - 7 specialit illam pticulam tre q° iaeet in? viam q? dueit ap" fpottif


--- Kelso1_page208.png ---
wD

88 LIBER DE CALCHOU,

Goxvese. wode 7 dnicum de dedrig* - in lati - 7 viam que ducit apud Huntcley - 7 fu 44.
Huplongifflath in longi « q’m diis Thomas pat meus Batis Ecetic 7 aonachis
ext'mo contulit - Q're volo 7 concedo + 7 confirmo - p me 7 hedibs meis ut
aflig‘tis ut déi monachi oma + 7 fingla pmifla - in tris cultis 7 nd cultis in
hofeis - pafenis - pettariis - moris - @arefeis - aq's - pifcariis «7 in omibg aliis
liftatibs «7 aifiamentis abfy, omi inpedimento contradiétione feu g*uamine
nei 7 heredi meoy fine aflignatoy meoy - libere - q'ete + plene - 7 integre -
pnt melius nidebit® cifdé monachis expedire ? Habeant tencant - 7 poflideant -
7 cémodii fui p voliitate faciant inppetnii - folas oFones p omib3 reddendo -
Ego wu? déa Alicia 7 heredes inci uf affignati / ofia 7 fingla Pmiffa in infirn-
mentis déoy dnoy Ricardi Thome fenioris - 7 Thome junioris contenta
cemoratis Eectie 7 monachis warantizabim? tnebim? acq*etabim? 7 defendem?
cont® omes hoies 7 feminas inppetud - In cui? rei teftimonia plenti sc'pto
figilla mei appofui + Hiis teftibg -

Carta Thome de Gordune Junioris -

121 Oimibs fee cat's cectie filiis 7 fidelibs ad qs jifens feptam pueiit Thomas
de Gorduii filius Thome de Gordufi efnam in dno sali + Nonerit vnitifitas
ra me diuine pictatis intuitn 7 - de affenfu 7 voluntate Wariori vxoris mee
dedifte « oceflitfe 7 hac carta mea pfirmatic deo 7 eectie be Maric de Kel-
chou + 7 monachis ibidé deo Suientibs - 7 inppetud scruituris - In Jibam -
pura 7 ppetuam clemofind totam tram q* continet? int iftas dinitas ca tris
cultis 7 nd cultis - ei p*tis - pafeuis - petariis - moris - marefiis - aquis «
pifeariis - 7 ci nirgis int? iftas dinifas e'fcentibs - 7 omibg aliis aifiamentis
adiacentib; + videlic3 a vado de faireforde + p uiam q° tendit uers? Gorduii -
ufg, ad quendam magnii lapidem inx* uid pofité + inxta {ra arabilem « 7 it:

a
ab illo lapide uers? auftri indireété ufq ad fuledi arat' + 7 fie femp p ila
fulea ucrs? auftrit - vig, in foflata q’d fecit Ricard? flandrens « 7 sie p illd


--- Kelso1_page209.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 89

foflatt {ifs orienté nfy in Rimulum q' defeend' a fonte {¢i Ofwaldi - 7 de Goarese:
Harewelle - 7 s* p illé rinnlum ify ad foffati f%m fubt? villam + 7 s* ab illo
foflato ufq, m Rinnli qui eurrit int carifeh + 7 petaria + mf, ad viridem
cuiiam - 7 p ila Rinnlum defcendendo fifas anfira - uly, ad hoe qd
mp fient fe

warifens 7 Petaria fe diniditt afecndendo ners? aq'lonem + 7
dinidat mfg, ad folfatd fem vers’ aq'lonem + 7 fie ab illo foffato ug, in Rivals
q' defeendit de faireforde 7 p ill rinnla afcendenté ners? aquiloné ufq, in
vadum de faireforde - Et pea dnas bouatas Pre pping‘ores Petarie -

jacentes int pacam Petariam + 7 Croftti Henrici de Hoga - Tenebiitt w
@onachi- déi de me 7 hedibs meis déas duas bouatas fre 7 omia alia Pnojata
yf continent® int diuiths pnoiatas + cit libero exitn 7 int’itn 7 fatis largis a
pdéis tris nfq ad patturas - ita - libera 7 qeta ab om Suicio int'nfeco

; Fi 9 ; a
+ ext'nfeco 7 exaccione + 7 hohe +» 7 ab omib; aliis q® aliq? tempe p aliqné

poflint peti - ficut aliq'm aliam elemofinam in Regno Scocie lihins 7 q'eci’
tenent 7 poflidct + nf aliq's cOmunicabit inf pdéas diuifas et @onachis
pnoiatis - {5 faciét comodii {ni de Pris - p'tis « 7 aliis Pnoiatis q’etiq, m°
gf” in aliis - Pretea

uoluerint meli? nel potuint + ta in edifictis confi"endi
monachis oimics donaddes - concefliones - 7 con-

coneefli - 7 confirmani dé
fades q's Pdecefiores mei  feilies + Rié aus meus + 7 Thomas pat mens
fe€unt cifdem 7 conceflerit ficut in cartis eoy pleni? ptinet® - Ego n° 7
hedes mei omia ifta pnoiata con® oies holes warantizabim? 7 defendem?

inppetmm - Si n° ego uel hedes mei cont® donaébes + concefliones + 7

Oa ; Pic Gia en -
con{*magones pdéas aliq? tempe con“uenire piumpterim? + fubiecim? nos
jurifdicédi Archid laodonie « 7 officiali - ut ipi oi apllaébe remota poflint

cam ad ommia ifta fideli? obluanda - In eui?

copelle nos p cenfuram cee’

rei teft> -

M


--- Kelso1_page210.png ---
90 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Goxoese. Lim Carta Dui Thome de Gordune junioris -

122 Oimibs sto «at's cectic filiis 7 fidelibs ad q’s jitens fe'ptnm puciit Thomas
de Gordan fili? Thome de Gordan ctna in dno Salatem + Nottit vnitifitas jor 43

tra me dinine earitatis intuitu 7 de affenta 7 volittate Qariorie yxoris mee

deditie concefliffe 7 hae pteuti carta mea confirmatte deo 7 ecctie te Qarie
de Kalchou +7 Abbati- 7 @onachis ibidé deo feruientibs 7 inppetuii Suituris
p falute aie mee + 7 pdée vyoris mee + 7 filiay meay - 7 p aiab3 oftium
afieetioy 7 {nection meoy in Tibam pura + 7 ppetuam elemofinam q‘ndam
ptem pettarie mee q® voeat® bran eof in tritorio de Gordun + Tam feilies
ptem q® iacet contigua illi Stroth - q’d pat meus dedit paeis ADbti 7
@onachis ex pte oceidentali ville mee de Gordn + q° déa pars pettaric
s+ Videlies a fotiato Gd fem eft fubt? loci qt dr

otinet® infra iftas dini
Toddeholes in dir'tum reéto t’mite fins anfiri fg, ad fotlata fem iux®
Rinulum de Blakeburne + qt riuulus diuidit in? Pritorit de flaunes - 7 de
Weloctian ? 7 tritorii de Gordun + 7 ita a foflato codem p eundem rival
fas orienté viq, ad rinulii «' defcendit de fiairetorde + 7 fie p rinulii illa
(fas aqtlonem afeendendo uly, ad fieam qf vocat® Witheleche «7 ita p fica
illam fis occidenté ufy, ad pdem foflata fabt? Toddcholes - Dedi # 7 con-

cefli cifdem octo peatas fre in lata a tra eoydem qf feilies fait tra q?ndain
Pat'cij Burnard / Ad faciend lidum 7 largit ing‘tum 7 eg*tit st 7 hominib3
{nis + 7 aialibs uly, ad pdéam pettaria - 7 ut faciant cOmodii fui infra ipas
cto peatas {tre modis omib3 q'b3 mcli? st niderint expedire five pettas
ficeando + five domi uel sepé ptt*endo ad pettas - nel fotlata faciendo ad
tram fiecanda + volo ¥ ut atalia faa pafeant? libe tempe eariacionis ubiq, fup

tram mea pxima ext blada 7 p“tum - 7 licencia dedi cis faciendi ponté p

voluntate fua viq, ad pdéam petaria - 7 accipiendi de bofeo meo maremiit
{ufficient ad ifm pontem faciend 7 repandai inppetudl ch defebit « p qué libe

poflint pettas fuas cariare - Dedi ecia cifdem licencia fodiendi q‘ntii necefle


--- Kelso1_page211.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. gL

we . : . ~ a Os >
habuerint in pettaria que dr pettaria Alani don’ Pd&m ponté fceint + Volo Gorvese
F 7 concedo cifdem ut licent 7 libe inppetuti fufticient aceipiant de bofco
meo Stoch 7 Ramail tam de queren q® de bule ad firmanda tiagnit fii de

Kalehon + 7 ei uceefie {iit ppetuo repanda - Prefea dedi cis 7 concefii
7 Pi 1 7

Orne fs we ee ta ea Os
padtis Abbti 7 monachis tota tra illam q° continet? infra iftas diuifas cit tris

eultis 7 nd eultis - ci p'tis - pafenis - pettariis - @oris + carefelis - aq's -

$+ 7 ef uirgis inf ipas diuilas cfeentib,

pilea 3+ 7 omibs aliis aifiaentis

adiacentibs - videlic; a vado de faircforde p uiam q® teudit tfus Gordun -

vf ad quendam magni lapidem inx* viam pofiti inx® fram arabilem - 7
ita ab illo lapide {ifs anfira in direcium - ufg, ad fuled arat’ + 7 ita p ipm
fale tifns anfira fy, in follata Gd fecit Ricard? fandrens + 7 p ilad folfata
tifus orienté « ug, in Rinnlum qui defeendit a fonte sti Olwaldi 7 de Hare-
welle «7 s* p riuulum illa vfq, ad fofiatum fan fabt? uillam - 7 sie ab illo
fotlato vfq, in rinulum qt currit int marifia » 7 pettaria uf ad uiridem
outtam + 7 p ila rim defvendendo tis anfird ul, ad hoe qd marilens 7
pettaria se diuidut ateendendo tilus aq'lonem xt s° iemp ficut fe diuidiit vig,
ad follata theti Vins aq'loné 7 s° ab illo foflato vig, in riuuli «? defetdt de
fairfurd > p ill rinuli afetdete Vas aq'loné wy in vadit de fairforde + Et
ptea dedi cis dnas bonatas tre pping'ores pettaric iacentes int predéam
vettaria 7 crofté Henrici de Moga - Dedi 7 conceffi eifdem wonachis toti
@oram 7 tram in ‘ritorio de Gordun infra iftas dinitas / videlies incipiendo
apd Brademedne qd diis ‘Thomas pat meus dedit cis ufq, in Edene + 7 ita
p Edene afeend@do uty, in vadum qd dr Carterford « 7 ita de Carterford

afecndendo p Cartergate viq, in Blakeburne - 7 de Blakeburne defeendendo

» Blakeburne - vig, in Edene ett oimib3 ad cafdem mora 7 tram p déas
diuifas ta fubt? tram q" sup ptinentibs + [ta q n® ego n® hedes mei n® hoies
mei uel hoies heredai meoy vi ali? offiino alig's in d@is mora 7 ‘tra edi déis
q@onachis alig? m° cémuna habedit + Dedi infup cifdem liceneiam 7 libertaté su. 46.
inppetuii ucllendi brucriti ubicnma voluerint ta in tritorio de Thornedich

q® in tritorio de Gordun - 7 ta infra duieum mei q® ext® ubicumq, meli?


--- Kelso1_page212.png ---
Gorpee.

v2 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

s' viderint expedire - Habituri inppetua liberé 7 plenam poteftaté brueritt
7 = - ea O - ; . =
{ud ad quemedq, loci uolucrint inf tram mea aut ext’ tram mea 7 mora
bs face - Ita q n® ego

cariare + 7 comoda fai pro voluntate sua modis of
n‘ heredes mein aliq's hdinum meoy aut hoies herediit meoy inpedicm?

5 “ : ao — Ba an Goya
c 0: poflint libum hre introita 7 exiti ubiciq, in tritorio meo ad

- qui 7
colligend brueriti sui 7 eariand » n® aliq'd ab cis ppt hoe exiget®  Pretea
dedi 7 concefli cildem oms donaédes + concefliones + confirmaédes + 7

libtates a Ricardo ano meo «7 Thoma pat® mco cifdem collatas put in eartif

coy pleni? otinet® ; Hee auté dia pnoiata ta in tis + gq" morif + pettariis -

+ 7 omibs aliis fup"d@is dedi 7 eoncefli 7 plenti carta ofirmani pdtis

pifearii
Abbti + @onachis tenéda 7 poflidenda inppetud in libam - pnram 7 ppetna
71 PI } 7 PY

clemofina de me 7 heredibs meis + adeo libe + quicte + plenarie + 7 honori-

fice + 7 integre eft libis 7 largis ingreflibs 7 egrefiibs ad ofies pd@af tras 7

7 ad Gia pdéa aifiamenta

pattura sient aliq® clemofina in Regno Scoeic
libins « pleni? «7 meli? ab aliq'h3 uiris religiofis tenct® 7 pofiidet? - Liceatg
cis de omibh; Pnoiatis comodé sud ablq, ullo inpediméto fave q’m’cumaq

meli® viderint expedire + Ita q nnllus dino hdinnm infra omies pfe'ptas

dinifas ablq, coy Hceneia 7 voluntate poflit ins aliq’d ut commna nendieare -

Ego uw’ 7 heredes mei pdéis abhi 7 @onachis dia fup"tepta cont" ones
homines 7 feminas warantizabim? inppetua 7 defendem? + nichil ab cifdem

igentes » Et fi ptizit q ego

p paeis oimib3 pt solaf oFones ad aiay faluté e
concefliones - 7 confirmaciones pdéas aliq’

uel heredes mei cont" donacdes
tempe cont‘nenire nolnuerim® + fubicin” nof 7 dia bona fra mobilia 7 in-
mobilia inrisdie@di Arehid Lacdonic 7 official q’ p tempe flit «vt ipi omi
one ceflantib; poflint nos p eenfura ecetiatticam cou

appellacde 7 con
pellere ad omia pnoiata fidelit obinada + Et feiendi eft q et p voluntaté
arnis ingredi 7 Corp’ mea lego deo. 7 be
tis religiofis Abbe 7 @onachis de Kalehou

Pni contivit me uiam vninerfe

Marie in eimitio de Kalchou a p!
- an BUI s Bit of ees EN oo =
{Fib3 meis in xfio put cis libuerit ¢ fepelienda , Et ut dia pnoiata ppetua 7
se'pta figilli mei munimine roboraui -

inviolabilem firmitaté optineant pfen
A

s teftibs +


--- Kelso1_page213.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. is

Tim Carta dui Thine de Gordune junioris de peta q vocat? bran @0s + Goxvese
123 Oni; hoe se'ptii viluris uel audituris Thomas de Gordun - fit T+ de Gor-

dun saléim - Noueritis me atfenfa 7 confenfu Qargirie yxoris mee dinine
yxoris + 7 filiay meay 7 p aiab3

caritatis intuitu 7 p falute aie mee 7 pdé
omunid aficelloy 7 sucectloy mcoy - dedilie concefiitle 7 pfenti carta ofir-
malle ; deo 7 Ecctie beate Qarie de Kelehou 7 Abbati 7 monachis ibide
deo Suientibs 7 inppetud Suituris in libam ; puram / 7 ppctud clemofina
y‘ndam ptem petarie mee q* voeat? brun @ofe in tritorio de Gordan illam

feilies ptem q? iacet otigua jlli ftroth - qd pat ihs dedit pdéis Abbi 7 ona-

fra iftas

chis ex pte occidentali pdée ville mee de Gordan q® pars ptinet
a foflato qa fem eft fubt? loca qt de Toddethole in dirttum

diuifa
recto tite tifus atria wy, ad ioficd fin ins" rinulum de Blakeburn « q'

oritt de Gor-

riuulus dinidit int tritoriii de fiauhnes 7 de @eloettan ¢

L

dun + 7 ita a fotlato illo p eundem riuulit ulus orient@ ufg, ad rinuli q!

defeendit de fairoford 7 s° p ili riuuli ifas aq'loné afeendendo ufy, ad
qf voeat? Wyteleche + 7 ita p syeam ill uers® oecidentem uly ad pdém
foffata subt? Toddefhoks - Concefli 7 eifdem octo perca

coydem q° scilics fra fuit q’ndam Pat'cij Burnard ad faciend lion 7 larg

>

ea,
© in lati a tra y

ingrefli 7 egretlti sibi 7 hoibs fais 7 atalibs uly, ad dam petaria , 7 faciendo
comodi fui infra ipas veto percatas tre omibs modis quibs s' meli? vidint
expedire + fine petas fiecando fine domi ut sepem faciendo ad petas fuas -

uf foffata ad fram ficcandam - Concefli 7 ut aialia tua patent libere tempe

cariaddis ubiq, fup tram pxima ext® bladi 7 pratii - Pretea dedi 7 concefli
Pdéis ADbi 7 @onachis licencia 7 liltaté faciendi pouté p uoluntate faa uty,
ad pdéam petaria - 7 aceipiendi de bofeo meo maremiti sufficient ad ipm
ponté faciend 7 repanda inppetuit ci defecit - p quem libe poflint cariare
petas fuas - Dedi 7 eifdem licencia fodiendi q‘utti ue hueriut in petaria
af dr petaria Alani. don’ pdt ponte felint - Pre

a dedi 7 cdcetli cifdé


--- Kelso1_page214.png ---
Gonpone.

ied

o4 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

licencia 7 libtat® accipiendi sufficient de bofco meo ftoc 7 ramail ta de

queren q® de Bule ad Mmand fiagna de Kelchou 7 ad repand inppetni -

Hee a ofmia Pnoiata dedi - concefli 7 pdtis Abi 7 @onachis pfenti carta

oftmani tenéda 7 poflidenda inppetnii de me 7 fedib; meis adco libe -
q'ete + plenarie - 7 honorifice ? fieut aliq® clemofina in Regno Scot Tibi?
qreci? + pleni? 7 honorificienei? ab aliq*h3 viris Religiofis tenet? 7 poflidet’ -

. 5 SS eon at ee pn mane ny ae
Liceatg, eis de omib; Pnoiatis cOmodi fund fate q’m*eiig, s* meli? vidint

pedire + ita q nls héind infra dinifas {nas sh coy licécia poflit ins vel
comuna vendieare + Ego u° 7 hedes mei omia Pnofata Pd@s Abbi 7 @ona-
chis cont” oMs hoies 7 feias warentizabim? inppetui 7 defendem? « Et
Ieiend q et p voluntaté dni ptigit me viam yninfe earnis ing*di corp? mei
lego deo 7 be Qari in eymitio de Kelchou a pfatis viris religiofis abbe

> wonachis de Keleh ffibg meis 1 xfo prout libuerit sepeliend - Et ut

dia Pnojata ppetud 7 Tniolabilé fmitaté optinedt # ples septir figilli mei

munimine roboraui + iis F +

FS =~ por =, 7 . . ~
Carta Andi frefer » 8r carneaé tre in villa de Gordune -

Oinids xpi fidelids Ptens fetptum vifuF uel auditn® - And? firaS fili? q’ndam
Gilbti fra$ ooiliti
ofeniu Beat'eis uxoris mee + dedifie - oeeflifie «7 hae Pienti carta mea [econfir-
mafic] de
inppetud Suitu? in liham - pura - 7 ppetna elemofina vn carueatam tre qm

y. ia . + Owe 3)
Jim etnam in dno - Notitis me i liba poteliate mea 7 ex

7 he Marie de Kelchou + 7+ Abbi 7 @onachis ibidé deo Suientibs 7

emi a WiHo filio 7 hede « Johis filij Johis de Kyrkcland iacenté i tenemento
de Weftgordii p has dinifas - s - de flairforde vig, ad Dedrige 7 de Dedryge
ufq, ad Cothlandifforde - 7 de Cothlandifforde ? vig, ad Swarthbrandkrue- -
7 de oceidentali pte de Swarthbrandkrne vig, ad orienté ptem de Dedrige -
+ de Dedrig p metas in? yppelandflat> 7 Hemelandes wy, ad foftiam de
Robtiflaw «7 s de Robtiflaw p foftam q° se extendit p crofta Robti Tod uly,


--- Kelso1_page215.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 95

ad viam de Spottelwod - 7 de via de Spottefwod in pte auft'li vfy, ad foflam
iux* Harewelle - 7 p fofiam illam VP oceidenté viq, Beretied - 7 de Berctied
vi, i rubea lapifodinam ex pte orientali - 7 de rubca lapifodina vii, i viam
de Huntteley + vna cit q'ndecim aeris Pre p has diuifas aflig"tis - s + de fayre-

ford sict via de Huntelie se extend’ cn le Croftlad + 7 ita inmediate uly, i

rubeti lapidé - 7 a rubeo lapide vfy i rindi q' peedit ex fayreforde - 7 ille idé
riuus diuidit dnicum de Gordun de tra Abbis de Kelchon ea duobs tottis 7
croftis q* Adi del Hoga - 7 Johs fit lethe i tempe dne Alyeie de Gordun
tenneriit + 7 cit omi pafiura toti? ville ad tantam 7 talem ram ptinente - vt
de inre ptitle nalente - 7 ci t'bs ac's pti i dnico de Gordun - 7 et Ada filio
Hen del Hoga natino inco efi tota sequela sua - 7 ef palt?a i codé dnico ad
q'd'ginta allia ef tota seq‘la sua yni? anni ubicumy, afin pp'a dni ili?
tenemiti de Gordun pafeunt? ucl pateere se potunt - 7 ad centit oues
wat'ces ubicig, i dnico codé ef tota seq‘la sua yni? anni - vt ad totidé
«ultones ; vit uolo 7 gecdo p me 7 hedibs, meis q dei Abbas 7 monachi

Matas Pras wat + in bofeo+ 7 plano + i @oris ; warifeis - i p*tis - 7
1 TY 7) } 7

pafenis - i ftangnis - 7 aquis - 7 molendinis - i petariis ; 7 turbariis - 7 omibs

s locis + ef omibs liftatibs 7 affiamtis ad déam tram fp‘tantibs vel de
5 3 7 XY i 3

iure fp*tare valentibs infra villam 7 ext’i libam + puran + 7 ppetua elemo-
find pacifice teneat ? 7 inppetuii q'ete poflidcant - Deas u° Pras - p'ta , hotes «
I 7 Mp] ET 1
7 patturas cii ojodis ptinéciis - libtatibs - 7 edmoditatib; fuis deo 7 Ecctie
be Warie de Kelehon + ac pfatis Abbi 7 @onach 7 coy fuccefloribs ¢ ego
Andreas 7 hedes mei warantizabim? + acq'etabim? / 7 defendem? cont* omes
7 ‘ 7
hoies inppetni - In cui? rei teflimonia pfenti fe'pto sigilla mei appolni -
PE I pto sig) PI
Hiis tett- -

Gorvese,

Sol. AS.


--- Kelso1_page216.png ---
Gontuse

96 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

~ 70
r da earucat tre +

y a6 ~ . F
Connenz int nos 7 Diim Adam de Gordune oilii

Pateat vu

cot

x’ fidelibs ad q’s fifentes pueiiint q cf orta Get matia

neionis int nobilé viri dim Adam de Gordun qilité ex pte vna / 7 Le.
Daye 5 - a 5 5 ©
ligiofos viros Abbim 7 Connentii conaftii ste Qarie de Kalchon ex alta -

sup quada earneata tre q'm ijdem Abbas 7 Connent? dudii huerit 7 poftedtt

cfi libtatibs 7 ayfiamétis sp‘tantib; ad eandé in Tritorio de Weftgordan ex
dono bone memorie dni Andé fira8 qilitis ia defundti - Demi die veris
pxi* poft fetta sti Pet' in Cathedra - Anno gic «® - cece? « o¢tauo + In eectia

waae on. ae ie. ee. fee
Pde wonaftii amicis cdib; intuenientibs + déa cdtencio int d&as ptes con-

quit in forma q° feq't® « videlics q Abbas 7 Couent? p bono pacis 7

inre déi dni Ade mediante ? vnanimit atlonferiit - 7 cécefferiit d@o dno Ade

+ hedibs suif vel suif aflig“tis q liccat cid’ dno Ade 7 hedibs fuis 7 affig"tis
a tempe cdfectidis Pent hre oratorid inppetua vbi st plaeitit vi placnerint
inf pochia de Gordun + Ita q lihe poflit tre st 7 hedibs fuis vt suif affig’tis

oblagbes qf fit ab ipo 7 hedibs fuis 7 affig"tis 7 coy liha familia ac ab aliis

{Tuzientibs ibidé - saluo inure @at'cis ecetie 1 omib; aliis - Et nfomin? coceflerat

ijt Abbas 7 Couent® déo dno Ade 7 hedibs fuis vel coy affig“is p omioda
inqg'etaGbe 7 molefiage q° eis 7 poftum potit fieri q°q’modo fup dta earu-
cata tre eit ptingeiis de ecto cnitanda 7 Amouenda a pdéo dno Ad 7 hedibs
fuis vt fnis affig*is duas mareas ftlingoy inppetui ab ipis Abe 7 Coucntu
+ coy @onattio annuatim peipicndas ad duos anni tmios « vids - medietaté
ad Pentecoft> 7 alia medictaté ad feftii sti Qartini in hyeme + T’mino p'me
soluddis incipiente ad Pentecoft? - Anno dni qille3 + cece’ - Nono - ad q“y
folugem fais Eminis fidetr faciend vt pdem eft + ijd Abbas 7 Coucnt? eit

dno Ade 7 hedibs fuis vt affig"is dia bona sua in pdéo teneméto de Gordan

innéta ti ce@iattica g* miidana fine fint de decimis dée pochie fine de aliis
rebs q’eits fuit in solugiem eayd eeflata - capienda 7 ad voluntaté déi dni

Ade hed fuoy + aflig‘toy Fonabilit dift'ngéda , 7 iux” q’ntitatd debiti eomuni


--- Kelso1_page217.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 97

eftimaéde leuanda : obligant p plentes 1 Déus v? diis Adam p se 7 hedibs, Gonpuxe
dat 7 q'eti clamat inppetui deo 7 be Marie de Kalchou 7 monachis ibidé
dco Suientibs 7 Suitu¥ oie ius 7 clamiti git huit vel aliq? m® habere potuit in
is in Weftirgordun vt teneat 7 heant pdéam
carucata tre ci ptingciis 7 ci dibs cdib3 ayfiamétis infra déam villa 7

Ay. Ri eo
pdéa carucata tre cit ptind

7
ex ita libe , 7 (ete ; plena¥ 7 pacifice 7 honorifice in dib3 fict cande libius

ac q'eci? aliq? tempe tenucriit 7 poffederdt ; in lifam pura 7 ppetua clemofina

illo iure aut Suicio déo dno Ade aut fiedibs, fuis vi suif aflig*tis de cadé caru- pl. 49.
cata Pre ct ptinenciis fuis 2 ofond fuflragia p fe 7 fuis inpoftum refuato -

Tn cui? rei teftimonii huic se'pto duplicato pti videlics penes d@m diim Ada
refidenti ? sigilli comune capituli monaftii de Kalchou ? eft appen’ + pti v°
refidenti penes coldé Adbem 7 Conuentit + sigillii dti dni Ade apponit® -

AG 7 dat- loco 7 die afidtis - Hiis Teft- -

Coftmaé - Thom de gord - GH Riti de gordun‘ « Sr donae> pris sui pict} ?
1 vit de gord -

126 Oniibs ste cat's ecclie filiis 7 fidclibs vifu¥ vel auditu¥ has litPas » Thomas
fit Rich de Gordufi salé - Sciatis me edcellifle 7 hac carta mea conftmafie
deo 7 cectic fte A)arie de Kelch ; 7 monachis ibidé deo Suicntibs offies
donaGdes - 7 cSuenGes q"s pat is cis fecit ta in Pris q' ialijs , fiue ppetuo

fiue ad firma tenédas 7 poflidendas « ita 7 q'ete plenaric 7 honorifice fic' in
cartis ipi?- R- pat's mei continet® - 7 fic' carte ipi? teftant? 7 conf*mat » Ad

oR ar me yD pe . . . nye
hae & ciuenédem fidelit 7 {ii malo ingenio ten¢dam / mann affidaui - 7 tras
7 alia dia q® in cartis pat's mci cétinent? ¢ cont offis hoies + Pdtis monachis
warantizabo 7 infte defendam - Hiis teft* -


--- Kelso1_page218.png ---
Gorpoxe.

12

a

D

LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Cott - The de Gordune Junioris sr Sib; donac® aficefloy suoy -

Vnititis ste cat's eectic filiis 7 fidelibs Pfentes tras vifuf vel anditu¥ Thomas
fit Thome de Gordufi salé Nowit vnitfitas tra me intuitn ecaritatis / 7P
aia pat's mei 7 mat's mee + 7 afieetloy 7 fuccelioy meoy cédeeflifle 7 plenti
carta conftmatic deo 7 ecctie ft Qarie de Kalch - Abbi 7 @onachis ibidé
deo £uientib; 7 inppetud Suituris ds cdcefliones 7 collaget’ q*s Pdecettores
mei - feilies - Ricard? auns fis - 7 Thomas paf fis feunt eifde 7 cdceflerat -
videlics - in tris cultis 7 nd cultis ; p*tis » pafeuif'y 7 pafturis ; coufiis 7
arifcis ; aq's ; 7 peta¥ ; bofeis ; 7 planis « viis 7 femitis - ftagnis ; 7 molen-
dinis ci dibs libtatibs 7 ayfiamétis q° i infi*mentis Pdtoy aiicetioy meoy
otinentur ; Tenendas 7 poffidendas de me + hiedib; meis libas 7 qetas ab
oluetudie 5 exacébe / 7 feculari demanda inppetut- Ego v° 7 hedes mei ois
pdéas concefliones donates - 7 libtates cont® ofis hofes ppetuatr fine malo
ingenio - warantizabim’ - In cui? rei teftimonia pienti se'pto sigilla: mei
appofui - Hiis Teftib? -

Carta Walleni Comit sup Haldefi 7 Wim fem ei? liberos eoy / 7 oifies

sequaces e0y +

Walleunf comes Omibs pbis hoinibs fis - 7 ofiibs fidelibs « salim - Sciatis
me dediffe 7 pfenti carta confmafie abbi 7 @onachis Ecctie ste Marie de
Kelchou - Halden « 7 Witt fiem ci? + 7 oities libos coy - 7 oifes sequaces
0% + 7 ipos con” offis hoies eis warantizabo - Hiis teftib’ -


--- Kelso1_page219.png ---
129

130

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 99

Carta Ade Curtenay filie Patricij comitis Sr qd parte terre in Pritorio de
Home -

Ten, om a 5 . a se
Unilifis ste cat's ecetie filiis 7 fidclibs has litfas vifu# vel auditu® - Ada de
Curtenay filia Pat'eij comitis de Dumbar falé i dno ebnam - Vnitlitati tre
noti facio me intuitu dei 7 p falute aie mee 7 p aiah3 pris mei 7 Miris mee-

7 maritoy meoy 7 dium aiiccfloy meoy in ligia poteftate mea dediffe « eon-
ceffifie + 7 hac jifenti carta mea conf'matie deo ¥ @onatiio ste Warie de
Kalehou - 7 @onachis ibidé deo feruientibs - in lifam + pura « 7 ppetua
clemofing q‘ndam ptem tre de libero @aritagio mco in tritorio de Home +
videlic3 ila tram q® iacet inx* riuuli de Edene ex pte anti‘Ti uly
i antiquin foffata - videlics « fict id@ foffati incipit a via q® diuidit int
Naythanetihirne 7 Home jux* bradeforde - 7 tendit Ys° orienté - vig, ad
ii foflatd qd fm eft ex pte aq'lonali in marifeo - Q"re volo ut pai

conachi pdéam fram cf liberis exitibs fais 7 cOmunib; a¥fiamétis ville de
TIome heant 7 poffideat ; Ita lie - 7 eete fict ali
Seocie libi? 7 eeci? tendt 7 poflident - Et ut dé monach de jidéa fra q’m’-
etiq, uoluerint cdmodi fui faciat - Ut auté h mea donago fut*is tempibs
robur firmitatis optincat - [fens feptum sigilli mei munimine roboraui -

Hijs teft> -

m alia clemofina i regno

Confirm - Pat's « fit Waldeui Comié de Dunbare r déa ra in fritorio de

Home -

Oj 5 has littas vifuris vel anditu¥ Pat'ci? fit Waldeni Comitis de Dumbar
fali in dno + ctnam + Unillfitati tre nota facio me intuitu dei 7p falute aic

mee 7 dium aficcfloy y succefloy meoy cicefliffe 7 hac pifenti carta mea
cdf'mafie deo 7 eectic ste aric de Kaleh 7 monachis ibidé deo Snientihs

A

[Hone]

fol. 50


--- Kelso1_page220.png ---
[Home]

131

100 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

donadgem q'm Ada de Curtenay filia mea eis fecit «7 carta fua conf'mauit -
Uidelies q’nda tram q° iacet sup ripa de Edene p cafdé diuifas q° otinent? in
ta dée filie mee q'm inde ofectam Hint - Q're volo ut dti @onachi déam
éciis suif ita libe 7 q'ete inppetud teneat 7 poflideant fict alig‘m
aliam clemofina in Regno Scocie liv 7 Qleci? tenét 7 poffident . Et vt h
mea donacio futuris tempi firma pmaneat 7 inconcutla pfenti septo sigilla
mei cora multis appotui , Hiis Tettibs -

c

2 ae
tram cui ptir

Carta Patricij Comit Sr f¥ in Meloftai dai BD - fii - BD de grame -

P.. comes de Dumbar + Omiibs litfas iftas vifuris vel andituris Pfentib; 7

3 1 3 7
futuris - salt- Notlitis me edceflifle 7 hae mea pienti carta oftnaffe - dd - fit-
dd + de Graha ffi Rig de ffaunes duos toftos i melokeftan + 7 xx + yna ac‘in
i Wytefeld «7 i Kingeffete - 7 xxx q'nq, acras iux* Edene ppi? uille de dnio
Rié de ffaunes + Tenend 7 habend s* 7 suif q°s de se genuit inppetnii de
Pdto Rit 7 hedibg fuis ch dibs libtatibs 7 warantif 7 i dib5 locis 7 dibs
modis fié carta pdei Rié de fannes teftat? 7 cdf'mat - Cocedo F
q dna Amable aa? pdei Rig eandé fram teneat de pd@o dd - fit - suo
*. denaf af Hextildefh infra niidinas

ofirmo

Anuati i tota uita fua reddendo - xij

eons - —
de Corbrige pdto dd - uf ei? niicio p om:
hac Pdéam ra teneat jta pacifice 7 integ® ci omibs libtatibs 7 dibz modis 7

5+ Cocedo #q Pdta Amable

p omnia fi i carta pd@i « R « de faunes ptinet® - saluo Suizo mco « Hiis teft -

De cétrofifia in? nos 7 Wiltm dim de Home 8r le pullis -

2 Onis has littas vifuris uel anditu® Wilts diis de Home fit 7 heres Nobilis

viri dni Willi qilitis q’nda dni de ville de Home falé - jn duo - fepitnam -
Nott vnitifitas fra q ci mota fuit cdtencio int me ex vna pte + 7 dim + H-


--- Kelso1_page221.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 101

dei gia Abbem de Kalchou 7 ci’dem loci couenti ex alta fap q'bufda tris 7
cay libtatibs 7 alijs reb3 q‘s ijdem huerit 7 hent i tencméto meo de home ex
donaé¥e bone memoric dni Cofpat'cij q’nda comitis de Dumbar vna ci ecta
dée ville mee de Home + Et ¥ sup q‘dam pticula tre iacéte i extiori pte
Pritorij de home VP oecidente + fup riuuli de Edyne q@ diuidit campa de
Home 7 de Naythanthirn ci edificiis eodé loco oftructis 7 plantis - Qua
qdem tram d@i Abbas 7 Couent? hent ex dono Nobilis dne Ade dite de
Curienay filie nobilis viri dni - P ~ q’nda comitis de Diibar - 7 q°nda dne
de ville de Home q° vocat? pullys + poft iltas v° albcades 7 edtendbes int
nos habitas ppendi me 7 ppendo « sciui 7 scio - confeflus fi 7 fateor me déos
abbaté 7 Couentii de Kalchou fup dib
aiid@a villa de Home + 7 cont" cctiafticas liftates indebite 7 iniutte vexatle

.

s ijdem fuerat 7 hent 7

manor
3 dzis tris

7 gualte- Q’re reniiciaui 7 reniicio p h? fe'pti p me 7 hedib; meis 7 allig"is
omni iuri si q’d hui ut hire potui i afid@is tris abbi 7 Couentui collatis i villa
de Home ; Ego v? dts Wits de Home iuraui tattis facI@is ewané
con® iura 7 libtates déoy AbDbis 7 Couent? de Kalch infut’um piuma s3 coy

iura 7 libtates - p potte meo Suabo - Et infup sciend eft q ego fepe dés Wilts
de Home qv déos abbm 7 Couentit idebite 7 iniufie sup déis Pris fais 7 cay

libtatibs laboribs 7 expn3 n° nd alijs dapnis 7 iniurijs fatigani 7 fatigari

peani + Ideo eoydé voliitati me Sbicci - 7 7 eenti solid bonoy ftlingoy Pp

[Howe.]

dapnis 7 expnS i iitia coy pofui - qs volo ut ijdem de me aceipiant vt fi alig? yo. 51.

tempe fut?o con® dtm qonaftiii de Kalchon n° no 7 ci%dé loci abbem 7
Couenti 7 liBtates coyd put inrani tehle 7 iniufte venire pfumtio ; Volo F vt
dei Abbas 7 Conucnt? namos meos 7 hdini meoy p déa pecunia accipiant
7 08 detinedt don’ de d@a peeunia cildé fait satiffem - si con® cofdem put
supi’ dém eft attemptare pluitio + In cui? rei teftimoniit fitentib;, littis figillit

meit appofui- Et qv sigilli mei minus notit eft - ideo sigilla Offie dni
Archid Laodofi ; 7 Decani del (’skys plentibs apponi pe’aui - Acta fit
h i e“fiino Cocepédis be Q)arie v'ginis - Anno gfe - «°- ce? + Ix° + viij?



--- Kelso1_page222.png ---
102 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Pe a Pore Qe =
Ceroxstase, Donato Rigi de fannes fa Dauid ffi sno de fF i Weloftane +

1593 Ricardus de ffaunes 7 Oimib3 has littas vifut vel auditu? - Salutes i dno ;
Sciant ta pofti q* pfentes me dedifie ; cdceflifle 7 hae carta mea plenti
oftmafle Dauid {ti meo fit d& de Graham duos toftos i Welocttan - {eit -
uni u' wet? aula fuit duay acray » 7 alii feit i anft'li pte de Welocttan ¢

fuit Ade + 7 xx" *. y+ acras jux*

acrai Witefeld ; 7 i Kyngefete «7 x

Edene ; ppins ville de meo dnio p humagio 7 Suicio q’d m! fecit ; Tenend 7
habend s* 7 suif q*s de fe genflit inppetut de me 7 heredib; meis et otibs
libtatibs 7 aifiamentis ad uilla de Ccloctian 7 de flanhnes ptinétib; i bofeo i
plano - i p‘tis 7 pafeuis - i vis - 7 semitis - 7 aq's 7 warefeis 7 i omibs locis 7
libtatibs ad villa de Weloeftan 7 de fanhnes ptinentibs - libe 7 q'ete ¢ hono-
rifice ; plenaric 7 folute ab dibs Sniciis , cSfuetudinibs exaccdibs 7 demandis ;
Reddendo m' 7 hedibs amuatim inppetua p omibs va lib‘m pipis vi - viij -
denat ad feftii sti Jacobi infra nidinas de Roxburg - Ego v’ 7 hedes mei
pdzam tram st 7 suis q°s de fe gentiit qf iure hereditario poft dies fuos fdzam
tenebat ei omib; pdzis libtatibs, ot® offs warantizabim? - % sciendii eft q
ego geefiu 7 voliitate eiufdé Dauid oceffi dne Amable qat* fire eandé ‘fram
ct pais liBtatiby Tenenda de cod - det - filio suo annuati i tota vita fua red-
dendo + xij“ + d - ap* Heftild*ham inf* nidinas de Corebrige pdéo. dd. vt
ei? niteio p omib; - Si % ipe Dauid shi petadbe sui corpis decefierit vt forte
vita {na mutalit - p? ei? decefiti vel vite fue mutacbem cadé tra ad hedes
meos integ® relitet? . 7 si ipe Danid afi firem firam Amable decefferit ipa
Amable i uita sua sié Pdém oft candé Pram pacifiee 7 integ® hebit 7 pofli-
debit - Reddendo pli dei dd « xij « & sit Pde eft - Si v° Dauid fillam plem
de fo gentiit - ipa Amable maf jira dibs diebs sue [vite] dam Pra et omibs
libtatibs tenebit + reddendo annuati fmm? p omibs Ricard de fauhnes ut
hedibs fuis illa lib‘m pipis inf cundé tminii sit Pdem eft - Hiis teftibs -


--- Kelso1_page223.png ---
134

135

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 103

Carta Ade de fawnis filij Riti de fawnis sup CF in Welokiftane -

Oinids xpi fidelib; lens septa vifuF vel anditut - Adam de Fauhnes fit
Rié de flauhnes sali » Noflit ynififitas ¢ra me p falute aie mee 7 dima
aiieelioy 7 succefloy meoy deditle 7 conceflifly 7 hac mea pfenti carta
of'matie deo 7 eectie ste Qarie de Keleh - 7 monach ibidé deo Suientibs
ilibam ; puram / 7 ppetua elemolina tota fram illam i Welokeftait qm
Dauid de Grah'm anunets fis Tiuit 7 tenuit ex dono Rig de fanhnes q’ndam

pris mei seilic; duos toftos in Welokeftan - ynii uw vet? aula fuit duay ac*y
1 3 % %

7 alii 1 auft'li pte ei%dé uille q {uit Ade - 7 viginti 7 vnd aera i Witelfeld -

7 i kingeflethe ; 7 t'ginta q'ng, acras iux* Edene ppinq'ores ville de ddinio
meo + Q're volo 7 gecdo ut dé monachi d@am tram q‘m Dauid de Graham

rtitudinib; fuis heant 7

tenuit 7 eis dimifit inppetuad cii omib; ptinécii
teneat de me 7 hedibs meis inppetuii ; ei dib5 libtatibs ; comunibs 7 ay
métis ad villa de Q)olocttan 7 de Fauhnes ptinentibs - in bofeo ; i plano . i

otis + in pafeuis + i viis / im semitis in aq's 7 molendinis; i @oris + qarilcis «
I i 7

71 dibs locis 7 libtatibs ad pid@as villas « feilies - de Weloketian » 7 des

flanhnes ptinentibs + Ita life ; qtete » plenarie 7 honorifice ; 7 solute ab
saeGbibs 7 demandis fit aliq*® alia elemofina in

dibs Suiciif / cdfuetudibs 7
regno Seocie ab aliq’bs viris religiofis libi? , qteci? , pleni? ; 7 honorificenci’
tenet? 7 poflidet? » Exo v° 7 hedes mei totam pdam tram ca dibs jideis

libtatibs fuis Bdzis monachis + warantizabim? inppetuii - Hiis tett> .

Carta Dauid de grame junioris sup fra in Welokitiane -

Onnmnib; xpi fidelibs pilens spt vifuF ut auditu¥ » Dauid de Graham fit
31 31 pea vif

Danid de Graham salé + Nouit vnilfitas tra me p falute aie mee deditle

7 ocellific 7 hae mea carta conf'matle Deo 7 ecte fte Qarie de Keleh 7

(MeLonsraxt


--- Kelso1_page224.png ---
COeLORSTANE:

104 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

donachi ibidé deo Suientibs in libam , pura, 7 ppetud clemofind tota tra illa
in tritorio de Wclokefian q‘m tenui 7 poftedi ex dono Rié de fauhnes feilies
duos toftos 7 coclokeftan + uni 7 ut vet? aula fuit duay acray 7 alia in aufi‘li
pte cifdé ville q' fuit Ade - 7 viginti vnd acra i Witelfeld 7 i Kingelete » 7
t'ginta q'ng acras iux® Edene de dnio + s+ pping'ores ville de Qelokeftan -
Q're volo 7 ocedo 7 q Ati cmonach pac: am fri teneat in etna 7 poflideat q'eta
p me 7 suecefforibs meis in liam pura 7 ppetud clemofina et Oib3 aifia-
mentis 7 libtatibg ad villam de @elokefian 7 de fauhnes ptinentib3 - In bofeo
plano i p*tis 7 pafenis 1 viis 7 femitis i aq's 7 olend + i @oris 7 petariis

ry earifeis 7 i dibs ayfiaMtis ad pdéas vill

sptantibs + libere ; q'ete » 7
“olute ab omibs Suieiis » edfuetudinibs ; exaeédibs 17 demandis inppetud -
Ego y? nf aliq's ex fuccefforib3 meis de ceto nulla ius i pdt fra nob uen-
dicabim? - 33 di iuri q°d in eadé tra habui ut bre potui p me 7 succefloribs

meis renuto inppetui - Hiis teft> -

Carta Willi de Hatteley ad f'mand ponté vit* Riuuli de blakeburne 7 cea -

136 Omid; has littas vifuf vel auditu¥ WiHs de Hattcley fit Z heres dni Robiti

dé de Hatteley ¢ 7 Watildis sponte sue falt in dno - Noflit vnilifitas tra me

deditie cdceffifle 7 ‘de affenfu 7 voluntate Emme sponfe mee 7 hac plenti

carta mea cofirmaffe p me 7 hedib3 meis n° nd aftig“is deo 7 be Marie de
7

Keleh » 7 monach ibidé deo Suientib3 7 inppetudl Suitut in pri 7 ppetua

clemofinam licencia 7 potetiaté firmandi olt"endi 7 Tindi fup fram mea de

Welonfian ponté vit" riuuli de Blakeburne ad cariandi: petas fuas 7 alia

bona sua vit" d@m ponté vbi 7 y‘ndo 7 ad q’eumm loca déis monachis 7
hdibz coy meli? videbit? expedire + Ita q°d n° ego n° fiedes mei n° affig"ti n°
hoicf mei aliq! d@os monachos 7 hoies fuos aliq? modo q'n dém ponté
faciant 7 heant loco eodem q* ponté hebant tempe pfeccionis ifti? tre 7 alibi

sup tram mea de Welouftan fi dés loc? cifde no petit conpete firment 7


--- Kelso1_page225.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 105

reparét q“do néve fit aliq? tempe inpediem? « Et ad t'nfcundi 7 eundii ad
dim ponté sup tenement mei de Welouftan cf quadrigis fuis 7 bigis sii
inpediméto mei vt meoy vi aliq?y i" sucecdencia + Q"re volo 7 cdcedo p me
7 fiedibs meis 7 aflig‘tis vt dei monachi dém ponté heant inppetna 7 pofli-
on 7 vid t Spfeundi ad ill 7 ult* lla i pura 7 ppetua elemofina ad ufns fuos
* aliq® alia clemofina i regno

pp'os adeo libe + 7 qrete / pac ‘fice » honorifice si
Scot lihi? q’cei? 7 honorificenci? Tictur 7 poflidet? - Ego u° 7 hiedes mei dem
ponté 7 vid cundi ad ill 7 t*nfeundi ult* ila pdeis @onachis 7 coy suc-
cetloribg con* ofis hoies warantizabim? inppetud 7 defendem? + In cui? rei
teftimonid pfentibs iris sigilla mea appofni - Hits teftibs -

Carta Philippi de Haliburé Sr ter? i elokiftane -

Onib; has tras vifu vi auditui + Philipp? de Haliburtof fit 7 heres dni
WiHi de Haliburton oilitis 7 Criftiai sponfe ci’dem salé i dno - Nouit
vnitifitas fra me oceflifie 7 hae plenti carta mea oftmaiie deo 7 ecte be

Marie de Kelch 7 monachis ibid@ Ges Suientibs 7 inppetnit Snitué in libera

pura 7 ppetna elemofina omies illas tras q's Dauid de Grame q’ndam hnit
7 tennit inf* villam de Q)clocftan 7 ext® ex dono Rié de fanhnes 7 cifdé
‘limit 1 Et q's Ada de faulmes q’nda aunncts meus d@is monachis dedit
oceflit 7 carta fua oftmanit + Q’re volo 7 ocedo p me 7 hedibs meis né nd 7
aflig‘tis vt déi monachi déas fras efi dibg ptinenciis fais » rectitudinibs suis
libtatibs 7 aifiamétis ad d@as uillas de Qelocftan 7 de fauhnes inf® 7 ext
ptinentib3 heant inppetuii 7 poffideadt put in cartis déoy Danid de Grame 7
Ade de fauhnes q°nda aunncti mei pleni? atinet? 7 Ita cy n° ego dis philip!
s suis aliq'd poflim?

né fedes mei n° alig's m* suecedens de deis tris eit pti

exife vii cifdé aliq’d iuris nob vendicare - Ego v° 7 ficdes mei pdeis

a@onach pdeas tras ci fuis ptinéciis con® ofis mortales warantizabim?

acqetabim? 7 defendem? - Concefli 7 infup 7 dedi dtis monachis p me 7
°

COELOKsrane,

fol. 58.


--- Kelso1_page226.png ---
Laxcrene.

138

106 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

hedibs meis 7 allig“tis p falute aie mee ajficeffoy 7 succefloy meoy licencia
faciendi pftYendi firmandi 7 poflidendi ponté vit" riuula de Blackburn sii
inpediméto mei 7 héintr meoy seu alicui? mé sucecdentis fup tram mea de

Weloctiaii mppctni loco codem q° ponté {ui huerit tempe ifti? collacois vt

alibi {ifus orient@ ad cariadwm petas fuas 7 alia bona vit" Bdém ponte ad
q’cumg, loca d@is @onachis 7 hdibs fuis videbit? meli? expedire + Et F via
t“nfeundi 7 eundi ci q “drigis fuis 7 bigis 7 eq's 7 hdibs p ‘tram de Q)cloeftan
ad dém ponté 7 vit‘ illa fine inpediméto mei vel meoy - Q"re volo 7 cdcedo
p me 7 hedibs meis 7 affig"tis vt d@i monachi déim ponté 7 viam eundi ad
ila 7 t"pfeundi ad ili modis fup"dtis i pvram 7 ppetua clemofina sine
cont“dicéde mei 7 meoy 7 inpediméto alicui? heant inppetui libe qrete 7
pacifice ad vfus fuos pp'os 7 poflidedt - Et ego 7 fiedes mei né nd affig’ti
dis monachis dém ponté viam ad illa 7 vit* illum q'nta ad nof ptinct
con® oiies mortales warantizabim? inppetua acqtctabim? 7 defendem? - In
cui? rei teftimonia pfentib; iris sivilli met appofui - Hiis teftibs -

Carta Rofi de Ov Sr eectia de ligt: -

Vnilifis ste Gris eectie fi 7 fidelib3 - Rous de Ov + Sali - Notint oies
ta pofteri q* pfentes me dediffe 7 hac carta mea conf"mafic ecctie ste Qarie
de Kelkou 7 monachis ibidé deo Suientibs ecctiam uille mee de Langtune
cit omib3 ptinenciis fuis in libera 7 ppetuad clemofina fic' Henric? ci%de ecte
pfona cam meli? 7 pleni? tenuit - Hane & cectiam dedi 7 concefli plate
eectie de Keleho p falute aie comitis Henrici dni mei 7 p falute aie mee 7
antcelloy 7 fucceffoy meoy - Q're volo ut iam dz Monachi de Kelcho Bthtamn
eectiam de Langtune lie 7 honorifice tenet inppetua 7 poffideant - fie'
aliq‘m clemofina liberi? 7 ‘cei? tentt 7 poffident » His teftib; - G + decano
de fogghou - Hug de Dans . Henrico pfona de Langtune - Hug de Ov -
Thom de Ov + Robto fit Randulphi -


--- Kelso1_page227.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 107

Wilhis de neti pote Sr d@a eccta de Lagt - Laxoruns

139 Wniuerfis fe cat's ecetie filiis 7 fidelibs - Wis de neti ponte p'mogenit?
filioy WiHi de ueti ponte + eoy feilics q’s huit de dna Emme de fto Hil-
lario etnam i dno salute - Notiint vnilifi fideles ad q’y noticia fe'ptii he
puehit me de ofenfa oingis mee deditie 7 conceflifie 7 hac pfenti carta mea
conf'mafie deo 7 ecctie fee Marie de Kelchou 7 @onachis ibidd deo Suientib;

ecctiam de Langtoun ci tris 7 decimis 7 omib; r°titudinibs ectiafticis ad

0

7
Awe ae en =
eam ptinentib; fient pat Mis afi me feat efi cade

a ym ifie cid cectie
affignau' 7 p eofdé {iminos , Pretea aflig“ui cis 7 addidi ad illam ‘tram qanta,
illi defuit tre aflignate ut fit vna carucata tre plenaria 7 menfurata cit illa
4m pat ms dederat ; Q're volo ut plata ecclia 7 pfati q@onachi de Kelchou
pdéam ecctiam 7 fdeam tram tencant 7 poflideant inppetuii in libam 7 pura
7 ppetnam clemofina cit pafchuis 7 focalibs 7 omibs alijs comunibs ayfia-
métis ei’dem uille fedm afitam cfatus q“nti ptinet 7 ad ccctiam 7 ad vnam
carneatam tre i clemoiam ecetie collata - ita lide , q'ete , honorifice ; 7
plenarie 7 fic' aliq’m ccetiam alia in Regno Scoc* libins , qeci? ; honorifi-
cenci? / 7 pleni? tenét ut poflident - Hae afi donadm feci cis p falute dnoy
meoy Reg Witti 7 Regine 7 coy filii Alexi; 7 cetoy liboy eoy , 7 p falute
mea / 7 cdiugis mee ; 7 heredii meoy 7 p aiabs Regi Danid 7 Q)alcholom
7 comitis Henrici ; 7 p aiabg pris mei 7 mat's mee ; 7 dium aiiceffoy 7
succeffoy meoy » Hiis tefi: - Huge eapHo dni Reg ; Ingilramo cfico dni
Reg, Andrea Mantel ; Roo de lalefereie - WiHo de veti ponte iuniore ;
Bna Matilde de sto Andrea fre ei? ; WiHlo de chetue » Riz de lundonijs
Gilbto cfico de M°botil » 7 Miltis alijs «


--- Kelso1_page228.png ---
108 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Laseress, Tim Willihs de veti pote ptmoz + sup déa eectia 7 tf de Lagt- «

140 Wniuerfis fee wat's ecclie filiis 7 fdelib; » Wilts de veti Ponte p'mogenit?
filioy WiHi de veti Ponte , eo feilics q°s huit de dna Emme de {to Hillario
cinam in dno salé « Notint ynititi fideles ad q°y noticiam fe'ptii hoe puehit «
ime de confenfu giugis mee + deditle 7 pcefliffe + 7 hac piienti carta mea
ptmatte - Deo 7 ecctie fte Aarie de Kelchou 7 monachis ibidé deo Suien-
tibs Ecctiam de Langtone ci tris 7 deeimis 7 oimibs rtitudinibs ecctiafticis un. 54
ad eam ptinentibs fieut pat fis afi me fetat ei cadem fra q'm ipe eidem
cectie aflignauit » 7 p eofdem tminos videlic; - ficut via iacet ab orientali
pte ecctie viq, in Wederburne ; Et ita p Wed¥rburne nfq, Hum pulles - rt in
langelandes ficwt diuifa nadit int tram dni 7 tra cectic , et p langelandes
bins occidenté ufy, in Wedyrb’ne tfus aq'loné ufy, ad Tofta Radulphi » 7
Toft Gilbti , et ita uly, ad diuifas Tofti Hen? q’nda pfone ; rt ai Tofta
ciufdé Hen¥ iux* q’ndam vetem fofliun ubi ipe Hen¥ q’ndam pofuit falda
sua Pretea aflignaui cis 7 addidi in tritorio eiufdé ville ad illam tra q“nta
ili defuit Tre affignate ut fit una carucata plenaria cit illa q‘u pat ms
dederat + fcilie; Gretryg> p has diuifas ficut foile facte sit de Holeb‘ne ulq,
in floefocelich ; et ficut fica inde tendit ufq i fulftrothir , et inde ius
orienté ficut tra enlta 7 prata de fulftrother se diuidit ; ct if p follas 7
lapides ufg, ad fieam que defeend* int Gretrig 7 int Stainkilcheftre ; rt fieut
sica defcendit p tres frutices ufg, ad femita q° vadit in holeburne ; ab ocei-
dentali pte de Chimbelawe ; 7 s* furfii p holebne ufy, ad follas Pnofatas 4°
tendat ufq in Stocfocelouh ; Pretea dedi eis 7 cdcefli q‘ndam ptiglam tre in
‘ritorio de Langtume q° vocat®? Colemannefflat p {uas r'tas dinifas unde ecetia

de Langtone q*ndam faifiata fuit » Concefli 7 eis 7 hac pienti carta mea
oftnaui Ecctiam de Hornerdene 7 q‘fdam sealingas in Lambmore q° vocant?

carta

Diueringdounes p fas r°tas dinifas tam plenarie fic‘ cas poflident ,

7
aui mei 7 pat's teftant? 7 ofirmant,; Q"re volo ut pfata cectia 7 pfati


--- Kelso1_page229.png ---
141

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 109

conachi de Kelchou ideas eectias 7 pdéas tras teneat 7 poflideant inppetwii
ilifam 7 pura 7 ppetuam elemofina ecctiis collatis ita libe q'ete , honorifice
7 plenat ficut aliq’s alias eectias in Regno Sco? libius q'cei® honorificenei? 7
pleni® tenét ut poflident , Has 4 donadbes 7 pfirmadcvcs feci cis p falute dnoy
meoy Regis Wiki 7 Regine 7 coy filii Alexi 7 cctoy liboy coy 7 p faluce
mea 7 giugis mee 7 hedi meoy ; 7 pro alab3 Regis Dauid 7 Qalcholomi z
comitis Hem~ ; 7 paiab3 patris mei 7 fhris mee 7 dium aficctloy 7 succelioy
incoy + Hiis teftibus - Johe de Qaccufwel vieet de Rokefburg ; Johe decano
de fogghou ; Hug capellano dni Regis ; Ingelr- clico dni Regis » Andr=
Mantel ; Rof de laleferie » WiHo de yeti ponte tuniore fre dni» Wito

iuniore fit dni 7 Mltis aliis -

Tk lam Witls pimogéit? 8r déis ecta 7 té de laget> «

Vnitilis fee aat's ecetic filiis 7 fidelibs , Wits de veti ponte p'mogenit?
filioy Wii de veti ponte coy feilie; q’s huit de dna Emme de sto Hillario
cfna in dno falé. Notlint vnitifi Gdeles ad q?y noticia sc'ptum h° pueitit me
de confenfu coniugis mee dediite eeflifie 7 hae pienti carta mea cbfirmalie
deo + ecctic fe Marie de Kelchou 7 Monachis ibidé deo Suientib; Ecetiam
de Langtune ci tris 7 decimis 7 dibg r“titndinibs ecetiatticis ad cam ptinen-
tibs fict pa® fis aii me felat ci cadem fra q'm ipe cectie aflignanit » + Pp
cofdé Eminos videlicg sicut via iacz ab orientali pte ecctic wfq, in Wedirburne
z ita p Wederburne vii, ad Humpulles ; 7 in langelandes fict diuith vadit int
tra dni 7 ‘tram ccetie 7 p langelandes uerfus occidenté viy, in Wedirburne /
= ita p Wedirburne vers’ aq'loné nfy, ad toftti Radulphi 7 tofta Gilebti 7
ita uly, ad dinifas tofti Hen¥ q°da plone ; 7 aii tofta ei’dem Henr: iux* q'nda
vetem foflam ubi ipe Hen¥ q’nda pofuit falda sua ; Pretea aflignaui eis 7
addidi i tritorio ci’dem uille ad illa tram q“nta illi defuit tre aflignate ut sit

una carucata plenaria cit illa q‘m pat ms dederat seilie; Gretrig p has dinifas

Layerese.


--- Kelso1_page230.png ---
110 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Laxcroxe. fict fofie {Ge fit de Holeb’ne ufq, in ftoefocclou ; ¥ sict sica ih tendit ufq i
fulttrothir 7 iii Vs? orientem sict fra culta 7 p*tum de fulftrothir se dinidat
7 inde p follas 7 lapides ufq, ad sicam q? defcendit in? Gretryg 7 in? fiain-
kylchefire 7 sic sica defeendit p tres frutices ufq, ad femita q° vadit ufy i
holeb’ne ab occidentali pte de Chimbelaue 7 s° furfi p Heleb’ne ufq, ad foflas
Pnoiatas gf tendat ufy, i fieefocclou ; Q’re volo ut pfata ecctia 7 pfati @onachi
de Kelchou pd@am cectiam 7 pdéam tra teneant 7 poffideant inppetud i libam jot. 55.
7 pura 7 ppetua clemofinam ci toftis 7 croftis ci pafchuis 7 focalibs 7 omibs
alijs cOib3 ayfiamitis ci°dé uille fedm afifam efiat? q*nta ptinet 7 ad ecctiam

= nO
7 ad uni carucati tre i pura 7

ppetuam clemofina ecctic collatam ita libe q'ete
honorifice 7 plenarie fieut aliq’m ecctiam aliam i Regno Scot libins qeci? ;
honorificenci? 7 pleni? tenét ut poftident - Hane donaéém feci eis p falute
dnoy meoy Regis Wiki 7 Regine 7 coy filii AleX 7 cetoy lihoy coy 7 p
fulute mea 7 oiugis mee 7 hedum meoy 7 p aiab3 regi DD 7 Walcoloni

+ Com Heng 7 p aiabs pat's fi 7 Miris mee 7 dium aficefloy y succefloy
meoy / Hiis tefiib » Jotie dec& de fogghou + Hung capHo dni Re& ; Ingil¥
clico dni Regis + Andrea Qanfel - Roo de lalefcrie ; Wito de veti ponte

iuniore filio dni ; Dna Q)atilde de sto Andrea ; 7 Miltis alijs «

Tim Wills de veti pate Sr pais « cit omi pleitndie sua -

142 Vnitifis (te Gris ccetic filiis 7 fidelibs » Wilts de yeti ponte ; Sali - Nohint
oms ti pofti q® pfentes me dediffe 7 oceflitie 7 hac carta mea confirmaffe
cectie {@e Warie de Kelch 7 monachis ibid deo Suientibs i liham 7 puram 7
ppetuam clemofina ecctiam de Langtune ei di plenitudie 7 integ'tate fua 7
cit omibz cOmiib3 ayfiamentis ipi? uille 7 ci omib3 ad ipam cecliam iufie
ptinentib3 7 cit toftis 7 croftis 7 fris fic ego ifie Wilts 4 qi hee carta fea
eft cora Mltis pambulaui - videlic3 fieut uia iacs ab orientali pte ecetic ufq,
in Wedyrburne ; 7 ita p Wederburne ufq ad humpulles ; 7 in langgelandes


--- Kelso1_page231.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. lil

Op ae,
us occidenté uly Laxerose

fict diuifa uad' in? tra dni 7 tra Ecetie , 7 p langgelande
i Wederb’ne fis? aq'lonem ufy, ad tofti Radulphi 7 tofta Gilbti 7 ita ufy, ad
diuifas tofti Henr* pfone 7 ad toftai Henke iux® qnda uetem fotfam ut ipe
Henk q’nda potuit falda suai. Hae a cectiam dedi 7 ocefli cis ad opagdem
7 opis futtentagem ipi? ecetie de Kelchou p aia regis Danid 7 regis Q)alcoloni
7 Comitis Henn 7 aia pat's mei 7 firis mee 7 dium ajfieclioy 7 succetioy
meoy ita libe 7 plenarie i ppetua clemofina poflidenda sie aliq'm aliam
cectiam hihi? qeci? 7 pleni? hut 7 poflident 7 scdm aflifum Reg Danid - Ita
q nd licebit cis pdcam cectiam de Langtune aliq? - tempe alicui dare f5 cau
oini tempe i manu fua retinere ad opaéem ut iam dém eft ipi? ecctic i qua
corp? Henr* Comitis req'cfeit » Hiis teftih; » Widoii abb de Lundo? - Johe
decano de ffogghou + Wagro Ad de Herfille « WiHo de Bolteby - Wilto de
Capet - Witto de Butemid , Sifid: de terligtune ; Johe de Duns » Wald
de Aula +

Anicabilis espofid in? nos 7 Wiltm de vefi ponte 3r offibs pris fui de

Angta reptad -

143 Sciant omf pfens féptum uifari ut audituri ; q anno qillcfimo ducentefimo
feio ab incarna@e dni feria q‘rta aii Pentecoften in jiencia dni - Witti
veitabit Epi sti Andre 7 clicoy suoy fta eft h amabit compoliG int» O-
Abbtem Kelchoen$ 7 monachos ci’dé loei 7 Wik de veti ponte fup con-
wifijs placitis 7 q'relis q’s iam des - W + adilfus eos habebat - videlics q
pnoiat? - W. pnoiatos Abbim 7 @onachos Kalchoenfes de offibs pat's fui de
Anglia reportandis 7 i cimitio Kalchocnfi tumulandis q'ctos clamaut inppetuit;
7 de omib; alijs q’relis q‘s ufq ad illa dié adils? cos se tire diecbat Excepta
‘rela de mult’a scalingay de Diuerigdoii q* cémuni parciti olenfu iudicio
cectic tae erat sopienda , Et pfatus abbas pfilio dni Epi puoiati 7 Conuent?
7 alioy viroy prudenti p bono pacis remifit Pnoiato + We xxx + sot- q’s


--- Kelso1_page232.png ---
Lanorone.

144

112 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

ci debebat » 7 infup dedit ei xl. sot . Et pictatis intuitu ad sepe dai W -
fupplicagom oceflit ut aia pat's ei? {peciali? 7 notatim in? ectas fpeciales
biifadtores «onattii Kalchocn’ i mifla in eod? @onattio p fidelibs celel‘nda
inppetud ophendat? - Et ut ti edpoficio fma teneat? inpoftum 7 inconeufla
ea sigilli dni Epi sti Anda’ 7 sigilla fepe dti W - roborauerit - Teft? . G -
7 N- de Drienburgo 7 Kylwinin Abbib3 - Wagro Jolie Archid laod - Johe
Deeano de ffogghou ; «agris Laurento ; 7 Wich » 7 Steph » Andr- de
Morauia » 7 Pet? baillard clicis dni Epi, Witt fit WiH - Alano filio
Rolandi de Gaweia ; Alano de Thurleftofi » Rig Nano ; Alano de Claphaii
vicecomite de Lawedyr , Will fit Ro& ; Pet? de Haga ; 7 multis alijs -

Confirmacio sup Ecctiam de Langtune -

Wits dei gfa Rex Scott - Omib3 pbis hofhibs toci? fre fue clicis 7 laicis
salt - Sciant pientes 7 futu¥ me concefliffe 7 hae carta mea conf'mafic deo 7
Ecctie {Ge Warie de Kelchou 7 qonachis ibidé do Suientib3 donaéom illam
q’'m Wills de ueti ponte eis fecit de Ecetia de Langtune - Tenend $ in
liam 7 pura 7 ppetua elemofinam ed tris 7 decimis 7 omib; alijs ad pdcam
eetam intie ptinentib; Ita libe 7 qete » plenaric 7 honorifice + ficut alias
eectias fuas lihi? , q'ecius pleni? 7 honorificenci? tenent 7 poflident 7 fieut
carta pfati Wii teftatur ; p divifas fre qm pdes Wilks cidem eectie dedit
noiatas in carta ipius - Saluo Suicio meo fi qd feruiciai me tinge debet de
Tris ab code Wiko datis pfate ecetie » Teft> » Hug Cancel meo - Coit Patrig
Juliz - Robto de @nei ; Roto de London fit fio ; Alano fit Walfi ; WiHo
de Hata » Rit fit Hug , Wit Flandr- , Ap* Selechireh - xxix die Julij -

fol. 56.


--- Kelso1_page233.png ---
145

16

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 113

Conuenzo in? nos - 7 Roland de Grenlaw Sr capella inf* claufura fn -

Hee of guencio int AbDbem 7 monachos de Kelehov » 7 Roland de
Grenelawe ; Scilie; s q abbas 7 monaehi ocelleritt pnoiato Rolando ut heat
pata capellam ; vidclic; infra clanfuram enric fue Ita q idé Roland? fide
intpdita pepigit abbi 7 onachis Pdzis q cectic fe Warie de Kelchou ut
ecelie de Grenclawe nHm oio dampnii q‘nti ad ipm Roland 7 ad fuos
ptinet : occafione hui? eapelle pneniet » $3 dia iura eectiattica ta de domo
ipi? - R + g* de héibs ci? 7 familia ? ita plene 7 integ® eectic de Grenclawe
plolucnt? ; ficut ai pft*ccioné hui? capelle pfoluebant? » Ipe u° Roland?
inuenict dia q* eapelle fit neeetfaria 2 Pe capellani - Abbas eni 7 monachi
facitt capellanii fui de Grenelawe fuire t'bs diebz i ebdomada jidée eapelle ;
qi Pats Rot ibi phendinat ; 7 nHs ali? capellan’ ibi Suiet 7 n* p bond uolataté

eapellani de Grenelaue » Ije 7 Rot 7 dis familia ei? magnis feftis ibitt ad

cetam de Grenclane ad andiend fuicii fui nt forte infin? {tit nt piclo
corpis fui dimiferit » Hoe 4 gecetlerat Pdts Abbas 7 onachi foli Rolando
pnoiato tantim” i uita fua / Telie eapitulo «

Carta fup ecctiam de Wolle -

Vniiis fee cat's ecetic filiis 7 fidclibs Efehina de Lodonijs ; falt - Notiint
ds ta pofti q* plentes me gceflifie 7 hac carta mea oftnafle cectic {%e Warie
de Keleho 7 monachis ibidem deo Suientibs » Ecctiam de Molle « cit tris 7
dibs alijs libtatib; fict tinerat 7 tenueriit co die q? hee carta fea eft ? in liham
7 ppetud clemofina - Et pitea dedi 7 geefli cis p aia dni mei Gantij filij
Alani; 7 p aia filie mee q° ap* Kelcho fepulta eft 7 p falute aie mee 7 dium
aficeffoy 7 succefioy meoy + ut ipi 7 capellan? 7 alij hoies eoy i ipia uilla de
Wolla sr Pra ecctie manétes ? heant esmuné paftura ci Fonabili inftanraméto +

P

Moree.


--- Kelso1_page234.png ---
1d LIBER DE CALCILOU.

. 7 ceta aifiaftita 1 bofco i plano 7 i focali 7 i dibs alijs aifiamétis i ipa uilla de
Molle e& hdib; meis de Qolle ; H ant oia + uolo ut ita libe 7 q'ete heant 7
i ppetua clewofina poflideat ¢ fict h carta teftat? + 7 fic! lib? 7 qcei? hnt 7
poflident alias clemoias suas i regno Seottoy , féa cft i hee carta » Anno
co? +e? « Ixxx® + v°+ inearnaddis dnice « ij° kt febr « Hiis teftibs » Symofi
capHo de Molle - Andi clico de Spronifi: - Hug Ridel » WiHo de sto
Qichacle » Nich . Edulpho - 7 Gillet de Qolle - Rolto Warefeald
de Wolle - Waleolit de Keth » Ricard de fachnes - Hug Bree - Rit de
Suapha -

Sup Eectia de Wolle -

147 Vnitifis ste wat's ecctic filiis 7 fidelibs » Dna Efchina de Lidonijs etna i
dno salt « Notlint ds pfentes 7 faturi me geeflifie 7 hae pifenti carta mea
oftmatie i liham 7 pura 7 ppetua clemofina Deo 7 ecetie ste Qarie de Kelcho
7 @onachis ibid do Suientib; Ecetiam de Qolle q‘nti ad me ptinet et dibs
juftis ptinéciis fuis i Pris 7 palturis 7 pmnnib; aifiamétis ipi? uille fic! evro-
efum i? nos 7 ipos pfedi teltat? « Et ptea pati®un + xx". vaceis 7 vitulis
cay dé ufq, di sint supannati + 7 vni tauro - 7 pté q’ndam p*ti int Eddridetete jon 57
7 niuula de Ruhope sict hoies coy ah me tenucrit ufq, ad aq*m de Blake-
pol, Ec illa ptem tre gq iac3 sup ripa Bolebent cont* Blakepol » 7 croft yd
iac3 a boriali pte dom? WiHi forefiarij fubt? Hogham , Et ofiem r‘titudiné q°
uidebat? ad me ptitle de @olédino # quieta clamaui Puoiatis @onachis inp-
petud - Hane & pceflioné 7 of'maébem teei p falute dnoy mcoy Regs Willi 7
Alexi fill} ci? 7 p falute aic mee 7 heredi meoy 7 p aiab3 pat's mei 7 watts
mee 7 p aiab; dnoy meoy-+ s+ dni Waltij fit Alani 7 dni Henr 7 p aia
Efchine filie mee 7 Giur aificetioy 7 succefloy meoy - Q’re volo ut pai

ita libe , q'ete 7 pacifice ;

@onachi has pdtas elemofinas heant 7 poflid
honorifice ; sie’ alig® clemofina libius , qeci? ; pacificenci? ; honorificcnei? i


--- Kelso1_page235.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 11s

regno Scottoy tenet? 7 poffidet? - Hiis tefi> Dna Auicia filia mea ; Dna
Cecilia filia mea ; Gamello clico ; Ricard eapHo ; Ricard de Nicot ;
Nichot fit Ade , Ricard feoto - Watho de Hou Roberto Warefcaldo ;
S¥mone Qorello ; Johe coquo ; ci multis alijs -

Sup tofta 7 Croftii Witti de Wolhope -

Vniliis £26 cat's cectic filiis 7 fidclibs has tras vilut ut anditu® - Cecilia de
Wolle filia Efchine de Wolle etna in dno salé ; Nowit vnitilitas fra me i
mea viduitate 7 pp'a ac lia poteftate oftituta tang’ Pnam pp'i iuris 7 vera
hui? donagis hedem divine caritatis intuitu 7 p falute aie mee 7 p aiabs
pat's mei 7 oat's mee 7 dium aficefioy 7 sucectioy meoy deditle oceflille 7
hae carta mea pf*mafic Deo 7 Eectie fee Marie de Kelehou 7 monachis ibidé
Suientibs 7 inppetui Suitu? i libam - pura - 7 ppetua clemofina Totti 7
eroftum q' fucritt Wii de Wollehope in moris inx* exitii fins Wytelawe 7
viginti ac‘s re arabit 7 sex in dnio meo de Molle  videlic3 1 hanacres a Pra
Gilti auencl fs? orienté noné acs tre ci dimid acra fre gf iacs pp'nq'or
riunlo q' nocat? Aldetuneburne q° acre iacent ibidé p parti¢las ; 7 duas acras
fre p Soulifide » 7 wna acram tre ppinqorem exitui qt tendit uers’ pfouh ;
~ ynd actm q° iac3 a pte oceidétali de Benelaun ; 7 noué ac's tre 7nd
pareata i dederig q® iacent int Aldetuneburne fis? anti® i afecndendo uly,
ad duas cruces p partiélas 7 subt? punlam hogam t's acras fre ppingoref
‘tre doy wonachoy 7 vni peatam 7 tota ptem mea de Hoga ; 7 dimidia
acri tre in Kydelaunecrofth Et i Hanftrother oéto acras p'ti , feilies q’tuor
ac’s q® iacent in? tra arabilé de hanacre 7 fut aratt q® dinidit in? pred

‘tum > pttum Gilbti auencl » 7 q*tuor ac’s pti fubt® plouh fewire q®
1 7} 74 i

iacent int {uleos arat'; Dedi 7 cifdé @onachis i liham , pura 7 ppetua

elemofina. t*fdecim acras tre arabit i dominijs meis ; videlic; totam ptem
5 . > 9. soe -

medi de Wolleftelle in q* gtinent® q*tuor act tre 7 dimid ; 7 pt? meam

Gore.


--- Kelso1_page236.png ---
116 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

ous. illi? tre q* iacz pping'or riuulo q' defcendit de Brademedue ufq, i Bolbenth ,
7 dimidia aera tre q® uocat? Crokecroft ppinq'oré uie q* tendit tts? pfouth ;
7 duas ac’s tre 7 dimid fubt? bercaria med ppinq'ores exitui fe pfouth
i afeendendo ; 7 t's ac’s tre i illa cult®a q® iacs pping'or pfouth ; excepta
cult?a Gilbti auenel ; 7 toté ptem mea prati de Brademedwe - 7 paft’am
fuflicienté trefeentis ouib3 7.pecé animalib; 7 q“tuor eq's ubiq, in pafturis
meis déieis 7 berearid mea inx* Aldetuncburne ; 7 liberos introit® 7 exit’
a tris fuis ubiq, ufg, ad pafturas ; Et accipient de pfouth ea q® sit nétia
ad carucas fuas 7 ad walluras faciend inppetua ; Tenebit dé monachi
dia ifta Pnoiata i lihan , pura , 7 ppetud clemofind q'cta 7 soluta 7 lita
ab Gi Suicio » 7 Suitute ; 7 exaccBe 7 dimoda pfuctudie 7 ab di hore 7
guamine ; 7 erat qeti a mula « Tencbat 7 id@ onachi pdéas ras
p*ta 7 pafi’as ita libe 7 qete 7 plenarie fic' aliq* clemofina i regno feocie
ab aliq'bs viris religiofis libi? q'eci? pleni? 7 honorificenei? tenet® 7 poffidet® -
Ego uw? 7 hiedes mei dia ifta pnotata paeis @onachis pt* ofies hoies fu. ss
warantizabim’ inppetua 7 defendem? - In eui? rei teftimonid figilli mea
Pientib; appofui ; Et ut h mea donacio maioris sec’itatis robur optineat
7 inpeufla ppetuo pmaneat ? ad inftancia mea 7 peticioné veilabit pat fir
diis WiHs dei gta Glafguen3 ept ; 7 magr Waltus de @ortno mari tiie
decan® ceetie GlafguenS figilla fua vna ei sigillo meo }Henti se'pto appo-
fuerat - Hiis teftibs , magro Gamelino ; magro Nichot de Qoffteth tie
archidiacono theuidalie ; Pat'cio de gardino clicis dei. dni epi, Walto
vieario de Molle ; Stpho de feothun - Jote caplto de Molle , Johe nepote
dni - W - Glas epi + Ada filio Nichot - Henk’ de Blachedene ; Alano de
hertefheued ; Rié de Boulden » Johe de fortun ; fernientib; Abbis de

Kelchou ; 7 multis alijs -



--- Kelso1_page237.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 117

Carta ar paftura feodi de Molle - our

149 Oimiibs fe «at's ecctic filiis ad q?y noticia Piens fe'pta pucilit - Ricard? de
Lincolfi fili? 7 heres Ricardi de Lincolit Salé - Notint vnitilitas ¢ra me con-
cefliffe 7 hae Pienti carta mea ofirmatfe Ecctie fe Marie de Kelchou ; 7
«onachis ibidé deo inppetuti Suientibs paltura snflicienté scptingentis onib;
i paft?a feodi mei de Wolle ; Qua pafi’a utent? i bofco 7 plano ta in
Berhope 7 @ollehope q* ext* ; 7 vbicumq, maluerint i dto feodo ext* blada
7 p’tum , Excepto q fingtis annis qindecim dicb3 pximis aii feltii sti Johis
baptific i eftate vig, ad fefti sti Pet’ aduincula abftinebit im a paftnra de
Berchope + P totii & annii ex'® Pnoiato tempe utent? eii déis ouibs suif paft?a
tai berhope 7 @ollehope q* alibi i déo feodo vbictiqg meli? s* vidint i bofeo
7 plano fict d@m cft PP blada 7 pttum ; 7 de nemore Pda feodi mei
accipient @iniftri d¢oy q@onachoy ea q’ néc‘ia fuerint ad caulas ouib; {uis

faciendas ? Ita « s + q de hoe faciant p vift Suientis mei Fonabili? fii vafta-

méto 7 deftrucée ipi? nemoris ; 7 ci fe fitint canle de! ouib3 sufficientes ¢
qf diu ille canle Fonabilit durare potunt ? nd aecipient aliq'd de déo nemore
afiq‘m itum necefle Ticant eaulaf viii suay fale 7 Yepare 7 tiie accipient
sufticien® sedm Fonem neceflaria sii {upfluitate de déo nemore p vifti Suicntis
mei; Et feiend q hiis p'mis viginti uf (ginta annis q’ufq, dém nem? meli?
reeretlit 7 i meliori ftatu fulit nichil de ipo nemore accipicnt ; s3 caulas
ouibs fuis fi uoluint intim de fuo puidebit ; Oues & coy iacebit i déo
feodo i caulis ut ext® canlas fic! qonachi volttint » Nulla ojo inpedimenti
facia ut fieri pmittam alicubi p aliqué five p aracioné ut aliq‘m inclu-
fura uf exclufuri q? min? oues déoy qonachoy heant larga fatis 7 libum
exit 7 introita de Pra cectic ad fdéam paftura - Habebit si volfint
oues hdinum 7 Suientia fuoy infra pfata nufum septingentay onium +
Concefli 7 et dedi licencia hédib; 7 tencntib; meis locandi déis @onachis
7 cOmodandi / q‘ntii uolttint ; 7 @onachis aceipiendi » Et qu déi monachi


--- Kelso1_page238.png ---
118 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

@oue. in’ 7 heredib; meis decim& molendini de Qolle ppetuo remiferit : ego p me
7 liedibs meis monachis Mltura ipoy de Qolle inppetut remitto 7 q'etam
clamo ; Do q°q, cis licencia molendi q'ete ubictiq, uolttint » Et si ¢fndo
molere yolftint ad molendina feodi mei de Wolle molent life abfy, multura
fiatim p? iad q?d flit sup t'meyl nifi blada ipius dui fit ~ Ego ue Rid dia
hee pdea ocedo 7 conftmo be Marie 7 monachis de Kelch in pura lidam 7
ppetua elemofina - Hee dia sict plens fptum otinet affidani 7 tactis facro-
{eis iurani in manu Robti abbis de Keleh me 7 hedes meos fine malo
ingenio inppetut obfuaturos - Tnfup fubicei me 7 hedes meos inppetnii
inrifdicédi veiabilii patrii q' p tempe fitint de sto Andé 7 de Glafeu epoy
ut poflint me 7 hedes meos ad dia pdéa fidetr obfuanda vbi 7 q°m? voluerit fi. 59.
sii canfe cogni@e copellere + Et ad petiGsem meam veltabiles pres Dauid
de Seé And? ; 7 WiHs de Glafcu tite tempis epi pfenti fe'pto vna cii sigillo
meo sigilla sua appofueriit » Hiis teftih; magro Walto de @ortuo mari
decano de Glasen ; @agro Nichot de Qofteth Archidiacono Theuidalye
Wazro Radulpho p* de Wymeth - Qagro Robto de Paxtona clericis - Hno
Ricardo de Bigirton - Bno Henrico de Halyburton - Bno Ailmero de
Hanefleye militibs ; Johe de QWunfort ; Gilbto de Thirncly ; Johe de
Grabheued ; 7 cultis alijs » Acta fat ifta+ Anno are @° ; cc? » ¢'ngq‘gelio +

in noie dni -

Carta sr toftit 7 croft» Wii de Wolhope «

150 Wits (te cat's ecctie filiis 7 fidelibs has tras vifu¥ ut auditu? Cecilia de
Molle filia Efehine de Qolle cena i duo falé + Nottit vnitilitas tra me de
aflenfa 7 confenfa Stmonif Wauleuerer Pni mei ; 7 dinine caritatis intuitu ,
yp falute aie mee ; 7 p aiab3 pat's mei 7 @at's mee 7 dium aiicefloy 7
fucectioy meoy dedifie / oceflitie » 7 hac carta mea pftmatie deo 7 eectie ste

Marie de Kelchon , 7 @onachis ibid do Suientib; 7 inppetnt fernituris ;


--- Kelso1_page239.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. lid

In liban ; puram ; 7 ppetud clentofinam ; tofti 7 croft q' fueriit
Witi de Qollehope iunioris iux* exiti vers? Witelawe ; 7 viginti acras
tre arabit ; 7 sex in dominio meo de Molle ; videliez 7 in hauacres a
fra Gilbti auencl fs? orient@ noud aeras tre et dimid aera tre q° iacet
ppinq'or riuulo q' vocat® Aldctuncburne ; q° acre iacent ibidé p pticulas ;
7 duas acras fre i pfoulfide ; 7 vnd acm {re ppingtoré exitui q' tendit vs"
plouh , 7 vndac‘m tre qf iacg a pte orientali de Benclawe ; 7 noué acras fre)
7 vn peatam i Dedrige q° iacent int Aldetuncburne Ys? anfira 7 aiven-
dendo ufq ad duas eruees p pticulas ; Et fubtus punlam hogam t's ac‘s ‘tre
ppinq'ores Pre déoy Monachoy / 7 vnd peatam tre 7 tota ptem inch de Hoga ;
7 dimid ac‘m trei Kydelaweeroft ; et i Hauttrother octo ac’s p'ti , s ; q"tuor
ac’s q° iacent in? tra arabilé de Hauacre ; 7 fuled arat' q' diuidit in? pdem
p'tum ; 7 p"ta Gilbti anenel ; 7 q"tuor ac’s p'ti fubt? pfouthfwire ; q° iaccnt
in? fuleof arat* ; Dedi # eifdé monach ilibam » pura, 7 ppetud clemofina
t*{decim ac’s fre arabit i dominicis meis ; videlic3 toté ptem mea de Wolle-
ttele ; in quaptinent® q‘tuor acre tre 7 dimid ; 7 ptem mea illi? ‘tre af jaes
pping’or riuulo q defeend' de Brademedwe ufq, i Bolbent ; 7 dimid acm
fre q® vocat? Crokecroft  pping'oré vie q° tendit VP Pfouth , 7 duas ac‘s
‘we 7 dimid fubt? bercaria mea pping'‘oré exitui fs? Pfouth in aleendendo ;
7 t's ac’s tre i illa cult’a q° ines ppinq'or Pfouth ; ex“ cult®a Gilberti auenel ;

7 tota ptem mea pti de Brademedwe ; 7 pattura fuflicienté trecentis ouibs 7
dee’ aialibs ; 7 q‘tuor eq's vbiq, 1 patiuris meis ddicis , 7 bercaria mea iuxt"
Aldetuneburne ; 7 libos int°it? 7 exit? a ‘wis tuis ubig, ad pafturas » Et
accipict de Pfouth ea q° St néia ad carueas fuas ; 7 ad walluras faciédas
inppetua ; Tenebiit & di monachi dia ifta pnoiata de me 7 hediby meis i
libam , pura ; 7 ppetua clemofina ; q'eta 7 foluta ab Oi Suigo 7 Suitute , 7
exacébe 7-7 ab dimoda ofuctudie 7 ab Gi hoile 7 g‘uamine ; 7 erdt qeti a
Miltura ; Tenebiit 7 id’ conachi fidzas tras 7 p"ta 7 pati’as ita libe q'ete y 7
plenarie ficut aliq® elomofina i regno Scocic ab aliq'b3 viris religiofis ¢ hihi? ,
qteei? ; pleni? ; 7 honorificenci? tenct’ 7 poflidet® » Ego u° 7 hiedes mei dia

MOoure.


--- Kelso1_page240.png ---
120 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

corse. ifta Bnoiata Pdtis monach con® ds hoics warantizabim? 7 defendem? in-
ppetua ; In cui? rei teftimoniai [lens fe'ptum sigilli mei appoficione robo-
raui + Hiis teft* WiHo captto de Wolle - Rié do Nichole , Ada fit Nichot ;
Heni de Blackedene ; Hen fit Robti; Johe nepote dni Wiki Glafy epi 7 st. 60.
Bni Regis Canech , Rig de Boulden; Alano de Hertifheuede Suientibs
ADbis de Keleh 7 alijs -

Carta gr quamd donagem Cecilic de Wolle -

151 Oniib; x' fidelib; plens {pti vifu¥ ut anditn? Sym Wauleuet ; salt ; i
dno - Noliit vnittitas tra me geeflifie 7 hac carta mea pf*maffe deo 7 ecctie
ste Marie de Kelchon 7 monachis ibid@ deo Suientibs 7 inppetud Suituf i
libam puram 7 ppetud elemofina tota donagem q'mn Cecilia de Molle filia
Efehine de Wolle fponfa mea eifdé @onach in tritorio de Wolle caritatine
otulit i libam ; pwam 7 ppetuam clemofina - In ris yi p'tis ; i pafenis ; i
hofeis ; in planis 7 i dib3 alijs aifiamétis ? fict i carta dée Cecilie fponfe
mee pdéis @onachis inde pfecia pleni? 7 liq'dius continet? » Q‘re volo vt
dé Monae d@am donacdem ci dibz ad eam ptinentib; adeo libere , qete ;
plenaric 7 honorifice inppetud tencant 7 poflideant ? sicut aliq* elemofina
iregno Scocie libi? q'eci? ; pleni? ; 7 honorificenci® tenet? 7 poffidet? + In
cui? rei teftimof plenti se'pto ? sigilla mei appofui ; Hiis tefi* Witto capHo
de Wolle ; Rit de Nichole ; Ada fit Nich ; Henf de Blackedene ; Hen?
fit Robti » Joie nepote Cancel ; Rit de Boulden ; Alano de Hertithened
suientib; Abbis de Keleh ; 7 alijs -



--- Kelso1_page241.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 121

Carta sr quada paft’am i teneffito de Molle - Morte.

152 Vnitilis fe cat's ccctie filiis 7 fidelibs Anfelm? de Wolle fat » Notlint ds ta
pofti q¢ Plentes me dediffe 7 oceflifle 7 hae carta mea [eonfirmatte] Ecctie ste
Marie de Keleh » 7 @onachis ibid deo Suientibs in libam 7 ppetua elemofina

alibs i paft’a tre mee

patiura fufficient@ septingétis ouihs ,-7 qinq'es - xx" + a
de Molle ; vtent? ati paftura p tota ‘tramea de Wolle ; ta i bofco q’i plano ta
i berhope g* ext* 7 vbiq, ext® blada 7 p*tum ; ex" q finglis annis no utent®
pafi’a de Berhope ci onib3 fuis ; s3 fm cit aialibs a q'ndecim dieb3 afi felti
fi Johis bapé i eftate ; ufq, ad fefta sti Pet* aduindla ; s3 tiie utent® paftura 7
Mollehope ; 7 alibi ubiq, in bofeo 7 plano ; Be berhope 7 ei aialibs fuis etia
tic i berhope , A fetto & {ti Pet aduinéla ufq, ad q'ndecim dies afi fefti
fai Johis utent’ paftura ta 1 berhope g® alibi ubiq, ta ci outb; fuis q* cit
aialib3 » 7 accipient de nemore meo q® néia fit ad caulas pdeis ouibs
faciendas 7 oucs coy 7 aialia iacebiit i tra mea ut i caulis t ext” put ipi
uoluerint » Dedi eni licencia dibz dibs meis ut eifdd @onach de tra fua
locent ut comodent u' caulas fuas ponat + Licebit 7 monach fi uoluerint hre
aialia ut ones hdint 7 feruiencia fuoy inf pdt nuhlum aialit 7 outa fuay ;
Et ne qit inpoftum g*uam aliq’d t moleftia ab hedibs meis t alijs de hac
clemofina mea fuftineat ? cdcefli cis + ut heant libum 7 fatis larga exita 7
intitd de tra fua de Q)olle ulq, ad pattura tre mee q'm dedi eis; n° ego ut
fedes mei arabim? aut arari paciem? aii eos , nf aliq? q’lib3 m? int’ita ut exita
aialiii 7 ouiti fuay p nos inpediem? n° p aliof inpediri paciem? ; Ptea Gm
ipi Monach q'etam clamailunt m* ” hedibs, meis decima @olendini mei 7
qetam elamaui eis inppetuii oultura fuam ; Et fi volitint molere ad q@olen-

0

dint med / molent abl, Miltura ftati p? illud q°d fait Sr trames nt medi diet
flit - Hee dia ocefii cis i liham 7 ppetua clemofina ; p aia regis Dauid ; 7
comitis - H - 7 p falute aie mee ; 7 dium aficclloy 7 succctioy meoy + His
teft- »S- Arch de Glafg. J+ p' de Rocaft - Ing « capHo « O - capHo -

a


--- Kelso1_page242.png ---
(our.

163

122 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

H. de Molle - BR; fit mco » N - de Colt  Edulfo ; Wald de Keth ; Robt
de Mace't? -

Carta sup quidam paft‘ram i teneifito de Qolle -

Units ste @at's cectie filiis 7 fidelibs ? Anfelm? de Qolt salt - Notlint
ofis t& pofti q” pfentes me dediffe 7 oceffiffe 7 hac carta mea conf'maile
Ecetie ste marie de Kelch 7 @onach ibidé deo Suientibs i libam 7 ppetua

elemofina paft?ram {nfficienté - dee - ouib3 ¢ 7 q'ng'es + xx" - aialib3 i paft’a
‘tre mee de Qolle » Utent? ati pati?a p tota ‘tra mea de Molle ta i botco q't

plano ti i berhope q“ ext" , 7 vbiq, ext p*tum 7 bladum ; ex" q singlis annis
q 7 b i 7 q sing

nd utent? pafia de berhope cit ouibs fuis » {5 tm ci aialibg a qindeci dich;
ah feliai sti Johis bapt i eftate ¢ ulq ad £" sti Pet aduinéla ; 83 tie utent®
pata 7 Mollehope 7 alibi ubietig, i bofeo 7 plano pe berhope 7 ii aialib3
suif F tie i berhope ; A fefto & sti Pett aduin@la ufq, ad q'indeci dies aii
f
aialibs - Et accipient de nemore meo q° nétia fit ad caulas Pdtis ouibs

i Joh utent? pafi’a ti i berhope q* alibi wy, ta ci onib; suif q* et

faciend » 7 oues eoy 7 aialia iacebiit i ra inca ti caulis t ext™ put ipi
voluit - Dedi + ¥ - licencia dibs hdibs meis ut eifil@ @onach de tra tua
locent 7 comodent ? u' caulas suaf ponat - Licebit i monach si voluint Tire
aialia t ones hiind 7 Suienciti froy inf® pdem numa aialia 7 ouit suay 7 Et
ne qit ipoftum g%vai aliq’d t moleftia ab hedibs meis f alijs de hi" clemoia
futtincant  oeefli cis ut heant lihum 7 satif larga exitdi 7 int%iti de tra fue
de Wolle vfq ad pafi?am re mee q‘m dedi eis n° ego n° fiedes mei arabim?
aut arari paciem? afi eos 7 n° aliq? q*lib3 m? int*ita t exit aialitt 7 ouid fuay
p nof inpediem? n® p alios inpediri paciem? - Ptea Gin ipi monach qreta
clamauerat m* 7 hedib3 meis decima molendini mei ? ego qeta clamaui cif
multura fua inppetuii , Et fi yolitint molere ad molendina mea : molt
abl Mita ftati p? illnd q’d fait fup t‘inef n' neti dnictt flit - Bota geelli

fol: 81.


--- Kelso1_page243.png ---
=

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 123

eif 3 liba 7 ppetua clemota p aia Reg Danid ; 7 comitis Hen ; 7 p falute
aie mee ; 7 dium aficefloy 7 succefloy meoy + Hiis teftiby » Symone Archit
de Glefg + Joh pfona de Rochefb . Ingulpho capo ; Otbto capHo de
Kelch » Hen¥ dno de Molle ; R - filio meo - N - de Molle - 7 Edulfo ;
Malé de Keth ; R de Suafa 7 W - fe ci? - Alano de Leinhale -

Carta &r quatda tras i fritorio de Wolle - [Helayethoug] -
Vnitifis fe cat's eectie filiis 7 fidelibs » Anfel* de Molle salé - Nottint tam

pofti q* pfentes me deditfe 7 cdcefliffe ; 7 hac carta mea of'nafie eectic
Warie de Kelch 7 monachis ibidé deo Snientibs i ilibam 7 ppetua clemofina

tota tram illa 7 p‘ti 7 nem? i fritorio de Molle q’d eft ab orientali pte de
Ernbrandefdene - s - a dinifis tre monachoy de Wailros recto tite uly, in

Ernebrandefdene 7 fic p ernbrand ufq i vadii de bolbent* ; tota videlie3 tram
A

tre eectie

dino 7 nem? 7 pti q°d eft a dinifis iftis ad orienté ; ufq, i dinita
de Molle; 7 furfti tis? Hnnednn yfy, i diuifas fre a@onachoy de Mailros ; 7
totit hulechefhoy i bofco 7 plano 7 paft’a ; ex* una acra tre q‘m dedi. W -
ccemétario » Hee aii ota dedi cis i libam 7 ppetud clemofina p aia Reg
Danid ; 7 comitis H - 7 p falute aie mee 7 dinm aficetioy 7 succeltoy meoy #
ut ca ita libe q'ete 7 plenaric 7 honorifice heant 7 i ppetua clemofina pofli-
deat 7 fict aliq’m alia clemoS lib? ; qcei? + pleni? 7 honorificenci? hnt 7
potlidet - Hiis tefte , Riz filio meo - Heng de Molle ; Adam Harane ;
capH » WiHo fit ci?; Hug capo Reg ; Oftro eapHo de Kelch ,
Nich de molle , Waleolii ; Pat'cio -

our.


--- Kelso1_page244.png ---
124 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

cour. Carta sr decima Qolendini de Molle «

155 Notiint ds iftas tras lecturi 7 audit’i q q'ftio q° Qtebat? in® wonach de
Kelch 7 Anfeliti de Molle de paft’ra tre Ans’ ; q” de iure ecctie sue de Molle
pfati «o*chi exigebat 2 7 de decia molé (pi? Ans* de Qolle ; amicabili
copofid’e ita fopita eft 4 Pdéi videlies «chi de Kelch relaxaflat 7 remifat
Plato Ans* 7 fiedibg ei? q'ftion® q* patt’am tre ipi? Ans* de Q)olle de iure
ecctic fue de Qolle petebat + Anfelm? aii pfat? ecctie Monachisq, de Keleh sot. 62.
dedit 7 oceflit 7 carta faa oftmauit in libam 7 ppetua elemofind paft?am fuffi-
cienté feptingétis ouibs 7 7 q'ngq'es uiginti aialibs i pafi’am fre fue de Colle 1

Hae patt’a utent? “chi de Kelch ubig, i fra ipi? An$ de Q)olle ; ta uidelics
i bofeo q* in plano ti i berhope g® ext” 7 mq, ext® pti 7 bladii; ex’ q
nnoq’g, aiio xv + dich pximis aii fefti sti Johis i eftate ufg, ad fefti £21
Petri aduinéla fi utent? paft’a de berhope cit ouib3 fuis ? f3 fm ef aialib; ,
Ifo afi tépe cf ouibs fuis utent? paft?a 1 Qolhope 7 alibi w'q, i bofeo 7 plano
j{t berhope 7 tie 1 berhope ea aialibs fais fmm? - P alind v? toci? anni
{paciii ci onibs 7 afalibs fuis utent? paft’a ta i berhope 7 Q)olhope g® alibi
ug, fie! dém eft i bofco 7 plano Pe blada 7 p‘tum + Et de nemore Ans°
aceipiét @*chi fingtis annis q° neéia ffint ad caulas onib; fuis faciendas ;
7 ones 7 aialia coy iacebiit i fra Ans* in caulis ut ext® caulas put chi
uoltlint - Et ne i poftum de hac elemofina g"uamé aliq’d ut moleftia ab
hedib; Ans* aut ab alijs fuftineat 2 hebit libum 7 largé fatis exita 7 int*ita
aialib; 7 ouib3 fuis de fra fua 4 cdpetit cectie fue de Molle , ad pafi?am
tre Ans* q'm dedit eis ; ita q ife - A+ 7 ficdes ei? fi arabat n° ab
aliq? arari pacient® aft cos ; n° alio q°libg m° int*iti ut exitd aialii 7 ouia
ipoy inpediét , ant p aliqné inpediri pacient? ; hebiit q°q, w"chi fi volflint
oues 7 afalia hoind 7 Suiencidi fuoy int pfatii nim aialii 7 onitt fuay -
Predés afi Ans? dedit licencia hdib3 7 tenentib; {nis locandi sup*déis m‘chis
uf cémodandi q"nti de fra fua uoltint ; 7 ofchis accipiédi » Et qr ‘chi


--- Kelso1_page245.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 125

Ans* 7 ei? hedibs decima @olendini Ans ipi? de Qolle ppetuo remiferiit # @ore.
ipe Ans* @chis mult’am ipoy de Molle inppetuai remifit 7 q'eta clamant -
Licencia q eis dedit molendi u'eiiq uolttint - Et fi aliqit mofe uolftint ad
molendinii ei? ? molét ablq Mlt’a ttati p? Hd q’d twit fup t'meil 7 nt blada

Ans* dict fftit - H 2" dia sic piens fe'ptit oting fepe dict? - A ~ affidaut i

manu + O - abbis de Kelch fe p dia si malo ingenio fuat?um - Tefi> ; Symi

arch glafé- J - pfona de Roketb’c - Ingulfo caplo - O + eapH - Hug -

eapH Regis - Heng de Wolle - Nich 7 Edulfo de Q)olle ; Rig tit Anfelmi ,

Rig 7 WiHo de Swafha ; Q)aleot fit Hui de Keth -

Carta sr vn bouata fre i Pritorio de Molle -

156 Oinibs fée cat's ecetic filiis 7 fidelibs ta pfentib; q* futtis vifuF ul auditur
has tras ; Alc& fil Willi fit eadgari ; 7 Jfolda filia Ans* ; de Wolle vxor illi? ;
salé + Sciatif nos dedifie 7 gecflitle 7 hac carta fira pf'matie Deo 7 cectic
f&e Warie de Keleh 7 monach ibidé deo feruicntibs vni bouata tre i fritorio
de Wolle ; de ra q’m tenem? de Rit + de Nichole ; feitt ili bouata tre ab
oricntali pte inx“ tra q'm Heng Groftus tenct de Rit Scotto i libam ;
pura; 7 ppetua clemofind ei dib3 ad Pdéam fram fp%tantibs q*uti ptinet

qenda vxoris Ans* de Q)olle ; ci Rit de

Nichole nob aflignaflit una carucata tre i ollehopes put int nof onent nof

a 8 6
ad im tre - Poft morté u° Agnetis

i efeambia Pdée bouate tre domui de Keleh , 7 Pacis qonach vna bonata tre
i ollchopef oferem? i meliori loco 7 utiliori q? ipi monachi uolflint ca
Pais aifiamétis ; Hae ati tra dedim? cis p falute aiay patra 7 matrit firoy ;
7 p falute animay firay ; ita libe , qete ; honorifiee ; 7 plenarie i ppetnii
poflidenda fict aliq‘m alia clemofing i Regno Scocie libins q'eci? » honori-
ficenci? 7 pleni? tenet 7 poflidet - Nos u® 7 fiedes firi Pais monach
warantizabim? pdéam fra ot off homes ; 7 h° sii malo ingenio tenent
affidanim? . Hiis tefte Rig de Nichole ; WiHo Anenel - Sith Q)alleucrer sot 6s.


--- Kelso1_page246.png ---
More.

126 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Rit Scoto Nichot de Molle ; Edwardo cap dni epi fei Andy ; Andy
Wanfel - Walt fenefcealdo  Witlo de Wartre ; Ada de Weftwit ; Rig chico /
Ada de bernewile ; Sy Morel ; J - Ppofito de Sp°uftun ; Alano de Cotii ,
ih de Boultofi 7 muttis aliis -

Carta sr toftii 7 Croft qt flunt Witti de Wolhope JunioF - [feilicet Ald-
tounburn}

Unifiis t@e cat's cectie filiis 7 fidelibs has tras vifuF ut anditut Cecilia de
Wolle filia EF:
viduitate 7 pp*a poteftate mea oftituta tang® duam pprit iuris ; 7 hi?
donadis hedem diuine caritatis intuitn 7 p falute aie mee 7 p aiabs pat's

. y + Oe On Ps 71h
{chine de Wolle ctna i dno falt - Nottit vnilifitas fra me 7 Liha

mei 7 mat's mee 7 dium aiicefioy mcoy 7 succcfioy dediffe , gcellille 7 hac
carta mea pftmafle deo 7 cectic {te Marie de Kelch 7 monachi ; ibide deo
Suientib; 7 inppetud fuitur 7 i li}am 7 puram / 7 ppetua clemofina tofti 7
croftii q fucrat Willi de Wollehope innioris ; iux* exita tis? Witelawe 17
vigiti acras re arabit 7 sexi dominio meo de Molle ; vidett » i hanacres
a tra Gilbti auencl fs? orient® noné acras tre ci dimid acra fre gf ines
pping'or riunlo qt uocat? Aldetuneb’ne ; q? acre iacent ibidé p particulas ; 7
duas acras fre i pfoubfide ;7 vn aera fre pping'oré exitni q' tendit ts’
plouth ; 7 vna acra q° iac3 a pte orientali de benelawe ; 7 noué acras tre 7
vna peati i Dedrige , q° iacet inf? Aldetuncb?nc uf? auft™ i afeendendo 7 lg,
ad duas cruces p ptitlas , 7 fubt? puula hoga t*f aeras tre pping'ores tre déoy
conach ; 7 yna peatam fre 7 tota ptem mea de hoga ; 7 dimid aera tre i
kydclaweroft ; 7 i hauftrotlier octo aeras pti , Scite; + q‘tuor ac’s q? iacét ine
fra arabilé de Hanacre 7 fulet aratt q! diuidit int Pde p*ta 7 pti Gilbti
Anenel 7 q*tuor acras p*ti fubt? pfouthfwire q° iacent in? fuleos arat* - Dedi
5 monach i liftam ; pura ; 7 ppetua clemofina t*fdeci ac‘s fre arabit i

doiniis meis videliez toti ptem mea de Wolleftcle » In q* gtinent® q'tuor


--- Kelso1_page247.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU, 127

acre 7 Jimid , 7 ptem mea illi? tre q° iacz pping'or riuulo q' defeend' de
Brademedwe ufy, i bolbent 7 dimid ac‘m fre q? vocat? Crokecroft ppinq'oré
vie q° tend ts? pfouth ; 7 duas ac’s fre 7 dimid fubt? berearia mea pping'oré
fre i illa eult?a q° iac3_ ppinq'or

exitui Bs? pfouth i afeendédo ; 7 t*s
pfouth ; ex® cult?a Gilbti Auenel 7 tota ptem mea p*ti de Brademedwe ; 7
pali’am fufficienté t‘feentis ouibs , 7 decé aialibs ; 7 q‘tuor eq's uy, i paft’is
meis dnicis » 7 bercarif mea iux" Aldetuneb’ne , 7 libos int’it? 7 exit? a tris
fuis vbiq, ufq ad paft’as » Et aceipiét de pfouth ca q* sit nece‘ia ad carucas
fuas 7 ad walluras faciend inppetui » Tenebiit % d@i q@onach dia ifta
pnoiata de me 7 fiedibs meis i libam ; puri, 7 ppetua clemofina q'eta 7
foluta ab di Suicio ; 7 Suitute 7 exaccBe ¢-7 ab dimoda pfuetudie 7 ab di hoile

ee 5 . 2 Nonebat x ide coon Pleas % e
7 guamie 7 eriit q'eti a imult*a , Tenebat 7 idé @ofi pdias tras 7 p'ta y 7

pativas ita lie 7 qtete ; 7 plenarie fict aliy® elemoia i regno Scot ab aliq'bs
viris religiofis libi? q'cci” pleni? 7 honorificenci? tenet® 7 poflidet? - Ego w
7 fiedes mei dia itia pnoiata pdtis @*chis ot" 6s hoies warentizabim? 7
defendem? inppetuti ; In cui? rei teftimonit figilla mei vna ci figillis
venabit pat's firi Bui Wilt Glai
de Roketh?e plenti sc'pto appofui - Hiis tefty WiHo captto de Wolle , Riz
de Nichole ; Ada fit Nichot ; Hen¥ de Blakedene » Heng fit Robti » Johe
nepote Dni - W + Glalg Epi 7 Dni Regis cancella¥ ; Rit de Boulden ,
Alano de Hertefheued fuientib; abbis de Keleh ; 7 aliis -

- epi, 7 dni Nichot de Sulys tie vieccom

Carta fup quada pté patiure i tencitito de Molle -
Notint 6s pfentes 7 fut?i q ego Ricard’ de Lincolnia 7 Q)athildis filia +
heres Anfelmi de Molle vxor mea gcetlim® 7 hae carta fra of mauim? Eectic
ste Marie de Keleh ; 7 monach ibidé deo Suientibs i libam , 7 pura 7 ppetnam
clemofinad pafi’am faflicienté septingentis ouib3 7 q'ny'es + xx" + aialibs +i
pafttam fendi firi de Molle; Qua paft?a utent? i bofco 7 plano ta i berhop 7

ore.

fle G4


--- Kelso1_page248.png ---
Moure,

128 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

colhope q° ext” 7 vbiq, i eodé fendo ext* blada 7 p*ti , Ex'* q singlis anis

Qndecim diebs pximis afi feftii sti Johis baptifte i ettate » vfq, ad feftii sci
Pet* aduintla abftincbiit a pafi?a de berhope tm ci onibs fuis » Ca aialibs
w° fris nd abftinebit - P toté aut anni ex’? Potato tempe utent® ch onibs
7 aialibs fuis paft’am ta i berhope 7 molhope g* alibi wg, sict dém eft i bofeo
7 plano pe bladai 7 ptt » Et de nemore pdti feudi accipient finglis annis q°
neétia fuerit ad eanlas ouibs fuis faciend , Et oues 7 aialia coy iacebit i
codé feudo i canlis ut ext* caulas fi monachi nolucrint » Nulla 7 inpedimenti
facie? ut p aliqué ficri fuftinebim? p aracioné ut p aliq'm alia exclufioné
«min? Teant ones 7 aialia coy libum 7 fatis larga exitii 7 int’itti de tra cectic
ad paft?am pnoiata ; Habebiit q°q, si nolilint ones y aialia hoint fuoy 7
Suiencitt int® Pfatum nuttium aialitt suoy 7 ouiti - Conceflim? F licencia hdib;
7 tenentibs firis locandi fup"déis cponacti 7 omodandi q‘ntii uolfint 7 coona-
chis accipiendi » Et qx cponachi Anfelmo 7 fiedibs ci? decima molédini sui
de Qolle ppetuo remiferit ? nos 7 fedes firi @onachis mult’am ipoy de
Molle ippetua remittim? 7 q‘eta clamam? - Licencia q, eis dam? molendi
nbiciiq, yolitint «Et fi q’ndo molere uolfiint ad molendini fendi firi 7 molent
abfq, mult’a ftati_p? illud q°d flit fap Trameyl it bladii dnied ipi? dni fit -
Hee dia fict pfens fe'ptii otinet affidanim? ta ego Ricard? de Lyneolnia
q° Watildis vxor mea filia Anfelmi 7 heres ei°dé i manu Ofbti abbis de
Kelch nos 7 hedes ‘os fine malo ingenio obfuat’os - Hiis teft? ; Hug~ capHo
clico Reg , Galf"do de Lempedlawe cfieo Ret ; Pet? le faukuner clico
Re& - Ramulfo clico dni Hug ; Ada eaplo de Kelch . Bernardo de
Handene ; Nigello de Heriz ; Robto Corbet ; Waleholmo de Keth » Robito
de Edenham ; Thoma fit Salom de Northa ; Robto filio Herbti de Wachut-
wet . T. de Heriz » Wito de Haudene , Walto fit Gilbti » Herman de
Molle ; Ada de Mailros » WiHo de Q)alkarwefti -



--- Kelso1_page249.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 129

Carta sr q‘mda pté tre i fritorio de Molle qf voeat® Temple acre - Corre.

159 Onib; fe cat's ecctie filiis 7 fidelibs Ricard? dés Nichole de Molle fit 7
heres q’nda Rit déi Nichole de Qolle fali i dno - Notlint omes ta plentes
q® fut’i_me diuine pietatis 7 caritatis intuitu 7 p falute aie mee 7 dium
aiicefioy 7 succefloy meoy deditle 7 ocefliffe 7 hac carta mea oftnafle deo 7
cectie fee A)arie de Kelch 7 monach ibidé deo Suientibs 7 inppetua SuituF i
pura 7 ppetua elemofina q‘nda ptem tre mee i tritorio de Wolle q° voeat?
templeacre fii aliq? reteneméto fict cam ynqua pleni? tenui ut pofledi ; que
quide tra iacs inf fram dni Abbis 7 Conuent? de Keleh fubt? occidentale
pté de Hyllokithou tendés OP autre ulq, i Bolbee ex oppolito aule dni
Gilbti Auenel » Tenenda 7 habenda de me 7 fiedibs meis libe » q'ete 7

7

plenarie , folute ab i Suico feculari exacébe 7 demanda fic' aliq® elemoia
libi? , qeci’ ; plenari? foluci? int* regnii Scoeie tenet® ut poflidet® - Ita q n°

; 7 . 5 a. £ ~ 5
ego uf fiedes mei n° aliq's fuccefloy meoy p déa tra nt solas oFones aliq'd

is ; f Oe pa
Ye potimus » Ego uw? 7 hedes mei déam tram d@is wonach

ung® inpoffum ex
ot* oms holes 7 p di actone hofpitilarioy inppetua warantizabim? 7 defen-
dem? ; Et ut h mea donacio 7 gceflio rata 7 incdeuila inppetuii_pmaneat
sigilli med p me 7 fiedib? meis huic jifenti se'pto appofui- Hiis teft’ Thoma jv. 0s.
ffe meo ; Henrico de Blakedene ; Johe Qufford ; Stepho de Cellario ; Ada

iuvene ; Tunnoé 7 aliis -

Carta Sr» xx - acras tre arabit i Pritorio de Molle «

160 Omniibs hoc septi vifuF ut auditu# Ricard? fit Rit d@i de Nichole falé i
dno + Noflit vnitiitas tra ine dimifite ad firma dnis Abbti 7 Conuentui de
Kelch viginti acras fre arabit 7 p'ti i tritorio de Wolle i loco q vocat®
Mollehope illas feilies viginti ac's q"s abbas 7 conuent? de Jeddeword de


--- Kelso1_page250.png ---
Worn.

130 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

mead f'ma tennerat ; 7 paftura {afficienté ad s

xaginta oues / 7 q“tuor vaceas
vbiciiq, volflint i tota ‘tra mea de Molle ex® dnico meo blado 7 p'to uly, ad
finé deeé annoy plene gpletoy / Incipicte fmino ad Pentecoft anni gie «*
ect; ¢ng& ; ¢nti ; Tenéd 7 habend tota déam tra cit déa pata d@ay ouiti
7 vaccay 7 ci edificiis tofto 7 evofto , pafenis 7 pafturis ; 7 dib3 aliis ptiné-
ciis 7 libtatibs 7 aifiamétis ad d@am tra sp°tantibs libe » qtete ; solute » 5
pacifice vig, ad pdém mina abfq, di stlari Suigo ; secta eurie ; anxilio dni
Regis ; ofuetudie » exaccone ; 7 demada ; P hac aut gceflione pace ‘tre cl
ptintelis 7 dée pafi?e 7 dti Abbas 7 Conuent® decé marcas B manibs m*
dederit ; Ego u° pdés Ris 7 hedes mei ut affig"ti [idem fra arabile 7
p'tum ; 7 d&am_paft’am efi dib3 ptinenciis libtatih; 7 aifiamétis {nis dtis
abbti 7 conuétui cont" ds hidines ufq, ad pdem {mini warantizabim? ,
acq'etabim? 7 defendem? ; Et fi otingat q dei Abbas 7 Couent? p potencia
dni Regis seu dnoy feodi ut aliq? alio caf q°? min? cémodii fii de déa tra 7
pati’a fade pottit ftlint inpediti ? d@am tra 7 déam paftam ta diu 7 manu coy
fine aliq* ot‘dieéde p? dem mina. elap{ti tenebit don reftituéSem amitioy
p vifi pboy viroy fitint plenarie pfeeuti - Et feiend eft q dti abbas
conuent? patam fra 7 p'td i manu sua tenebit ufy, ad felt séi Qartini

Sao iera Gn on gi macs
hyeme px? fequés fing pda tmini » Et ad maioré hui? rei

7
i

eitat® hos pleg
inueni » Dim AleXm de Chattun tic tempis conftabularia de Rokefburg ,
Dim Robta Ridel ilites » Johem de Grubhened ; Wiltm de Heuifide ;
ynaquég, p fidei donaéd6em 1 manu dui Abbis de Kelchou ad ofies pdéas
ouendées noie meo fidelit Suandas se i solida obligando - In cui? rei tetti-
moniti huie pfenti fe'pto figilla mea appofni , Hiis tefty magro Tug de
Bernb} cfico dni abbis de Keleh ; Alex? warefeallo ; Stptio de Dumfinet ;

7 aliis -


--- Kelso1_page251.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 131

Carta sr q‘mda pté fre i tritorio de Qolle -
q p

161 Omnib; {Ze cat's ecctic filiis 7 fidelibs ta fut’ris q* pfentib; Ricard? de

tw

Lincolnia falé ; Sciatis me coceflifle 7 hac carta mea conf'maile deo 7 ecclie
{Ge A)arie de Kelchou 7 monachis ibidé deo Snientib; i libam 7 pura; 7
3 cultam apd

ppetuam clemofina q‘mdam ptem fre i fritorio de Wolle ; {i
Lathladde ptinenté circa viij acras fre 7 vna Roda - Q'm tra Ricard’ Scots
fit Anfelmi de Q)olle cis dedit 7 carta tua pfirmauit - Q*re nolo 7 eoncedo
ut pdei @onachi pdtam fram ita libe 7 ete ; plenaric ; 7 honorifiee i liham
7 ppetua elemofina teneant 7 poflideant « fic’ aliq’m clemofina in Regno
7
Heng d Qolle ; Rit Seoto ; Gamello elieo ; Rad fit ci? ; Be - capHto - Hug
clico » Nichot de olle ; Witlo cognato meo ; Robto cliente Nnrici de
Wolle ; Hermanno ; Walt Tyne ; Wit Watyng ; Ric Walenfy ; 7 multis

Seoeie libins qreci? ; pleni? ; 7 honorifieenci® tenét 7 poffident , Teft>

aliis -

Carta §r yna bouata tre i tritorio de Dole «

Omid; fee wat's ecctic filiis 7 fidelibs ta pfentibs q® futis vituF ut andit‘is
has tras « Jsolda filia Anfelmi de Wolle salé ; Sciatis me dedifie 7 coneeflifle
z hac carta mea pfirmatle deo 7 eectie ste Marie de Kelch 7 monachis ibidé
a bonata tre i tritorio de Molle , de tra qm teneo de Rit

i@ , ila bonata tre ab orientali pte inxta tra qm Heng

deo fernientibs v

de Nichole 7 s
Grofius tenet d Rig Scoto i libam pura 7 ppetua elemofind , cit dibs aitia-
métis ad pdéam ram fp*tantibs q‘nti ptinet ad tm ‘tre » Polt morté u°
Agnetis q°f vxoris Anfelmi pat's mei ; cit Rig de Nichole mi? aflignattit
una carucatam ‘re i Wollehopes put int nos ouenit ¢ Ego in efeambit Pde
houate fre Bd&e domui de Kelcho 7 Pdeis @onach vna bouata tre in Qolle-

Moute

fol. 66.


--- Kelso1_page252.png ---
(one.

132 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

hopes oferam i meliori loco 7 vtiliori q°_ ipi @onachi yolfiint ct pdeis
aifiamétis - Hac aut tram dedi eis p falute animay pat’s mei 7 cat's mee 7
p falute anime mee ita libe » qtete ; honorifice 7 plenarie inppetuii pofliden-
dam fic aliq'm aliam clemofina in Regno Seocie hibins qeei? ; honorificenci?
7 plenius tenent 7 poflident » Ego n° 7 fiedes mei Pdeis q@onaehis waranti-
zabim? pdéam ‘tram cont* oes hoies ; Et h° sine malo ingenio tenendii p
me 7 hedibs meis aflidani ; Hiis teft- Rig de Nichole ; Wil anenel ; Sif
Mallenerer , Rit Seoto ; Nichot de Wolle ; Edwardo capo dni Epi sti
Andg [Andrea] Qanfel - Walto senefealdo , WiH de Wartre ; Ada de
Weftwie ; citi Multis aliis -

Confmato sr viij acras tre 7 yna roda de Aolle «

163 Omibs ste cat's cectie filiis 7 fidelibs ta fu’is q* pfentibs « Rieardus feot®

fit Anfelmi @ Qolle salé ; Sciatis me deditle 7 peefliffe 7 hac earta mea
otirmatte deo 7 eectie fee Maric de Kelehou 7 @onachis ibide deo Suientib;
ilibam ; 7 pura / 7 ppetud elemofina q‘mda ptem tre mee i tritorio de
Wolle ; feilie; cult’am ap’ Ladhladde ptinenté cirea « viij + aeras ‘tre 7
vn rodam ; Q'm tra dedi pdéis oonachis p falute aie mee 7 vingis mee +
p aiab pats 7 @at's mee 7 dinm aiicefloy 7 snecefloy meoy vt eam ita libe

7 ete ; plenarie 7 honorifice i libam 7 ppetna elemofinad poflideant

7
teneat ; fic' aliq'm alia clemofina in Regno Seoeic libius ; qeei? + pleni? ; 7
honorificenci? tenét 7 poflident - Tett* Hen de Wolle ; Rit de Lineolnia ;
Gamello clico ; Rad fit ei? « R capo - Hug clico ; Nichol de ole ; Wito
ognato Rié de Lincolii ; Robto client@ Heng de Molle » Hermanno ; Walt

Hyne ; Wi Wayting? ; Rig Walensi 7 multis aliis -


--- Kelso1_page253.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 133

Conf'mae

Br q‘fdm Tras - 7 potfeffides i tritorio de Molle « ore

164 Omibs x’ fidelibs Plons sc'pta vifuk ut auditu® « Gilbv? Anenel miles 7
heres Ceeilie filie Efehine q’nda dne de A)olle salt i dno + Notit vnilifitas
¥ra me diuine caritatis intuitu 7 p falute aie mee 7 p aiab3 pat's mei 7
at's mee 7 dium afiectioy 7 succetioy meoy conceflifie 7 hac carta mea ofir-
matic deo 7 ee f%e Qarie d Keleh 7 monachis ibidé deo Suientibs 7 ippetua
Suitu® ilibam ; pura 7 ppetua clemofind oities tras pvta ; palt’as ; 7 des
7 libtatibs fnis sit aliq’ retenem@to » quas

alias poffefliones cit dib; peinens
déa Cecilia filia dée Efchine i tritorio de Wolle cifdé monach i sua viduitate
7 legitima poteftate dedit / conceflit » 7 ofirmau' ; put earta dée Cecilie inde
ofeéta pleni? teftat? ; eui? tenor de fo ad tba talis oft - Vnitlis fee wats
ecctie filiis 7 fidelibs has tras vilut ut auditu® Cecilia de Qolle filia Efehine
de Qolle cina i dno falé + Noftit vnittlitas tra me i mea viduitate 7 ppta ac

liba poteftate pftituta tang” dnam pprii iuris 7 vera hui? donaédis heredé
divine eavitatis intuitu 7 p falute aie mee 7 p aiab3 pat's mei 7 wat's
mee 7 dium aiicefloy 7 sucecfloy meorum ; deditie ; geelliffe » 7 hae carta
mea ‘of'matte Deo 7 Eectie fe Q)aric de Kelch 7 coonachis ibidé do
Suientibs 7 inppetua Suitu# i libam puram , 7 ppetna elemoiam toftii 7 crofti
_ fucrat Witti de Qollehope junioris jux" exiti tilus Witclawe 17 viginti

's tre arabit 7 sex i ditio meo de Molle , videts i Maar a tra Gilbti
Avenel s? orient® nove ac's tre ett dimid acra Tre q® iae3 pping'or
riuulo q' vocat® Aldetuncburne qf acre iacent ibidé p priculas 17 duas acras
{re i pfoubfide » 7 vna ac‘m fre ppinqoré exitui q! tendit UP pfouh » 7 vna
ac‘m q® iae3 a pte orientali de Benelawu ; 7 noué ac's tre 7 yna peati i
Dedrig q° iacent int Aldetuncb’ne fis? auft™ i afeendédo uly, ad duas ernces

p pticulas ; Z fubt? paula hoga t's ac"as tre ppinq'ores tre doy Monachoy , 7 jul. 67.
vnd peatam tre 7 total peem mea de Hoga ; 7 dimid ae‘in frei kydelawcerofth ;

7 in hauftrother octo ac’s pti, fcits “tor acts pitt q° iactt int arabilé de


--- Kelso1_page254.png ---
(orre.

134 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

hauaere 7 fuleos arat' q' diniditt in? Bdém p'tum ; 7 pti Gilbti Anenel ; 7
q‘tuor ac‘as pti fubt? pfouhfewire q° iacent in? fuleos arat* ; Dedi F eifde
cchis i libam pura 7 ppetna clemofina t*fdecim ac“as re arabilis i dominiis
meis / videts tota ptem mea de Q)olleftelle i qua ptinent® q*tuor aere tre 7
dimid 7 pt@ mea illi? fre qf iaez pping'or rinulo q' defeendit de Brademedu
ufg, i Bolbenth 7 dimid ac‘am ‘re q° vocat® Crokeeroft pping'oré vie q° tend!
is? pfonh ; 7 duas acras tre 7 dimid fubt? berearii mea ppinq'ores exitui
ils? pfouh i afeendendo ; 7 tres aeras tre 1 illa eult2a q° iacet pping'or pfoul: ;
ex® enlt’a Gilbti Aucnel ; 7 tota ptem mea pti de Brademedue ; 7 paft?am
fufticientem trefeentis ouib; 7 decé aialibs 7 q"tuor eq's vbiq, i pati?is meis
mea iux” Aldetuneb’ne ; 7 lihos int°itus 7 exitus a tris fais

doicis ; 7 berea

uy ufq, ad pafi’as » Et aceipient de plouh ea q° sit neGia ad carneas fuas

> ad walluras faciendas inppetua ; Tenebiit aii id@ @onachi dia ifta pnojata
i libam pura 7 ppetuam elemoiam q'eta 7 foluta 7 liba ab oii Suicio 7
Snitute 7 exaceione 7 omioda ofuetudie 7 ab di hone , 7 gnamine ; 7 erat
a7 pafturas ita libe s

qfeti a mult’a ; Tenebit ¥ idé Qonaehi pdéas Pras p
qrete ; 7 plenarie fieut aliq" elemoia i Regno Scocie ab aliquibs

veligiofis
libins qeci® ; 7 honorifieenei? tenet? 7 poflidet® » Ego u° 7 heredes mei dia
ifta Pnotata pdéis @onachis ot‘ des hoies warantizabim® inppetuti 7 defend-
em?” - In cui? rei teftimonid sigilli mei hnie se'pto appofui Et ut hee mea
donato maioris fee’itatis robur optineat 7 ingeufla ppetuo pmaneat - ad

. aon Gey ety ey STR 2H PN AT oe
inftaciam mea 7 peti¢onem venabit pr fir dis Wils di g¥a Glafg ept ; 7

Waltus de mortuo wari tie Decan? ede Glaf® sigilla sua vna ci

plenti se'pto appofuerat , Hiis teftibs 7 &- Et feiend q ego pdés Gilbert?
9. F

s tras ; prata , pafturas ; 7 des alias

Auenel 7 hedes mei ut aflignati pde:
pofleftiones Pdtas c& dibs ptincneiis 7 libtatibs {nis d@e ecetie Be Qarie de
Kelehou 7 Monaehis ibidé deo Suientibs 7 inppetud Suituris warantizabim?
tuebim? 7 defendem? con“ des hdies inppetuii - In eni? rei teftimonia pifenti
‘0 Nichot de Woftet tie Archi
éro Walto de Jarum ;

se'pto sigilla mea appofui , Hiis teftib; - Wag
Theuidat , dno Galfrido tie deeano Thenidat ; Qa



--- Kelso1_page255.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 138

Bno WiHo viea* de Roketburg ; Bno Symone de Hortleye + Gerualio Mone
Qaunfel ; And? Qauntel- Ada fiffore burgens de Roketburg ; 7 aliis ; Dati
Anno ge © ; ce? ; q'ng’geS p'mo ; i ctiino fi Edmadi i eda fei Jacobi

de Rokefburg - i pleno capitulo -

Carta sr yna aera tre 1 fritorio de Wolle ap* Theules -

5 Vnitilis fe cat's ccetie filiis 7 fidclibs Rieard® de Nichole sali) Sci
omies ta pofti gq’ Plentes me dedifle 7 peel

nt

io
o

ey hac carta mea pfirmaiic
Ecetie [@e Warie de Kelchou 7 @onachis ibidé deo Suientibs i liham 7

= oe Oo ae F Par i
ppetua clemofina uni acram tre in tritorio de Wolle ap* theules int prata

mei 7 tra q'm Ri Scot? dedit monachis + Hiam tram dedi cis p falute aic

mee ; 7 dium aficetloy 7 fuccefloy meoy ita libe 7 qtete in ppetua elemosina
tenenda - ficut aliq'm aliam libius 7 Yee? tenét 7 poflident , Hiis teftibs ;
Heng de Wolle ; Robto eapHo ; Rit Scoto ; W ; nepote ipius Rit Nichot -
Hermanno ; Rit Walcis / Wio Waithing> -

Sup loq'la #2 abbm de Kalch 7 heng de Molle 7 vxoré ci? de q'da patiza -

166 Notum sit omib; fte mat's ecctie fillis 7 fidelib; viluF uel auditu® has tras -

q loquela q° in? abbaté 7 @onachos de Kalehou « 7 Heng de qolle 7 vxore

ei” Efchina aliqi mota cft de pattura q‘m ipi abbas 7 @onachi petebant in
tritorio Pre coy de Wolle iure Eectic 7 noie pfone fub amicabili compoligde si. 6s.
ita q'euit » q dds henric? 7 Pnoiata yxor ei” efchina ocellerat 7 hoe fe'pto
ofirmanerat Pdeis abbi 7 oonachis » ut habeant inppetuii in Critorio Pre coy
de Qolle pafiura septingentis ouib3 7 sexcics - xx" - animalibs q‘m ipi
petebant iure ecclie 7 noie p* ci omib3 aifiamétis q* pfona debet hre « Et

prea vicarl? ifoy monachoy 7 hoies coy in fra ecctic manentes hebiit


--- Kelso1_page256.png ---
Mourn.

167

156 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

7

Wolle ; Hiis teftibs , Robto Archid de Glalg - Johe decano de Rokefburg -
Hug capHo - Helia pfona de veti Rokctburg - Edwardo de Lyntun -
Gamello viea¥ de mot + Robto captto de w*botyl - Hberto vicecomit 7

eapitlo de Theuydale +

* Roe at tg ee te sae ra
comuné paftura 7 cOnmnia aifiaméta i dibs ci hdib tre ipius henrici de

Sup quamda pté tre i tritorio de Molle «

Oinnibs ste cat's cectic filiis 7 fidelibs has tras vifu¥ uf anditu® « Aliz
vsor Ricardi Scoti de Wott salé » Nottit unitifitas fira me deditle 7 pceflitle
7 hac jifenti carta cdfirmatte Deo 7 Ecctic be Warie de Kelchou 7 @o-
nachis ibid@ deo Snientibs 1 libam ; 7 pura; 7 ppetua elemofinad q‘ndan
ptem tre mee i tritorio de Molle « s+ eulrura apt Ladblade otinenté circa
octo acras 7 nna Roda - Qn tram dedi 7 ocefli pdzis conachis p falute aie
dni mei Ricardi Scoti ; 7 p falute aie mee 7 p animab; pat's mei 7 m

ince ; 7 dium aficelloy 7 succefioy meoy ut eam ita libe 7 ete ; plenarie
z honorifice ; i libam 7 ppetua elemofinam tenc[a]nt 7 poflidefa}nt ¢ fieut
aliq'm clemofina aliam 1 Regno Scoeie liberi? q'eci? ; pleni? ; 7 honori-
ficenci? tenét 7 pofiident - Teli» hiis ; Hérico de Wolle ; Rit de Lincolnia ;
Gamello cfico ; Radulpti fit ci? » Hug clico » Nichot de Qolle ; WiHo
cognato + R + de Nichole » Wil Waiting ; Rit Waleis 7 oultis aliis -

Sup quatuor acras tre in teneméto de Wolle «

3 Onnibs ste qat's cectic filiis 7 fidelibs ad q’s pfentes tre puehing 7 Ada

de Roule 7 Johanna Wyfchard sponfa fua filia 7 heres q°nda dni Hen¥ de
Halyburtun wilitis falim in dno fempitna + Nottit vniflitas tira nos divine

caritatis intuitu 7 p falute animay jiray , 7 p aiabs aiicetioy 7 fuccetioy


--- Kelso1_page257.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 137

roy dediffe cefliffe 7 hac prente carta itra confmafie p nob 7 hedibs iris cours
deo 7 ecctie be Marie de Kelehon 7 monachis ibidé deo Baientibs + 7 inppetual
Qnituk 1 q‘tuor acras fre in tenemento de Wolle ; r iacent i supiore pte de

Stalpelawe Us? occident@ , de illis trefdeci a

cris tre iacentibz i Stalpelawe
inf® tram Johis de Wolle filii 7 heredis q’nda AleXi de Molle ex utraq, pte
re sup*dte , Habend 7 tenend dtis monachis 7 coy succeflorib; de a 7
Redibs ii S17
cit libero int*itu 7 exitu ad f Ydeim tram adeo lite , pacifice / 7 q'ete in dibg ¢

inppetna in pura 7 ppetuam clemotina cf dibs suis ptin
ficut aliqua tra elemofinata i Regno Scocie libius q'eci? 7 honorificenci? ab
aliq? donat? 7 tenet? ; Ita q d@i Qonach inf* dominici n#m milla comunia
uendicare poflint / rde d@ay q*tuor acray tre. B qua qnidem gceflione 7
oo ara dt B nape ) | Aaa aa
donabe fra déi monachi sufeepit nos 7 hedes firos i frafnitate

ma 7
oFonum suay pticipaédem inppetui 7 ad celeb‘ndi p aiabs firis qualih3
septimana yna miflam i eectia fua de Kalehon Nichil alind a pideis religi-
ofis exinde inppetuii exigendo nifi solas ofones ad aiay firay saluté ; ut
Pde eft « Nos n° 7 fiedes firi Pdtas q“tuor acras cf fuis ptinenciis fup"deis
@onachis modo q? pdém eft ot* oms mortales warantizabim? inppetua
acq'etabim? 7 defendem? - In eni? rei tettimonia figilla ira pfenti carte
appofuim? ; Hiis teftibs , Bno Gilberto fra milite 1 @adro Walrano de
Chattoii rtore e&e de Jeth*t ; WiHo de Carnoto ; Wito de Roule ; Witto
d&o Anglico ; Hug de Roule » Witt de Blakelawe ; 7 aliis -

Carta sup vnam bouata i fritorio de Molle - fol. 69

169 Omnib; xpi fidelibs has littas vifuris uel anditu¥ ; Ailmer? Scot? de Qolle
> Criftiana vxor ci? filia Jfode filie Anfelmi de Qolle ; salt ; Sciatis nos
coneefliffe 7 hac carta fira conf'mafle deo 7 cectie {te Marie de Keleh 7
@onachis ibidé deo feruientib; vnam bonata fre in ritorio de Wolle de tra
feits q'm AleX fili? Wii filii Edgari 7 Jfovda vxor ei? filia Anfelmi d Molle

s


--- Kelso1_page258.png ---
ome

170

138 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

tenuerit de Ricardo de Nichole ; a Pddis @onachis caritatis intuitu otulerat
feit; illam bouata fre ab orientali pte inx fram q'm Héricus groffus tenet
de Ricardo Scoto ; Tenend in libam pura 7 ppetna clemofind ei omibs
aifiamentis ad pdgam fram fpectantib3 put pleni? 7 melius in carta ipo

Alexandri 7 Jfovde otinet? » Nos u° 7 hedes fri Bdéis qonach warantiza-
bim? jdéam fram ot* des hotes 7 h? sine malo ingenio tenendii affidauim? -
Hiis teftib; , Symone de Lyndefaye » Symone Qauleuerer ; Symone de
Grubeheued ; Rit de Nichole ; WiHo capHo ; Gilberto Auenel ; Ada filio

Reginaldi de yethame ; Johé de Wuntfort ; 7 multis aliis -

Carta sr yna tram i burgo de Roxburg* 7 i Molle « 7 i uilla de Renfrun -

Vnillis ste aat's ecctic filiis 7 fidelibs » Gant fili? Alani - dapifer Regis
Scocie salé Sciant omes ti pofti q* plentes + me dedifie 7 pceflitie 7 hac

i}

plenti carta cont"matie Ecetie ste Q)arie de Kelcho 7 conachis ibidé deo
feruientibs tram qm habui in bargo de Rocafhure ; 7 in uilla de Wolle una
3 I 8 7

acram tre ; illa feilic3 q° fuit 1 caliipnia int me 7 eecliam cinfdé uille » 7 in

uilla de Renfrin ; illam fram que eft iux® tofta qua Rex Danid dedit Pdeis
qonachis ; ufq ad riuulii q' defeendit de molendino in clud ; 7 illa eandem
toftam q'm Rex Dauid dedit cis conf*me cis ci Gibs rétitudinibg fuis fieut
carta Regis Danid cis conf'mat in ppetua 7 liberam elemofinam p falute

animay Regis Dauid ; Re& Walcot - 7 comitis Henn - 7 p falute dni mei

Regis Willi; 7 mea 7 aficetloy 7 fuccelioy firoy + volo itag, ut has paz 8
poffefliones de me 7 de hedibs meis in libam 7 ppetuam clemofina ita libere
7 quicte tencant 7 poflideant ficut aliq’m aliam elemofina « lifins 7 q'eci?
tenét 7 poflident ,; His teft- Robto de Coftentin - Robto de Wunguiij 1
Robto filio Fulbti , Salo decano ; Hené capHo ; Ada de Q)olle » Wilko fit
Robti , Robto Croc ; Jordane locard ; Rié de Svafam ; Qatho de ouh ;
Wito de handen ; Alano filio Vitalis -


--- Kelso1_page259.png ---
Bo

-

LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Carta Sr q‘flam potteftises 7 libtates i tritorio de Q)olle - oure.

171 Omnibs xpi fidelib; pfentes tras vifuris ut audituris ; Wills de Vetei fit 7
heres q’nda dni Enfiachii de Vesei etna in dno salé - Nowit vnitifitas tira 4q
ego Wilts de Vefchi p me + hedib3 meis ad inftancia 7 petiGbem dni Gilberti
Auenel @ilitis mei ; 7 heredis Cecilie filie Efchine q’nda Bne de Wolle ; 7
p falute aie mee 7 paiab; pris mei 7 @at's mee 7 dium aficelioy 7 snecetioy
ineoy coneefli 7 hac carta mea confirmani Deo 7 ecetie fe Qarie de Kalchov

7 @onachis ibidé deo feruientibs 7 inppetuii feruitué - in libam ; pura; 7
ppetua clemofind - ofies tras - p*ta ; pafturas 7 oimes alias poffefliones ci
omibs ptinenciis 7 libtatibs fuis fine aliq’ retenemento ul impediméto ; q's
déa Cecilia filia dée Efchine de Q)olle - in ‘ritorio de Molle dée Ecctie de
Kaleh 7 onachis ibidé deo Suicntib3 in fua viduitate 7 legia poteftate dedit
cOceflit ; 7 ofirmaut put carta dée Cecilie fup Pnofatis ofecta ? pleni? tettat? -
Et ceia conecfioné 7 conftmadvem dni Gillti Avenel fup pd&a donade
dée Cecilie filie dée Efchine de Qolle ofectam + put in q°da inftruméto déce
dé deo Suientibs a Pnotato Gilbto Auenel

ecctie de Kalehou 7 onachis i
t"dito 7 concetio ; pleni? yeeditur ; oftmatur ; 7 otinctur ; Et seiend q ego
Pd%s W . 7 hedes mei cont” hane concefliond 7 pfmacem niicy® inp*teri
iG nei appofui , Hiis

obueniem? , In eni? rei teftimonia [fenti se’pto
teft? , WiHo filio meo dno de Spronefioh ; Bno Radt de Cangy ; Dno
Symone de Luker ; Bno Wito de Boys ; Bno - Hen¥ de Halyb’tun ;
fico dni; Alexandro Qarfeallo abbis de Kelehou ; Rit de Nichole jot. 70.

7 aliis -


--- Kelso1_page260.png ---
(Qoure.

17.

2

140 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Conuento

t Abbtes 7 Connent? de Kelfou 7 de Q)elros -

Cvm mota éct queftio int religiofos viros Abbaté 7 Conucntii d Kalchou ex
pte vna 7 Abbim 7 Connentii de Welros ex ala 7 auetoritate afilica cora
enbdoeano Glafg comiffat dife’toy viroy Abbis de Paflelet 7 precentoris
GlafZ Judici p'ncipalid: a sede aplica delegatoy fap dimodis decimis
ta maiorib3 q” minorib; pucnientibs de tris q's d@i Abbas 7 Comuent? de
Welros ppriis manib; tic excolebant feu habebant inf* pochiam ecctie de
Wolle ; Q%m quit eectiam déi Abbas 7 Connent? de Kalchou in vfus pp*tos
optinet ; Tand@ mediante yeilabili viro m@agro Wito Wyfeard tie Archid
{ci And¥ 7 dni Regis Scocie cancellario in pfencia multoy ta religiofoy q*
alioy fup peticione day decimay int ptes inf* q@onaltia de Kalehou fnit
ordinatti sub hac forma ; saluo fiatu vicarie 7 viearit sine diminucione
pmanente ; Videt; q d@i Abbas 7 Coment? de Welros 7 eoy succeflores
dabiit singtis annis inppetua dto @onattio de Kalehou p omib3 decimis
afidtis puenientib; ta de tris q's pp's manibs excoliit q* de decimis garbay
hdini suoy infra pochiam d@e ecctie de Molle ; fine ot“dicé&e 7 caucllace
ut alig? alio inpediméto trefdecim celdras farine bonay anenay Et qr
honoroft fuit pfatis ADbti 7 Conuentui de Welros d@as t*fdccim celdé fat
ad @onaftiai de Kalchou finatis annis eariare - Ideo q'ntodecio kalend
Janna¥ Anni gic wille3 - ducené + septuag - teij

Pfencia abbati déoy monaftioy babenciti poteftaté speciale a suif conucn-

7 in e&a de Boulden in

tibz compontdi i hae pte 7 ordinandi 7 ltoy alioy ta clicoy q’ laicoy de
confenfu peiti Sb hac forma fuit puifii 7 ordinatii » Videts , q dti Abbas 7
Conuent? de Welros 7 coy sucectlores dabit finglis annis inppetua 7 foluet
deis Abbti 7 Conuentui de Kaleh 7 coy succellorib; infra monaftia fui a
Kalchon p afidtis t*fdecim ecld? farine infra octauas f¢i Q)artini in hyeme
qndecim mareas bonoy + nouoy + 7 legalit fPlingoy 7 oto solid dée
monete , trefdecim folidis 7 q‘tuor denariis p marca q‘lib3 cdputatis fine


--- Kelso1_page261.png ---
vacat.

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 141

aliq* diminucione feu defalcaébe ; Et fi otingat q dt Abbas 7 Convent? de
Welros vel eoy succeflores déas q'ndecim mareas 7 octo solidos uel aliq’m
ptem eaydé fuis fminis 7 locis ficut predict eft soltfe negatlint vel ditin-
lerint ; p q’d dei Abbas 7 Conuent? de Kelchou vel eoy peurator expenfas
febint ut fetit 7 dapna vel iacturas incurrerint ? liceat d@is Abbti 7
Comuentui de Kalchon ; namos dtoy Abbis 7 Conuent? de Welros vbicumg,
fuerint inuenti ; cape 1 inpareare ; 7 ta diu fine replegiacione retine don’
dis Abbi 7 Conuentui de Kalchou ta de dampnis 7 expen’ q* de p'ucipali
debito fedm q pe’ator coydé in aia {ua iuraucrit plene ; fuerit satifftm -
Confenfu ordinarioy dni Regis balliuoy seu cui’camq, altins minime
req'fito ; Reniciaiunt infup in hae pte memorati Abbes noje fuo 7 con-

uentuii suoy p se ac fuis 7 suoy Connentut fucecfloribs , omib; tris

plicis
7 aliis inpetratis 7 inpet‘ndis fen 7 ptuilegiis cui’euma, tenoris exiftat ; 7
omni attioni 7 defenfioni p qua déa solucio feu pens {tm i toto vel in pte
potit inpediri vel differri ; In cui? rei teftimonia yni pti iftins instraméti in
modi cyrografli ofecti pencs Abbim 7 Conuenti de Welros refidenti Paci
Abbas 7 Connent? de Kalchou s

ili capituli fui vna cd sigillis Laodonie
7 Theuidalie Archideaconoy appofuerit - Alti u° parti penes Abbim 7
Connenti de Kalchou refidenti ; memorati Abbas 7 Connent? de Welros
sigilla comune Wonaftii fui et sigillo Abbis a go 7 yna eit figillis padzox
Archidiaconoy appofuerit -

iS

Anno gfe m?; cc? ; t'ecfimo q'rto , Ad fetta
conuencio int Symoné Qaulcuerer 7 Ceciliam filiam Efehine de Qolle
fponfam einfdé ex pté vna ; 7 abbem 7 conuentii de Kalchou ex alta ,
videt3 q d@i Symon 7 Cecilia {ponta cius dimiferat ad firma déis abbi 7
connetui +

Morte

@i Johis baptifte fea est hee fl. 71.


--- Kelso1_page262.png ---
Oouve.

173

142 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Comuento int Rig de Lyncolnia dim de Woll - 7 Adbm 7 Couent’ de

Kelch -

Omnibs hoe se'ptit viluF ut auditu¥ Qatildis q’nda fponfa Rit de Lincolnia
dni de Wolle ; saltm in dno + Nottitis me dimififfe 7 condonaffe ex mera
confciencia 7 puro corde plene 7 integre dnis ADbi 7 Connentui de Kelchou
‘os ut hofes 7 Suientes

oiodas caulas 7 querelas q*s habui ut hire potui erg:
fuos uf, ad pent? diem - Simitr aut do 7 concedo 7 ffenti se'pto ofirmo deis
Abbi 7 Comuentui tota quod ad me fpediat fone dotis ut Peii de tra q’am déi
Abbas 7 Conuentus accepunt ad firmam de Pdéo Rit de Lincolnia q’nda sponto
meo i villa de Molle ; Et volo 7 concedo ut déam fram heant 7 poflideant
Nihe 7 qete , plenarie 7 integre + fine calipnia ut inpedifito mei ut heda
meoy ut pe’atoy ut aflignatoy meoy aut aliq’y alioy qui aliq’d in déa ra
noie meo pete potunt 7 viq,ad mind fud plene completa et dibg condiGoibs
conuendibs libtatibs 7 aifiamentis que sc'pto conuenconali in? déos Abbtem
7 Conuentii ex vna pte; 7 dém Rid - sponfi mei ex alta inde pfecto
plenius ptinét? - falua mult’a - Ita videt3 q d@i Abbas 7 Conuent? exibiit
Wito filio meo in victualib3 ei melioribs 7 digniorib; scolaribs qui reficidit i
domo panpa q“diu déam fram i mann fua tenebat » Hee dia concefli i lia
viduitate mea + volens hoe fe'pto obligari ad hee dia pdéa fidetr obfuanda
7 copelli si neéée ftiit - In cui? rei teftimonid huie sc'pto sigilli meat
appofui , vna cii figillo dui Walti viea¥ de QWolle » Dat* ap" @olle i die sti
Bartholomei apli + Anno gic m° ; ec? , sexagefio ; Hiis teft» Thom de
hetpol - Rig de faunes ; Waleolmo Suiente -



--- Kelso1_page263.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 143

Carta sup tras 7 libtates i tenemito de Molle - (@oure.

174 Omnib; xpi fidelibs hod septa vifu¥ ul anditu¥ ; Henrie? dés de Halybur-
tofi salé in dno fempitnam , Nollit vnitfitas vfa me dinine earitatis intuitu
7 p falute aie mce 7 p animab3 pat's mei 7 mat's mee 7 omni antecetloy
7 fueectioy meoy coneeflifle 7 hac carta mea confirmatle deo 7 cectie {te
Warie de Kalehon 7 @onachis ibidé deo Suientibs 7 inppetuit Suituris i Hibam
pura 7 ppetua clemofina ofies Tras / prata , patturas ; 7 oes alias poffefli-
ones 7 alia inra 7 aifiamenta ci ofiibs libtatibs 7 ptineneiis fuis fine aliq?
reteneméto quas dna Cecilia filia dne Efchine q°ndam Bne de Molle eifde
@onachis i fua viduitate 7 legia poteftate dedit ; conceflit 7 confirmauit Et
quas dis Gilbert? Auenel qiles 7 dée dne Cecilie heres dis monach earta
fua conf'mauit ; q'S uidi 7 infpexi ; Q'te volo 7 eoneedo p me ¥ hedib3 meis
3 nel ptiie

7 aflignatis ut dt monachi dia fup"déa cit omibs ad ea ptinétib,

fiamentis
ip
cildé pfectis pleni? 7 liq'dius ptinet® libere , q'ete ; plenarie ; 7 honorifice si
inpediméto 7 g“uamine mei heredit meoy ut affignatoy tencant 7 poflideant
7 fieut aliq* clemofina in Regno Scocie ab aliquibs viris religiofis liberi’

ib3 al

valentib3 ; in ris pratis ; pafenis ; bofeis ; planis ; 7 in of
ficut i eartis dne Cecilie 7 déi dni Gilbti Ancnel militis 7 heredis eiufdé s

qecins ; pleni® ; honorificenci? tenet? 7 poflidet? ; 7 In cui? rei teftimoniat
pfentibs iris sigilli mei appofui ; Hiis teftibz ; Nichot Corbet ; WiHo de
Sumyrvil ; Nicho de Ruthirforde ; qilitib3 ; dno Wito vieat de Wot ,
Robto fit Alani de Edynham - Ganfredo Rydel ; Ri de faunes ; Syih
carefeallo Suientib; Abbis 7 multis aliis - Dat» apd Kelchov mente Junij

anno gfe @illes ; ducente’ ; feptuaget” -



--- Kelso1_page264.png ---
144 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

cous. Hee sit dinife tre de Molle -

175 Hii sit tmini de hethou qua dna Efchina dedit i clemofina Eectie de
Kalchou p has diuifas fieut aqua defeend' de fonte p Bradeftrother in?
hethou 7 favefyde » 7 wl i riuula ¢ defeendt de Weftehehodene ; 7 ita p fol.72.
ila riuuli afq, ad t"nfita vadi supioris eiufdé riuuli pximi inx Craega 7 s°
in t‘nfifam hachod {ins orienté ficut ernces pofite 7 fofle fee sit 7 fule?
tract? eft » 7 lapides in tra pofiti sit vig, ad riuuli de Efterhathou ; 7a
vado ei?dé riuuli afeendendo fieut bofeus 7 tra harabilis iungunt? fup halre-
berghe 7 ita {tus orienté ufq, Grenelle iux*lapidem alba ufy, ad caput fontis
pnoiati de Brathefirother ; Et ptea q'nda parte fre ult® rinula de hethou
Us? occidenté ulq, Blyndewelt ficut pratii 7 ra harabilis iungunt’ defeen-
dendo ulq, pnoiaté Riuuli de Hethou - In teftimonia hui? pambulaéois
lmic se'pto sigilli: mea appofui -

Carta & Eectiam de Wolle efi tra adiacenti « (Helaycfhongh] -
176 Nota fit omibs ptentibs 7 futuris q ego Vetred? fili? Liulfi eeclefiam de

Molle p falute aie mee 7 aficefloy meoy ; 7 dnoy meoy DD - Regis 7
Henf comiti

ectie ste Qarie de Kelcho in ppetua dedi elemofinam ci
fra adiacenti  fict ego Vetred? 7 Aldred? deean? pambulauim? ca ; feilie; ;
ab Hulaues hou ufy, ad riua ci? ; 7 a riuo p Hulaues hou ufy ad uadi
Bolbent ot* cectiam / 7 a vado illo furfa fas ufq, ad Haulaues hou 7 inde p
uiam wfq, ad Hunedune 7 if ufq, ad cap4 riui Hulaues hou ; Concedo F
cdmuné pafiura Molle ville mec ci aifiamétis ; ita libere 7 quicte tenenda
de me 7 fedib; meis ; fieut alig® e@¢a aliqua clemofina liberi? 7 q'eci?
poflidet - Hiis teft? Hug de Qoruile ; Rit filio ei? ; BD Olifard ; Witlo de



--- Kelso1_page265.png ---
li7

178

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 145

Sumtuile Wito de Moruile , Horm fit eilaf » Edmido de Q)achelwel ,
Aldredo decano ; Gamet de foghou ; 7 aliis -
Carta 3r tras 7 liBtates i teneitito de A)olle «

Notint omes Ptentes 7 fut2i q ego Ricard? de Lyncolnia ; 7 Q)atildis filia 7
heres Anfelmi de Qolle vxor mea conceflim? 7 hae e:

rta ofirmam? réée ste
Qarie de Keleh 7 qonachis ibidé deo feruientib3 in libam 7 pura 7 ppetua
clemofina tota tra 7 p*td 7 nem? in fritorio de A)olle ab oriental pte de
Ernbrandefdene a dinifis tre @onachoy de CWailros recto tnite ufq, in
Ernbrandefdene 7 s* p Ernbrandefdene ulq, in vada d bolbent , Tota feilies
ra 7 nem?) 7 p’tum / a diuifis iftis ad orienté ? ufq, in divifas tre née de
Wolle 7 furfa {” hunedune ¢ ufqi diuifas tre @onachoy de Wailros ; Et totii
Hulocheshou in bofeo 7 plano 7 patt’a ex" vna acra Pre q'm Anfelm? dedit
+ W- cementario ut Bdéa ita libere q'ete - plenaric ; 7 honorifice in libam ; 7
pura 7 ppetuam elemofina habeant 7 poflideant ficut alias clemofinas fuas
libius » q'ecius , pleni? » 7 honorificeaci? in Regno Seocie hint 7 poflident -
Hiis teft» - Hug eapHto clico Regis » Galtrido d lempedlav eaffario Regis ;
Pet? le faukuner clico Reg ; Ranulpho clico dni Hug ; Adam capto &
Kalch ; Bernardo de Haudene ; Antonio Corbet ; Nigello de Heriz , 7 aliis «

Carta Heng de Molle 3r Ecetiam de Molle «

Vniliis tee ete filiis 7 fideliby Heng de Qolle sali ; Notlint des ta pottti

q® plentes me conceflilfe 7 hac earta mea pfirmatie e&e ste Maric de Kal-

chou 7 @onachis ibidé deo Suientib; eam de Molle ; ci toftis 7 croftis ad

ipam ecctiam ptinentib3 ta ab occidentali pte de Q)eredene q* halech ie

Cliftui, ; 7 ci omib3 aliis ad ifam iutie ptinentibs in libam 7 ppetuam
T

Mou.


--- Kelso1_page266.png ---
ors.

Keeii

Cesnos.

79

146 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

elemofinad - Coneefli

eis ut ipi 7 capellan? 7 hoies coy i uilla d Q)olle manétes
heant cOmunia aifiamZta in paftura in bofeo i focali 7 i dibs aliis aifiamentis
i ipa uilla de Molle ci hdibs meis de Molle ; Pretca conceffi cis duas bonatas
fre cf tofto + crofto 7 pafiura fufficient® quadringutis onib; xvj aialib3 ;
duob3 aneris 77+ xii? suibs in fritorio de Wolle i liham 7 ppetnam elemofina ;
7 fieut teftat® carta Efehine spofe mee que hane clemoiam eis dedit ; H ant
dia pcefli cis p salute dni mei Regis Wii 7 p salute aie mee 7 sponfe mee ;
+ dium aficetioy 7 succefioy firoy ut ea ita libe 7 q'ete heant 7 in ppetuam
clemofina poffideant / fie! libins 7 qteci? hnt 7 poflident aliq’m alia elemofina +
Tefiante 7 he ip{ti oeedente - FE - fponfa mea ; Hiis teftibs ; Hug capHo Regis ;
Ofiito capo ; Rohto » 7 Wito elicis ; Symon eapHo » 7 WiHo filio ei? ;
Nichot 7 Edulfo de Qolle ; Qalcholoii de Keth ; Robto @archaldo -

Si Lite mota int Abbes de Kelfon , 7 de Welros +

Tn noie pat’s 7 filii  fpt? fei ame ; Ca in? ADbem 7 Conuentit de Kalchou
ex pte vnay 7 ABbtm 7 Connentii de Welros ex alta frp decimis maioribs
7 minorib3 7 aliis inrib3 ad eétam poehialé de Wolle fpectantibs ; auct*itate
afilica lis mota fuill’ » 7 Abbas de Paffeleth 7 Canto¥ ; 7 Thefaura¥ eée Glale
Judit pneipales a duo [Papa] delegati offit 7 fubdecano Glafg vices fuas i
ciis cis a sede aplica omiffis Sb altnaéSe pmifant , ptibs i indicio p peuratot
legie pftitutos opentibs ? Copia tre p*plis 7 alioy inftrumétoy i indio exhibitoy
pti ree Sb sigillo indicis f@a ¢ libello connen@onali dato ? cui? tenor talis eft -
Dieit 7 ppontt Abbas 7 Conuent? de Kalchou ot* abbim 7 Conuétum de
Qelros edendo + q cit iii Abbas 7 Conuent? de Kalch e@am de Q)olle in
Archidiaconat* Thenidalye in pp'os vfus optineat 7 déi Abbas 7 Conuent? de
Welros poffeftiones q's tint inf limites pochie dée eéée p? geilale concilitt
adq'fiuerat ; 7 de déis pofleflidib; afig* ad man? dtoy monachoy de Welros
pueitint , decimas 7 alia iura pochialia memorate eé¢e de Molle pt" infticia

Sol. 73.


--- Kelso1_page267.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 147

Sbtraxeriit 7 adhue subt“hunt 7 reddere pt“dicit i ipoy ADbtis 7 Conuent?
de Kalchou Pindicia 7 g‘uamen ; vnde petit déos Abbem 7 Connéti de
Mel ad reftituédem déay decimay 7 alioy inrifi pochialiit p pdem tempus
fubtractoy ; quas decimas 7 que iura eftimant trefeentas lib stlingoy 7 com-
pelli ; 7 ad déas decimas 7 alia iura pochialia dée eéte impoft um integ® fol-
uendas sitiatr pdempnari » Preferti ci ex hui’modi subt*@ione pdta ea de
Molle g*uit ledat? » Hee diciit saluo s* juris biifiGo no artantes se ad dium
ul singloy Pmitfor pbom ; s3 ut g‘ten? pbattint eaten? fiat condépnago ;
Petit 7 expnsaf in lite ftas 7 ptefiant? de faciend , pteftant? F se velle a
pleende petiddis sue defitte 7 si Pdzi Abbas 7 Coucnt? de Welro$ aliq? iure

spali {up d@is decimis fubt‘hendis ottenderint se i indicio fore immunes ;
Sup hui’modi libello iudiciis delibatoriis datis excepéBibs quibsda dilatoriis
ppoitis 7 p intlocutoria caifatis lite p pe°atoré legie oftituti i for” iuris
oteftata + ac p pe’ato¥ vt'uly, ptis inraméto de Vitate dicenda Pltito 7 iudieio ,
pofigdibs ex vt"q, pte ppofitis , 7 hine inde refponfionib; ftis » 7 sb sigillo
iudicis i se'ptis redactis ; 7 ci p refponfiones ad pofigdes de intenGe ptis
actricis liquere nd potat 1 eX pte actrice erat teites pdueti ; iurati 7 exami-
nati ; 7 7 inft*menta exhibita q'b3 ps actrix intenédm sua pbare intendebat ,
fa eoydé pti ree copia déis teftia in sc'ptis fidetr redactis atteftagoib; pub-
lieatis caydé pti act'ci copia fea ; 7 pti ree ci effectu oblata hita Sr hiis aliq*
diu difputaée pe’ator ptis ree dib3 obiectis 7 obiciendis in tefics 7 teftifieata
reniiciauit i iudicio q‘sda pemptorias excepes i indicio pponés diz petiit
ad café phandas p infitinenta 7 nd p tefies peile 7 sit vitiori dilag&e eayde
Sb sigillo indicis copia ta die aduenicnte q° ps rea excepées pemptoF
pbare debuillet nich oo pbanit , inti*menta ut p'uilegia lies fepi? in indito
7 ext req'fit? n° exhibuit ; n° exhibere voluit » ppt q’d nos Sbdecan? Glatz
gerés vices dtoy Abbtis de paiteleth cantoris ; 7 ‘Thefaura¥ Glatz indici
p'neipalia intloguendo pniciauim? pe’atoré déoy Abbtis 7 Couuent? de
Wel# in pbacione exceptont pemptoF p ipm ppditay defecitle » ac ultins 1
ta ocludentes dié vt'q, ptiad audiend Peife siiam diffinitiua pfixim? » Q? die

Keicue

C@etros


--- Kelso1_page268.png ---
Kenecno

MerRos.

148 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

ptibs i iudicio p pe’atores cdpentibs nof reuoluto peeffa 7 diligent ci deli-
Page examinato intenédm déoy Abbtis 7 Conuent? de Kalch put i indigo

erat ppoita p teftes ydoneos / 7 7 p inft*menta fignis autenticis fignata plene

&e pbata inris pitoy ofilio nob aflidentid freti - inuocata spt? sti gia siiiatr
7 diffinitiue pniiciam? déos ABbem 7 Conuentii de Welros decimay 7
alioy inrid ee pochiat de oH sp*tancid put i libello pleni? otinét? illicitos
fore detentores ; fimili modo sfiiatr pniiciam? odempnantes pe’atoré dctoy
Abbis 7 Conuent? de Wel® 7 p ifm eofdé Abbim 7 Conuenti p siiam
diffinitina ad reddend dis Abbi 7 Conuentui de Kalehou x*toribs e&e de
Molle decias 7 alia iura pochialia de poffefionibs q’s adq(fiuerit i pochia
illa p® geitale concilia fedim q déi Abbas 7 Convent’ de Kalchou de aliis
pochianis i déis tris

omorantibs aliq? tempe pcipe ofueuertt , Et naturatr
eqa eft neminé debe ci altins iactura locupletari 7 p teftes i indicio eft
pbati q Abbas 7 Conuent? de Kalchou r‘tores e@¢e de Molle i ducentis 7
sexagint qaré argéti sit dampnificati p Abbfm 7 Conuentii de Welros fone
ininfte detenddis decimay 7 alioy inridt pochialia' i déa pochia , ppt qd nof
cundé pe’atoré 7 p ipm déos Abbaté 7 Conuentii ad reddend platis ADbi 7
Conuétui de Kalch ducentas 7 sexaginta [@arcas] p dipnis q* p defectu
decimay 7 alioy iurifi nd solutoy inc’rerint vna ci viginti lib¥ noie expnfay
taxatis iuratis 7 adiudicatis inf dnicam q* cantat? Q%i modo geniti shiatr
odépnam? 7 diffinitince » Hui? sie execuéom de Dryburg 7 de Jeddeword
supp'oribs 7 decano de Q)*fkys facienda demandates ginnetim 7 dinifim ;
refuata nob poteftate iux* tenoré madati aplici 7 gmiflionis nob dir‘te de
aliis caufis cognofeendi int pifatos Abbes 7 coy Connent? » 7 F refuata nob
debita 7 candica cole ot* rebelles 7 siiie fire parcre nolentes ; Lata eft h
shia i E@éa cathed“li Glasé die Jonis px* aii fetid sti Thoe apli Anno gie
«7 ce? 7 sexag 7 nono / Plentibs 7 Magro Bernardo vieat dni Thefaura¥ ;
BPno Edgero vica¥ ville Glasg ; Bno Jobe cantore ; Pno Witlo de Efcedale
Puno Petro capo ; Bno Wiko de Cunyngh*m ; Dno Al

de louchmaban ; vna ci dib3 aliis dée ee vica¥ ; 7 F plentibs » agro

x° , Dno Hug

fol 74.


--- Kelso1_page269.png ---
181

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 149

Ad de Louchmaban ; magro Walto de Lyndefeia ; Bno Wil de Svynford
ee cathedrat sac'fia 7 aliis » Et ad maioré euidencia dium Pmniffoy pions

fé'ptii sigilli fri qunimine fecim? roborari

Act 7 dat- die 7 anno sup“ddis -

Carta sr Ecctiam de Lefmahagu ci tota pochia -

Onib; has litfas viluf ut anditut - Joes dei gta Ecctie Glafg minif? humit
falé in dno ppetua ; Sciatif me caritatis intuitn ad petiG>em dni mei - BD
Re& Scottoy illuft's ; confilio 7 Aamoni
laicoy ; ex aflentu F 7 voliitate toti? Capituli mei oceflifie 7 hae carta mea

¢ viroy timencia dm ; ta cficoy g

conf'matte abbti 7 @onachis Calchovenfis monaftii Eectiam de Lefinahagu
ci tota pochia fua ; put eis libucrit inppetui ordimanda ; monachos i
eadé inftituendo ; et ipam ci monachis ibidé SuitnF ab di cxaccione 7
subiecéde Epali iure ppetuo liberi dimifitle 7 qetam + Hee ant acta sit
cord dno mco Rege + dd - ct multis aliis ta clicis q* laicis » Auno ab

inearnaéve dni 7 «° + c° + xl? + iiij +

Carta snp tram de pua Kype -

Vnittis f%e tiris ccctic filiis 7 fidelibs pfentibs 2 7 futu® ta cficis q* laicis
Ricard? Bard ctnam i dno falé ; Nonit vnitifitas Fra - me dediffe 7 ocellitie
7 hac pfenti carta mea ofirmafie domui sti Wachuti 7 monach ibidem deo
Snientibs 7 inppetud Suitu# ; tot tram illa q° dr parna Kyp aflenfu 7 cdfenfo
dui mei Robti fit Waldeni , p eafdem dinifas p q‘f pdéa dom? 7 monachi ea
tenueriit 7 poifederiit de pre meo Ricardo Bard scitz p iftas dinifas ; a
capite aq? q® dr Kyp i dir‘to 7 linealit ufq, ad viridem moflam q° eft inf*
duas Harefawes ; et s* de cadé mofla ufq, ad p'ma petra q° pofita eft inx*
suledi q' fs eft p dinifa ; q' lineatr 7 directe erigit? a pPnoiata mofla ufq, ad

Leswan acu.


--- Kelso1_page270.png ---
Lrsmauace

D

150 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

alias pet's fs? cap! de Bradewude pofitas - Et s* de eapite de Bradewude
4 orienté lineatr 7 dir'te ap‘ alias petras q° pofite fat ufq ad riuuli q'
currit ex alia pte oriétali capitis de Bradewude 7 defcendit 7 labit? i Bdgam
ay‘n q? dr Kyp + Et s° affeendédo p candé aq‘ ufq, ad dem capt ei*dem
aq’ de Kyp ; Tenend si libera ; pura 7 ppetuad elemofina p falute mea 7
ediugis nce 7 fied meoy 7 p aiabs pris mei 7 firis mee 7 omniti aiiectioy
i Wachuti 7 Pnofati conachi

7 suecefloy meoy / Q*re volo ut predéa cectia
cide ee ibi deo Suientef heant 7 inppetud poflideant Pfata fra; libere 7
g'ete ; pacifice ; integ* ; 7 honorifice ; 7 plenarie ; In bofeo ; i plano; i pratis ;
i pafeuis , i pafturis ; 7 marefiis ; in ftagnis ; iaueupaddib3 ; i pileacdibs , 7
1 venaédib; ; 1 @olendinis ; 7 edificiis ; et oMib; aliis aifiamentis infra diuifas
Pnofatas fdée fre exiftentibs » Volo # ut candé tram teneat adco libere 7
qrete ficut alig® aliam clemofina libins , qreci® + pacificenci? 7 honorificenci?
iregno Scoeie tenét 7 poflidét » 7 ab omi Snito 7 exaccde sint jmmunes /
Hiis tefte Grego¥ satdote 7 Arnaldo Senefealdo ; Rit de Edenham , Wito
albo , WiHo portario ; Robto de Cranford ; Wito Waht> ; Ada de fol-
cartun ; Conftantino de Danan ; 7 @ultis aliis elicis + laicis -

Conftmazo Regis » Alext - e fra q'm Rig Bard dedit domui Séi Waehuti -

AleX dei gia Rex Seottoy Omid; pbis hdibs toci? tre sue salt - Seiant
plentes ; futut nos coneeflifle 7 hac carta fira conf*matie donaédem illam
qua Rieardus Bard de cdfentu 7 affenfu Robert fit Waldeui dni fui tecit
domui sti Wachuti 7 wonachis ibidé deo Suientibs de tota tra fua q* dr pua
ky{p-+ Tenend 7 habend déis monachis 7 fuis fuecetloribs inppetud in purs
+ ppetud clemofina de dto Rit 7 heredibg suif p catdé diuifas q° continent
icarta ifius Rit ; Ita libere 7 q'ete , plenarie ; 7 honorifice sient carta déi Ric
Bard ; inde pleni? conféa domui sti machuti 7 monachis i eadé domo deo

Snientibs 7 Suitui infte teftat? » Saluo fuicio iro , Tet: » Walte® fit Alani

Sol. 75.


--- Kelso1_page271.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 151

fenefeall « Juftié Scot 7 Rig Cumyn ; Danid de Lyndes ; AleX Cumyn 7 Lessansce.
WiHo de Duneglas ; Wilo de Haya ; Ranulph de Dundas ; ap" Lanaré
oetano decio die Julij ; Ani Regi dni Regis ; vicefio fexto -

Conf'maco Reg Alexi Sr ‘da pte tre i fritorio de Kadyou -

183 Alex dei gia Rex Scott ; Omibs pbis hdibs toci? tre sue elicis 7 laicis
salfm + Sciant pfentes 7 futu¥ me céceflifle 7 hac carta mea conf'naffe «
donaem illi qui Robert? de Londofi frat’ meus fecit deo 7 ecctic ste
Warie de Kelch 7 @onachis ibidé deo Suientib de quada pte tre fue i
fritorio de Kadihon in yafto fuo seilics de Rothauait ; ficut ed cori pbis
hdib; pambulauit , p has cinifas ; videlic; a q*dam q‘ren e*ec signata q° ftat
ad caput eni°da sici 7 s* p fied ill defcendendo ufq i pxima rinula ; 7 8° p
niuuli ill defeendendo uly, in Clide ; Et ex alta pte ? de pdéa q'reu defeen-
dendo ufq, i Clud in dir‘tum ex oppofito tre Thom fit Thancard ; Tenend i
libam , 7 pura; 7 ppetna clemofina cit dibs aifiamétis 7 libtatibs ad patam
tra infte ptinctibs 7 efi cémuni paftura bofei cide Roberti de Rofhauaii ad
viginti animalia ; seit; ad decé vaceas ; 7 decé boues ; Ita libere 7 q'ete /

arta Pati Robti fis mei inde fa Pdtis monach de

plenarie 7 honorifice sic
Kelchon teftat? / saluo Suicio meo - Teft> WiHo de Bofch » Canceltio » Robto
capHo , Walt> Olifard - Juftié laod ; Ph de Qub‘y - Ingel# de Balliol ;
Lauf de Abernith ; Johe de Haya ap* Roketburg - x° « die Jut ; Anno
Regni mei octauo +

Protetio prorat? de Lefmahag «

184 Alex dei gta Rex Scott , Oimib; pbis hdib; toci? fre fue salé » Sciatif nos
proré de Lefmahag 7 hoes ; 7 ras / 7 polleflides ei? ynilifas fub f'ma pace


--- Kelso1_page272.png ---
152 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Lesuansou. fita 7 pteccione iufte fufcepific ; Q're phibem? firmi? ? ne q's eis iniuria uf
moleftia aut g*uamé alig’d iniufte inferre pfumat sr firam plenariam forif-
factura , Teft> » WiHo de Bofch - canceltio - Comit Patrié , ap* Trauegr ,
Nono die Decemb? ; Ani Regni firi nono -

Tte Era pacis 7 ptecdis ptoris 7 monachoy de lefmahag- -

iss Alex dei gia Rex Seott , Oimib3 pbis hdib; toci*® fre fue falé » Sciatis nos
p'oré 7 @onachos de Lefmahag> , ras fuas holes fuos ac vniltas eoxd
pollefliones 7 bona sua mobilia 7 immobilia ta ecefiafiica g™ midana sub
firma pace 7 ptecdbe fira intie sufcepitie » Q*re finite phibem? ne q's cis malit y fol. 76.
iniuria , moleftia , aut g“uamen aliq’d infre pfumat iniufte - sup firam plenaF
foriffactura , Teft» Witto Cumyii de kelbride ; Johe d Dundemof ; 7 Jotie
de Lambirtuii ap* Q)achafi septio die Augufii Anno Regni firi sextodecio -

Carta sr tot decima bladi tre Rit de Bard -

L

Onnnibs fe war's ecetie filiis 7 fidelib; hoc septa vitu¥ vel audituF » Hugo
de Bygris fit Robti filii Waldeui de Bigris pat?nus ecctie d Strathauan etna
in dno salf - Notit vuitifitas vFa me quanta ad promi ptinet dediffe 7
eonceflitie 7 hac pfenti mea earta confirmatie p falute aie mee 7 dium
aficelloy 7 suecefloy meoy deo 7 sto Wachuto de Lefinahag- ct onaehis
ibidé deo Suientib; 7 inppetud feruitu® » In pura ; 7 ppctua clemofina Tota
deeima bladi Pre Ricardi de Baard jacentis ex pte autirali de Auan videlics
maioris Kyp 7 minoris Kyp ; 7 Glengeuel ; 7 Polncbo ; 7 Louhere ; 7 omniti
fray ex illa pte iacentia q* culte sat ut que p tempe excoli potunt » Tenenda
s note simplicis bivficii ; liam 7 q'eta ab oi Suicio ; confuetudie ; exacéde
7 hone sélari 7 cccliaftico » Hoe ex" q monachi finglis annis viginti bollas


--- Kelso1_page273.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 153

farine anene reddent CapHo fernicti Capelle ste Brigide de Kip + Ne ant Leswansce.

FI

t* hane donaédVem mea venire naleam : sz ad plena see7itaté® fup pmiflis
& Py

habenda ? sac‘mentii corpale cisd@ monach de Lefnahag In Capiilo de
Kelchou cora fidedignis preftiti ; Reniicians omi auxilio 7 bitficio Juris
ordinarij 7 ext*ordinarij eSmunis 7 p'uati 7 7 specialit illi ansilio si q’d m'
conpete poffet ex minori ctate ; et tempe hui’ collaédis decé 7 noné annos
habuerim vt ampli? pp'e exittens potetiatis ext tutela 7 eura + iis teftihs
Reginaldo de Crauford ; Ricardo p* de Cultir - Arehembaldo de Daueglas ;
Arkanbaldo de Strethbro® ; Waleolono Loceard ; Robto de Robiiuti » Wile
flamang> Radulph de Cormacefir ; WiHo - Joh ; Ad; filiis Reginaldi de
Cranford ; WiHo Watalent » Thom" le Bret ; Joh » Rit de Bouldet Snien-
tibs dni Abbis , Et ut h donato mea rata sit inppetudi 7 fina » Dis Rit py
igillo
meo huie se'pto appofueriit ; Act? ap? Lefmagu anno ge ° / ce? ; xxviij? /

xvj° kt Wareii -

de Cult» R - de Craufurd miles ad inftancia mea figilla sua vna citi

Carta sr dimit @aré argenti peipiend de tra q'm Gillem? [dedit] -

187 Omnibs {Se Gris ecetic filiis 7 tidelibs Gillem? fit Gilleconel salé « Nottitis me

7 heredes meos deditie 7 oceftifie 7 hac pfenti carta conf'n

e inppetuii deo
7 ecetic {ti Maehuti de Lefmahagn 7 @onachis ibidé do Suientibs annnati
dimidia @area argéti_, cedictat? ad Pentecoft> 7 medietaté ad fettu sti
Qartini i augmentii firme fire de fra q'm de eis tenem? in tiham ; pura ;

7 ppetua elemofina intuitu caritatis 7 fratnitatis « p aiabs dium aiiceffoy 7

suecefloy firoy + Bni u° ptor 7 wonachi recepunt nof' i fratnitaté api

cectic ut fim? pticipes dium biificioy que fiit ul fient i ipa eectia , H
tefie , Pno Johe de Hunteduii ; Alex’ de Setuit , Arehebaldo forefiat » Wit
flamag ; Arkill senefeaH - W - Cumyn ; Ad senefeatt ; Com Patter - BB -
de Curroe’ ; Rog: fit Johis ; 7 cultis aliis -


--- Kelso1_page274.png ---
Lot LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Luswanacu. Lita gr - x - celd# fat auenay vendit dno Alex? folkard « p T- de Durram

end p'oré de lefinahag: -

188 Wnillfis pientes tras inspectut ; Robt? dei gia Eps Glasd 7 ei%dé loci Capittm
satm i dno ; Wontt'ta eft nob ex pte P'oris 7 monachoy de Lefnahag* q AlX
foleard piles affit ipos s* tei obligatos i dec@ celd? farine anene q's st ven-
didat vt affit Thomas de Durram anglic? ptor q’ndam déi loci Peio p cadem
st 7 domui de lefmahalg* vt affit foluto ; penis ad fab'eam ede fire Glalg

’i si i ea dom?

sii solu@Se dée furine ad tos tios defckit adicetis ; qua fari
de lefmahag- tenebat® veracit intellexim? Ge foluta liez ipi ex simplicitate

sua ei%dé forte neq'uerint oftende? soluGdem ; Ide'eo Nollit vnitifitas Fra q

nos ofidato q dés p'or anglie? erat nd soliim® bonoy p'orat? de Lefinahag> ; 85

Gq @onaftii de Kelchou di p vfinrpaédem noi ibid geflit ADbis dilapidator ,

déas penas si i pfenti ex fa Pdéa debeant? ut debi otigit i fat?um domui jo 77.
de Lesmahag* zclo moti rem'‘tim? caritatis illo vng" tempe ad suggefiioné

vel affigna@em pdt @ilitis exceutoy ut heredi fuoy feu alioy q’ractq,
eafdé ab ipis petitut ; In eui? rei teftimonia sigilli: nfm vna ci sigillo

$y Dat ; apd Gla:
Anno gfe @* ; cee? ; q'into decio -

capiili iri pientib; ef appei

qnto die men’ Octobt

Refignago Sr ptitlam tre i teneifito de Lefmahag- q° dr Pollnel -

189 Unitifis prentes littas infpectuk - Wis abbas @onaftiy de Welros faluté
in dno ,; Nouerit vnitifitas ra nos infpexifie 7 legiffe q°dda infi*menti no
caneellata nd aboliti ; n‘ i aliq* sui pte viciati in hee Vba + Oimib3 has
las vifuf ut auditué , WiHs dts de folkardfton® fit 7 heres Ade dé de
folkardfton* salf in dno » Nota facio vob oiiib3 7 singlis q Ada aiidés
de folkardfton® pa? mens iniufte detinuit illa pticula tre in teneméto de



--- Kelso1_page275.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 155

Lefinahagu que dr Pollenele q° fuit 7 eft de iure dnoy meoy Abbis 7 Con- Lessee.
uent? de Kalehou p cui? illicita detene 7 iniufia occupaébe : dés Ada pat
meus erat sentéeia ligat? expica@vis afig* de tra Scoticana reecflit 7 similit
oines eidé cdmunicantes , ac ei%dé tre de Pollencle detentores » Q*re ego
afid@s Wilts dtam exoicacbis sentencia volens euitare ; ae déi Ade pris mei
animam ab cadé liberare , recognofeo 7 fateor dtm Ada prem mei 7 me
nullii ius i déa tra de Pollencle ci ptinéciis fuis huifle ut hre » Ideo dée tre
de Pollenele reniieio p me 7 hedibs meis 7 affig'tis omib; 7 singlis jfentibs
7 futuris » 7 q'eq'd iuris i ca habui si q¢d hui ut fire potui ut afieetiores mei
habueriit q’cumg, titulo cenfeat® , 7 eam i manus dni mei Henriei dei gra
Adbis de Keleh ad vfus dei monaftii de Kelch 7 eiusdé loci Conuent? 7
dium suecefioy suoy refigno + Ita q n° ego n® fiedes mei né affig*ti mei né

aliq's m' sueeedens tempib3 futuris i afid@a tra de pollenele ut ptinéciis fuis

aliq’d ins ut clamea s* potint vel potit vendicare » In eui? rei teftimonia
plentib; Tris sigili met appofui ; Hiis tefte Bno Thoma Ranulli tic tempis
cafario dni Regis Scocie ; Bno Nicho de Bygir milite ; Bno WiHo elieo de
Lanaré , Dno Willo Brunyng* burgen$ de Lanar@ ; Robito déo de Edynhan
senefcallo abbis de Kelchov - Gyllemo¥ fit WiHi ; Rit dé@o de Ilaxtebet ,
Thoma déo Were ; Ad déo Tullus ; Pet? de le Grenrig* ; 7 aliis « Dat» in
curia de Lefmahag’ Anno ge qilleS , pueenteS ; sexages ; xono ; In cui?
rei teftimonid sigilum nfm jfentibs eft appen’ » Dat i qonaiterio firo de

Welros die Lune pxia aii Afcenédem dui Anno gie «° / cee? ; xvj? -

Refignato Sr maiore Ardauech 7 minore Ardauch -

190 Omnib; x* fidelibg Pfentes tras vifuris vt audituris Robt? dés frané de
Lambinift: fit 7 heres Henf filii 7 hedis Wit d@i q’nda del Ardach etna
i dno salé - Notitis omes 7 singli q ego Robt? nd coaéus + nd inuitus «
s3 pp'a voliitate motus in Pfencia dni Alex di gia Reg Scott 7 Regni


--- Kelso1_page276.png ---
Lesmanace.

156 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

magnata apd Roketburg i eaftello cdftitut? feio decio kat Junij anno gie
@?, ec? ; Ix; vj? 7 publice 7 manifetie viua voce recognoui 7 plenti se'pto
ie Robti dem frand recognofco Abbm 7 Couentii de Kalch fup Pris i feodo
de Lefinalag* exittentibs ; videlics qaiore Ardach ; 7 winore Ardach ci eoy
ptinéciis iniufte inplacitatte ; 7 ing'etatle ; meq 1 iis | tris vt aliq'b3 eay
ptinéciis ofo nichil iuris hre + 7 si q'd iuris i cifde Pris vel aliq'b3 ptinéciis
eax ego 7 pdeceflores mei haberem? vi aliq‘udo habuim? ; vt ego 7 fledes
mei sen ‘aMignati aliq'b3 tempib; q‘etiq, oceafione feu ta hre potuim? vt

votim? , déis Adbti 7 Couentui de Kelch 7 succetlorib; eoy inppetua p me
1 7 7 5 PY Pp

p+: ; Aon CR £0, - ; ane
7 hedibs meis 7 aflignatis singlis 7 vnituis Tdé ius p fuftum 7 baculé furfi
reddidi , q'eti clamaui , refignaui ; 7 reniiciaui / 7 dam q'etam clama-

Gem 7 refignagem feu reniiciagom plenti fepto meo conf*maui publice 7

: te lee Dene am wit
manifefte recognofeés déas tras efi ptiné pure 7 abfolute 7 ab antiq? éc

ius 7 pattmonii be Warie de Kaleh » 7 bi Machuti 7 ad wonattia de
Kelehou 7 ei°d@ loci cduentii integ® 7 pleno inure ptiite - Ego 7 d@o die

scilics teio decio kat Junij in pfencia dti dni Regis 7 regni ei? magnati /

corpale p me 7 hedibs meis feu affignatis pitti sac'mentii » q n° ego nf
hedes mei né aftignati i déis tris vt aliq'b; eay ptinéciis aliq'd iuris vendi-

cabim? ; n° deof Abbtem 7 Conentii vt aliqué de eoy suceefloribs fup déis

tris vt aliq’bs coy ptinéciis aliq’ndo inq'etabim? vt inq'etari peabim? vt ot*

pmifta i aliq? veniem? vt aliq’d attéptari faciemus - Siu? ptingat me ut

aliqué heredit fen aflignatoy meoy aliq’ tempe i dis Pris vt aliv [b3 eay

ptinéciis aliq'd iu® uendicare ¢ vt @onaftiti de Keleh seu # ci°dé loci
Connentii aliq? m° inq'etare vt molettare ¢ Volo 7 pienti se'pto p me 7

itis finglis 7 vnililis pcedo q ab agendo tang* piuri

hedibs meis 7 alli

; eee. Sen i. ae
repellan’ + 7 q dis agus iudicialis nob tang™ piuris ofo intd

* 7 don®
conaftio de Kelkou 7 einfaé loci Couentui sup tali ac tanta offenta p me 7
hedes meos seu aftignatos sedm arbit'um Abbis de Kelchou vel ei%dé loci
Conent? q' p tempe fuerint plene fitit satiffém - Subiciens me 7 fedes meos

fen aflignatos fingulos 7 ynitifos i omib; 7 finglis pmiflis iuFdiecdi dni Epi

fol. 7S.


--- Kelso1_page277.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 157

Glafg q! p tempe fit vel q’raetiq, Efioy vt archidiaconoy i quoy dio® nos

2 otigit » vt liceat cifde sii Ge ogniGde singlis dieb3 duicis 7 feftiuis p oms
epatus suos pullatis campanis , 7 accenfis eandelis publice 7 finit nos
exoicare 7 expicatos deniiciare + Si u® ptingat nos vel aliqné nfm monal-
ftium de Kelchou ; vel eidé loci Comnentii fup dis tris vel aliy’b3 eax
ptinéeiis aliq'b3 tempibs q°’ciiq, m° inplacitare seu molettare aliq'd iuF i cifde

vel eay pting

; , Aree oo. ;
is vendicando ; Volo 7 plenti septo p me 7 hedib3 meis seu
ag, COL “Op mar Sn ns ER ot? done
aflig‘tis singlis 7 yniulis coneedo - q siia dée expicaddis ta din obfuet? don’

@onattio de Kelchou 7 ei’dé loci eonnétui de dapnis 7

Tonis [ratione] ing'etaédis alicui? vt aliqo} froy suftinuerit p nos uf aliqué

xpni si que ut q's

noft™ plene flit satit#@m Tnfup ut q’s dinin? amor a malo nd revocat +
penalis saltem timor choerceat ; volo 7 7 plenti septo p me 7 hedibs meis ten
aflignatis finglis 7 ynitilis edeedo q ego 7 hedes mei seu aflig“ti si p nos vt
aliqné noft™ vt aliq’m vi aliq’s noie firo vt alicui? nolt™ i aliq? pmifloy aliq'bs
tempibg aliq'd {uit attéptati ad pena ducentay libray filingoy fub'ee monat-
tii de Kelchou folnenday et ad pena eiufdé sime pecunie soluende fab‘ce
ede Glafy> tencain’ et Plenti sc'pto 1 religione pitici sacraméti obligem’ ;
Volens q, tociens pena edmittat? q’eids i aliq’ ot" pmitia vi aliq’d Pmitioy P
nos vt aliqné noft™ aliq'b3 tempibs aliq'd flit attemptati + Obligaée p'nei-

pali in suo robore nichilomin? pmanente - In quib3 omtb3 7 sing

is uniflis
volo 7 plenti se'pto eoneedo ; p me 7 hedibs incis scu aflignatis meis fingulis
7 ynill q simplici affereioni abbis de Kelehou q p tempe erit vt ci’demn
loci monachi +

ci°dé loci pe“atoris ad hoe deputati eredat® ably, vitiori

2 ; aN een ee) B
hone pbonis ; Reniicio 7 By omib3 7 singlis pmiflis p me 7 hedibs, meis seu
aflignatis meis finglis 7 vniutis - omni actioni » excepcdi » eanillacdi » cont’

dicGi , inpet*eioni ; biificio retiitucdis [in] integra ; Judicis officii implo-

raéont ; 7 omibs tris aplicis  Regiis inpet*tis feu inpet“ndis 7 maxie regic
17 3 I 7

MibiGdi » omni in¥ remedio ta eanonict q* ciuilis » 7 di déo 7 ft q’d m' vt
¥ 7 7 7 1

hedi

u affig"tis meis vi alieui heda seu aflignatoy meoy aliq'b; tem-
pib3 potit pdefle 7 déis abbi 7 Couentui de Kelchou + vel coy snecetforib;

Lesuanace.


--- Kelso1_page278.png ---
Lesa seu.

191

158 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

aliqfi ob@e - In eui? rei teftimonia Pfenti se'pto sigilla mea appofui , Et
nt Pfenti sc'pture plenior fides adhibeat? sigilla dni Johis dei gta Glafg
Epi, 7 wagri Wii Wifchard Archid sti And¥ ; 7 dni Regis Scocie
eancellat ; dni hugofi de berkeley Jutfticia¥ laodofi , Bui Alex’ vnyot
vicecom de Lanart » Dni Thome Ranulphi vicecom de Rokefburg ; Dui

vieccomit de Peblys » Willi de Dufgl

Q

Symoii fi - qilitis huic se'pto sit

appenta -

Cont*tia in? Adbm 7 Couentit de Keleh ; 7 dim Alex™ folkard -

Cwm cont°tiia mota fuills, in? Abbi 7 Conuentii qonaftii de Kelch ex pte
vna ¢ 7 Dim Alexand folkard milit® ex alta sup tenem@to de Pollenel
baronie de Lefmahag- ; q°d qnid tenementii dés diis AleX dicebat ad ipm
jure heditario ptite 1 Ipis ADbe 7 Connétu i contri affentib; » Demi
ry

dia cont°tlfia cong'euit

die lune px* poft fetta sti Marci ewangt ; Anno dni @°  cce? ; 7 apud
Noflamynyii diferetis 7 fidedignis
i hie modi ; videlic; q diis AleX fatebat? 7 recognonit se nulla alind ius

fire 1 teneito de pollencl n‘ q illnd de dtis Abbe 7 Conuttu ad firma p

iris intuenientibs

tempe vite sue tenebat , Reddendo inde cifdé finglis anis noné marcas

dis AleX i folude {me sue dé teneméti de Pollenel p
noué annos it 7 ipis Abbe 7 Conuentu arrcragia ci’dé ci inftancia
petentibs  Tandé p bono paeis 7 ad inftancia amicoy dé dni Alex’ ; dés
Abbas pfato dno Alex® dia arreragia dée fme vf ad simam viginti
mareay f{ilingoy gratofe remifit 7 e6donauit ; q*s quid viginti marcas des
AleX pmifit fidetr 7 se obligauit solutu¥ ad fminos Sbfequétes / videts ad
fetta Pentecoft centii solid , sti Qartini i hyeme centi folid ; 7 p*ificadis
De virgifi sexagint sex folid 7 octo denaf imediate poft cdfectonem ifti?
infi"menti 7 qv d@s diis Alex alleganit 7 implici? edquerebat? q pdtm
tenementi de Pollenel ita erat defi*éti p gwerra 7 deuaftatii q integra

filingoy i7cad

Sol. 79.,


--- Kelso1_page279.png ---
192

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 159

firma noué @areay solile no potat n° inde tm lenare ; Dts Abbas pei
Miltoy intuentn deuid? ; dno Alex? Pp fmino qq annoy imediate Sbseqntit
de integra f'ma tres marcas finglis annis remifit ; Ita q de sex refiduis
q’lib3 anno durante q'nquénio Pdéo ecifde Adbi 7 Conuttui ad duof anni
tminos videts ad fefta sti Martini 7 Pentecoft> p eq‘les medietates si fi*pitu
7 gt“dicGe satiffaciet » ptmo tmino soluddis incipiéte i fefto sti Qartini i
hyeme Anno dni o° , cee? ; sextodecio 7 fic deineeps ; quib3 q'nq, annis
fais 7 des diis Alex pddis religiosis de integra firma sua noué marcay

oi anno p tempe uite fue sii cauillacde refpondebit 7 satiffaciet competent :
Déo aut dno Alex? decedéte ? dém tenemétii de Pollenel ad monattia de
Kelehou abfy, aliq? inpediméto reutet? » Ad ifta ati amicabilé conuenédem
fidetr 7 sii fraude obfuanda , d@s abbas manu i p*tore pofita i fibo sat docij /
dés diis Alex fide i manu déi ADbis pitita se aftrinserat » In cui? rei tefti-
moniii pti hui? indentature penef dém diim Alex™ refidenti 7 d@s abbas fui
apposuit sigilli , pti u® penes d@os Abbm 7 Conuentit refidenti sigilla
déi dni Alexand' vna ei figillo dni Efi Glafguen- apponit? - Hits tefi-
coagro Witlo de Luas r‘tore eéée del Stanhus ; magro Hug de Chernefyde
clico - Alex? Bard ; Wito de Wauhaii ; Wichact Hert de Lanaré ; 7 cultis

aliis -

=. =. 9
Refignato Sr tram de Dowane -

Onmnib; has litfas vifuF ut anditnt » Adam de Dowan* fit Daniclis de
Dowan* salé in dno ; Notint vnilifitas fra me die @’eurii px* poft felt
Qathei apli 7 ew*ngt ; anno dni mi ; pucenteS ; NonageS ; Q"rto 7 i plena
curia dni Rieardi ADbis dei gfa de Kelchou ap* Lefmahag tota fram ‘in
ego 7 aficeflores mei i teneméto de Dowan inf” baronia de Lefmahag aliquo
tempe habuim? / dnis meis Abbi 7 Conuttui de Kelch p me 7 hedi i
vt aflignatis vendidifle 7 p fufta 7 bactm furfii reddidiffe p q‘da

it

Lessanseu.


--- Kelso1_page280.png ---
160 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Lesuanace. p®cunie q'm idem dni mei mi mea raxia neCitate tottalit pfoluerit ; de
e eran 9}
qua siima peennie plene 7 integ® me reputo ppagato ; Excepcioni nd nuniate

no tradite 7 nd recepte peceunie reniiciando penit® 7 expreffe « Et siq'd iur
a ; eens) ee

ul clamei ego 7 heredes mei ut aflignati i déa tra de Dowaii aliq? tempe

fuim? ut hre potuim? illi iuri 7 clamco mera 7 spontanea voliitate mea ex-

pile reniicio p pifentes « 7 toti illud ins Pdtis Anis meis ABbi 7 Connétui de

Kelch p me 7 hedibs meis v1 aflig‘tis inppetuit q'etii clamo / V ‘lo = F 7 cdecdo

si aliq’d infirumonta ut carta futuris tempib3 inueniat? q?d ut quem 7

«

liedib; meis ut affignatis aliq't inris i dea tra de Dowai att'buere videat?

illud inftsiti ut carta nulli

sit momenti 7 vacuii feu vacna 7 virib; carcat
+ null’ roboris opt

eat firmitaté ; Et si otingat me hedes meos vt afligna-

tos cont” ifta vendiGbem ; y'ctclamagbem 7 7 libam refignagdm me i aliq?
face vt venire p me ul p alios , obligo me 7 heredes meos ac aflignatos
ad solugjem q“draginta libra stlingoy fubtce eéte Glafguen$ 7 qd'ginta
libray i Sbfidia fre ste noie dapnoy + 7 intée solucnday afig® in aliq® lite
andiam? » Sbiciens me 7 liedes meos ut affignatos cobcioni 7 7 potettati dni
Epi Glafg ; 7 officiat Glatz q’ p tempe fitint q poflint me 7 hedes meos
vi aflig“tos expfeare ; 7 p tota dioceS Glaf® de dic i dié expicatos deniciare ;
qrulg, de dis quat viginti lib¥ p dampnis 7 7 intée si que ine’rerint p me ut
jicdes meos sen aflignatos plena® flit satiffem illo pponédo obftante , pdta
vendiéde , q'eta clamacione 7 liba mea refigna@be nichilomin’ i suo robore fel. 80.
duratut ; In eni? rei teftimonié figillii mea plentib; eft appens ; F neq,

mei min? eft noti , sigillum venabit pris Bni Epi Glafg ; 7 sig’
Galfridi de Cubray tie Jufliciak Landonie ; ae sigillii dni Godefredi de
Rok tiie vicecoi de Lanaré plentibs, apponi pe’ani ; Hiis teft- ; Nichot
de Benauthyit ; 7 Johe filio suo » WiHo folkard ; 7 Alex? filio suo ; Rie
Wet / 7 Rié filio suo , Reginaldo de Corrokys 7 aliis 1 die 7 anno fup"dé

i dta euria de Lefmahag ; cong*gatis «


--- Kelso1_page281.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 164

Refignato Ade de Douane junioris de tota tra sua in déa villa de Douane Leswuree

cit ptinéeiis fuis -

193 Oinibs has tras vifuF ut anditu® » Adam de Dowan* Junior sali i dno -
Oe Oa ~ . : > + A
Notit vnitditas tra me p me 7 heredib; meis seu affignatis refignatle
qetclamafie ; 7 p futti 7 baculi surfi reddiditie i plena curia dni Abbis

de Kelchon tenta afd Lefmahag in viglia Pentecoft> ; Anno dni; ccc? ;
T g

p'mo ; tota tram mead de Dowaii cit dibs ptindciis fuis » qm de déis Abbe
7 Cométu inre heditario tenui i efeambia tre de Hauhtiferdale , q’m mn" 7
hedibs meis dzis die 7 loco dederiit 7 cdcefferat - Ita videlies qn® ego ne
fiedes mei vt affignati seu aliq's alins vice aut nole firo aliq’d ius ut clamiti
i déa tra ut aliq® ptidla einfdé aliq? titulo » Fone , vt ta inpoftum potim? ut
potunt vendicare + Et si otingat me vt fiedes scu aflig’tos meos feu aliqué ut
aliq’s noie iiro ; pe’acione seu ratihabicione fira con® ifta refignaéém firam
qetclamacioné ; 7 surfi reddiédm 1 aliq? fate ut venire obligam? nos ad
iia

solucioné centii mareay {tlingoy fabrice ee Glaf® , 7 cont mareay i aus
tre ste noie pene contitenday , afig® in aliq* lite audiam’ ; pfenti fo fro
nichilomin’ i suo robore durat’o ; In cui? rei teftimoniat pfentibs figilla met
appofui , Et qr sigilla mei min? nota eft ; sigilli veilabit pris dni Robti di
gia Epi Glafg ; 7 sigillii dni Walteri Logan tie vieceomit de Lanaré pfen-
tib3 apponi peuraui ; Hiis teftib; ; no Alexandi flolkard qilite » Bno
Aylmero r‘tore eectie de Duglas ; Nich de Benauthin ; Ricardo Wer » Ada
de Dowan + Danid de Pollenele ; WiHo de Kype , Reginaldo del Corrokes ;
Archebaldo del Croke ; Wil filio Brydot » Ad filio ci? ; 7 multis aliis -


--- Kelso1_page282.png ---
162 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Lecwanaov, De canfa Vfata int nos 7 Danielé 7 Robta de Douane 7 eo vxores Sr tra
de Douae «

194 Onmnibs hoe septa vifur ut auditu# , Ph - 7 Jolis dei gta de Jeddeworde
7 de Dryburg Abbes + Jn dno salt - Noflit vniifitas tira g ci eaufa fiteret?
cord nob auetoritate dni pape int Abbm 7 Connenti de Kalchou ex vna
pte 7 Danielem 7 Robta de Dowan 7 coy vxores ex alta ) sup tra de
Dowan qm dai Abbas 7 Connent? petebant a pdtis- D+ 7+ R- 7 coy
uxoribs sicut illicite a monaftio suo alicnata - ad ius 7 pp'etaté ipins
revoeari ; Tandé in? ptes talif tiie sopita q'euit - Videt3 q dai-D-7-R-
p bono pacis dederit Pd@is abbi 7 @onachis q’mda simam pecunie 7

oceflerat cifde siti cui’d @olendini sup Kerlyngholii ficut riuulus de

Dowan defeendit 7 cadit i Neythan ; ci libo aque ductu p fra de

Dowafi ad d@m molendina ; 7 ad ftagnii faciend ; sfi di ot*dieéde 7 inpe-

diméto inppetud - Conceflerat 7 7 eifdé 7 Ldibg fuis de villa molendini ,

7 omibs nenicutib; ad pd@m qolendin’ eomunia pafture de Delues a paso

mnolendino i in dirta WP orienté ufq, ad Bra ? oppofitii eid molendino ; 7 ita

p illud bra ? defeendendo ufy, i} Naithan 7 s° de Naythan afeendendo uly

ad feped@m molendinii p pdtin riuula de Dowait - Ita tn q hoies de villa

molendini nd pafeent ibi nu’ dimidio anno hyemali ; s3 6s uenientes ad

molendina toto anno ibi pafeent sii inpediméto 7 pt*diecde ; Et sciend q

inf™ pdeas dinifas de Delues p déos + D + 7 R + ut coy vsores ; fiedes ut

sneceflures 7 nig’ fiet p%ta ul tra arabit ;s3 semp iacebit ad edmuné paft?am

vt pd@m eft » Coneetierat 7 déi- D+ 7 R. 7 eoy uxores Pdtis abbi 7

qonachis eSmund petamore q* vadit iux* an horebrechs ufq, ad domi q‘in jy. si.

pades Robt? de Douaii feeit in cadé fra ivita Conftantini ¢ eum libo ingreftn

7 egreflu ad petas fuas fodiendas 7 eariandas ; 7 ei fuflieiéti 7 competenti

loco ad petas fuas quas foderint iux® loci foflionis ficcidas + saluo blado -

Ad maioré aut pee pacis fee“itaté , vt'q, pti hui? eyrog*phi penes Pdeas ptes


--- Kelso1_page283.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 163

sigilla fira appofuim? , Hiis teft: ; Pno W. de Duueglas ; Bno Regifi fit
vdardi  Bno Walto flandren$ 1 Bno J + vica¥ de Pebt » Dunecait p* de
Dunegt - W - vica¥ de Dunfyer - W + Qautalent » Rit de Boulden - J +
de mortuo ma¥ » AleX carefcalt Suientib; de Kelch , 7 multis aliis -

Refignaé + Ade de Douane senioris de tra i gréryg- -

Vnitifis ad q’s pfentes tre puentint 1 Ada de Douane senior salé i dno ;
Nouerit vnitfitas fra me g'tis 7 spontanea voluntate mea refignafle ofo
qretaclamaffe ac p fuftem 7 baculi surfa reddidiffe p me 7 fiedibs meis
inppetuai dno Walrano Abbi qonattii de Keleh - Capitali dno 7 eiufdé loci
Conuitui inf? monaftia fui Pdem tota tram mea q'm hui i villa 7 teneméto
de Grenerig infra baronia snam de Lefmahag> ci suif reéis diuifis 7 sing
ptin@eiis ac libertatib; ad pdam tram q’m°etig, sp‘tantib; ut sp*tare deben-
tibs fine ali’ retinefito » habenda 7 tenenda pfatis dnis abbi 7 Conuétni 7
eoy succefforibs p sue libito volitatis inppetuai , Ita q ego vt fiedes mei
aut quiuis alius noe ut iure firo rée alieui? conuenddif , cdpoliGdis » seu
otract? cuiveiiq, in? me seu Pdcceffores meos ; 7 déos dnos meos Abbm 7
Connentii Bazi @onaftii sive aliqué alidi note suo q’etiq, m? initi feu feat
aliq’d ius ut clamifi a tempe dée refignavis pientis ; déis dnis ADbi 7
Conuentui ut pdtin eft in tota pdea ‘tra efi suis ptinéciis ; feu in aliq® pte
ciufdé fillo modo exiSe vt vendicare potim? ; aut eont™ pfentis se'pti tenoré
aliq? modo venire - In cui? rei teftimonii prenti se'pto sigillii meit appofui
Hiis teftibs , Bno Alexandé folkard qilite » Johe de Benauthin » Thoma
Were ; Pat'cio de Auuynleé ; Théa déo del Halle ; 7 aliis -



--- Kelso1_page284.png ---
Lesanacu,

196

164 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

aan sf ~
Coneto it nos 7 dém Ad -

Ad fetta Pafeh Anno gre @° ; eee? ; xi? , Ita puenit in? abbm 7 Conuentii
Que : a ;
conattii de Kelchoy ex pte vna 7 Ada de Douafi senioré ex alta ; videt;

q idé Ada refignanit d@is Abbi 7 Conuttui tota tra fua qm huit apt le

Greneryg ci omib3 suis ptinéciis infra baroniaé sua de Lefmahag 7 eandé
surfum reddidit p fufium 7 baenla , p qua quid refignaéde # inueniét ecidt
Ade p fuo ppetuo infra domi {ua de Lefmahaz fuftentagSem vni? serianti
in victualibs 7 quolib; anno vna roba vi una [ ] stlingoy p
volitate poris dt loci ; 7 pdts Ada faciet p déis [Abbate] 7 Conuétu

secta curie i comitatu de Lanar@ 7 ipos indempnes confuabit i omibz de

déa secta q“diu potencia {ui corpis heat 7 sanitaté » 7 ei inpotens filit ila
seeta faciendi vitius nd recipict p anni p faa roba n* dimidia marea ut vn
garniamenta ; 7 tencbit simitr placida sua de Lefmabag qtndo fait p dem
p'oré sup hoe req'fitus ; In eni? rei teftimoniii pfenti sc'pto int dtof abbm
z Couenti / 7 ptatii Ada indentato pti fcilie; penes eosd@ Adbm 7
Conentii remanenti / sigilla d@i Ade eft appenS » Alti u® pti penes dém

Ada remanéti - sigillum pmune eoydé eft appens -

In? nos 7 Reginalda de C’rok* sup tra de Kype sub titulo pmutaé

Oinibs ste cat's ecctie filiis 7 fidelibs ad q’s pfentes tre puenint - E -
pmifiione dia Abbas de Kalchou 7 einfdé loci Conuent? salt i dno ; Nott
yninerfitas tra nos de vnanimi confenfu toci? capituli firi dedifle conceflifie
7 hae Pienti carta fira pfirmafle Reginaldo de Corrokys 7 hedibs fuis titulo
pmutaddis toti tra firam de Kype minore ci omib3 ptingeiis fais 7
marchiis ; libtatibs » i @oris » 7 @arifeis i p‘tis » 7 pafenis 7 omibs aliis
aifiamentis fuif ppetuo tenend 7 poflidend de nob adeo libere + quiete fine


--- Kelso1_page285.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 165

aliq'b3 petiédibs vt exacédib3 sélarib; fict nos ca aliquo tempe tenuim? ut Lesuansoe.
tele potuim? ; Reddend nob annuati p déa tra vna libra eymini die sti

Wachuti ap’ Lefmahag ; Concefim? 7 pdto Reginaldo toto tempe uite sne

y*tuor ecld¥ farine auenc finglis aiis de p'oratu firo de Lefmahag ad duos jot. 82.
{minos peipiend - videlic; duas celd# ad fefta sti Q)artini i hyeme 7 duas

's be War sii vitiori dilagbe yna ei honefta fulten-

tadbe s' 7 vni garé¥i i vietualibs i @onaftio fro de Kalehou vt Lefinahag ;

Et poft deceilti déi Reginaldi a piftade dée farine crim? ojo liberi 7
inmunes / $3 hedibs fuis viginti solid stlingoy singlis annis inppetuit
pfoluem? ad loci 7 fminos s“d@os de q'b3 viginti solid {tlingoy paeis hedibs,
pfati Reginaldi ut fup*d@im eft soluend nos tenore pfent obligam? - Nos

celdi ad feta p°ifiead

Pdéam tra de Kype et fuis ptinéciis pdt Reginaldo 7 hedibs fuis ot” oms
hoies 7 feminas inppetua warantizabim? acq'etabim? 7 defendem? ; Reni-
ciantes i hoe fto excepédi i fem doli mali 7 ne poflim? dre nos deeeptos
vit medietaté infti peii - ac oii Puilegio 7 aliis exeep@dib3 iuris eandici 7
ciuilis q° poffint ot* pfentem tram firam obici ut obponi - In eui? rei tetti-
anoniti plentibs tris figilli comune eapituli firi eft appenS ; Teftib; Buo
Aymero de Softlaw r‘tore Eectie de Duglas ; uo Galfrido déo Inirwye
capHo + Walo elico déo Anrifab¥ burgen$ de Rokytburg ; wagro Hugoii
de Chirnefyde clico ; Rié de fauhnes ; Watho de Grenclau burg de Kal-
kou ; 7 aliis -

Retignat + déi Reginaldi Sr t# de fineurrokis -

198 Nobili viro 7 difereto » Dito Wito de Séo Claro qiliti suuf Reginald? de
Corrokys satm i Saluatore dium ; Q'a nup tot tra mea de fyneorrokys
inf* baronia de Lefmahag’ q’m vos de me tenetis ad firma p trib; carcis
annuis vfq, ad fine mini in puendde inita int vos 7 prem mei fiatuti ;
Duis Abbi 7 Conentui de Kalch supiorib; dnis dée tre 2 mera 7 tpontanca


--- Kelso1_page286.png ---
Leswanaau.

199

200

166 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

voluntate mea duét? refignani q'et clamani ; 7 tota jus q°d hui vi tire potui
q‘liteiq, i A@a tra vfq, ad hee tempa p fufti 7 baculi furfa reddidi p meg
hedibs meis vel affig“is abfqy aliq? retineméto iuris m' conpetétis i déa tra
vt inpoftum cdpetituri ; Dife’cioné Fram attenci® req'ro ? q‘tin® de d@is t'bs
qareis annuis ad Pminos ofuetos eifd@ ADbi 7 Couentui nofe meo si placs
am? satiffieri faciatis ; Scitu¥ q nolo q vos aliq*m excufaédm heatis fone
pfone mee vt heredi meoy p qua soluto dée annue f'me suis fminis qem’-
libs impediri valeat seu differi - vel abbas 7 conuent? afidéi i exaccione 7
s ine’rere valeant seu iactura + In

recepcione dée annue firme fatigac:
cui? rei teftimonia sigilla mea pfentib:
eft sigilli venlabit pat's dni R- dei gia Epi Glafg- ad maioré scenritaté

appofni ; 7 qv sigilli mei min? nota

pfentibs apponi peuraui -

Delibat nob f%a de ficrokis «

Henrie? de Séo claro giles ; Dileéto s* in xpo balliuo suo de fyncurroé
satm in dno Wandam? tibi 7 peipim? quatin? pdtam tra de fyncorroe cit
fuif ptinenciis iuftis delibes Abbi de Kelch vt ptori de Lefmahag vt
€0} attornato sii con*dicéve vi inpedimento - In cui? rei teftimoniai Plen-
tib3 figilli mea eft appen’ , Dat ap’ Edynburg q’rto die Warcii ; Anno
dni Qe ; cee? ; q'nto decio +

Refignacio Wihi fit Philippi de Greneryg- &r té pt de Hatillet -

Onib; has tras vifu¥ vi auditué » Wits fit Philippi de Grenrige satm
nam in dno ; Nowit vnilifitas tra me die @%curij px® polt fefta fei
Qachuti Epi Anni gfe Q)* ; cc ; fexag ; sexti ; i plena curia dnoy
meoy Abdbis 7 Couent? de Kelchou afd Curroe Symonis p fuftem 7


--- Kelso1_page287.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 167

bacula surf reddidifte 7 q'et clamafle p me 7 fiedib; meis dis nis meis
abbi 7 Conuétui de Keleh tota ius q’d habui vel hire potui in teia pte de
Hautilleé ea omib3 inribs 7 ptinéeiis ad déam fram , i aq's 7 i molendinis
fiagnis » pifeariis ; moris ; marefeis ; petariis: 1 bofeis 7 7 planis 7 p*tis
7 pafenis ! 7 oib3 ais ayfiamétis q° ad dtam ‘tra aliq® — ptinebat vt
inpoftum ptife pofunt p q%dam fama p*eunie q’m m’ i mea magna ne-
ccflitate dederit ; Q’re volo 7 gcedo p me 7 fediby meis q déi dni mei

Leswamacc.

Abbas 7 Conuét? de Kelch déam tram i feudo de Hautillet inppetua heant ju. s:.

7 pacifice poflideat sii clamio vel eon“dicéde mei alieni? vel aliquoy hereda
meoy 7 Et fi ita ptingat q ego ut aliq's heredi meoy cont* ifta refignagbem
7 qeta clamaédem venire volitim? ? ut déos Abbm 7 Conuentii fup aiidéa tra
de Hauttileé ci ptindciis inq'etare voluerim’ ; volo 7 cdcedo 7 p hoe septa
me 7 heredes meos obligo + vt ante inicift litis quad“ginta libre dtis Abbi
7 Couentui p ci ut p eos inq'etanté ut inq'etantes i pecunia nuttata bonoy
ftlingoy plenarie pfoluantur ; Et ad hee omia sup‘déa fidelit’ tenéda
7 sii dolo inniolabili? obSuanda obligo me corpali Pitito sacmento 7; 7
Sbicio me 7 hiedes meos inrifdicdi cuivctiq, indicis eGiaftici ut se@laris
qué dé Abbas 7 Couétus duXint eligend q' me 7 liedes meos ad obfuacdin
dium 7 singloy Pdzoy sine strepitn indiciali qfeaq, cenfura voliiit compellat ;
Reniiciido i hiis omib3 sup*dtis p me 7 hedib3 meis omi excepédi ,
cauillaGdi_ 7 di jut ausilio canonici 7 cinilis 7 maxie regie phibicvi 7
dibs inpet*tis 7 inpet'ndis 7 oimib; 7 singlis q° m' 7 hedibs meis ot* hoe

fan potunt pdefle inpofterad 7 dtis abbi 7 Couentui obée , Et vt hee

mea refignacio 7 qteta clamacio ppetua heant firmitaté plentibs tris sigilla
met appofui » Hiis tettib3 » Bno Bernardo de Monte alto @ilite ; Bno
Wilto de Lanaré déo cfico » Bno Gregorio de Nef* qilite ; Robto de
Edinh‘n senefeallo abbis de Kelchou ; Thoma déo We ; Pet? déo de
Grenrig ; Gylmor fit Willi Gyleonel senefeallo de Lefmahag - 7 aliis -


--- Kelso1_page288.png ---
168 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Leswanace. Lia Bui Willi de Duglas Sr cart fuis a nob receptis -

201

202

Omid; has tras vifu¥ vt auditu¥ , Wils de Duglas diis de Duglas
salf in dno ; Nottitis me recepifle de duo Abbe de Kelfou eartas meaf q’s
habuit i cuttodia fua - q‘s quidé cartas supplico dno d@o Abbi ut latori
Pfent deliberct - In cui? rei teftimonia tras meas déo diio Abbi dedi
patentes ; Dat apd Glafg die yeilis i e“itino {@i Hillarii Anno dni O° ; ec?
octoges / octauo -

De fia de Polnele dno WiHo de Duglas cdcefta «

Onib; xpi fidelibs has littas vifu¥ vel anditué , H - pmiffise dia Abbas de
Kalchou 7 eiufdé loci Conuent? satm i dno se mpitnam 1 Nowit vnilifitas tira
nos cdceflifle dno Wito de Duglas qiliti tota {ri firam de Pollencl in
teneffito de Lefmahag ci ptinéciis suis ; p fideli céfilio 7 auxilio 7 pat*cinio
tenenda toto tempe vite fue libere ; q'ete ; 7 solute , Reddendo anuatim
domni de Lefiahag duas libras cere i felto sti Machuti i hyeme noie firme
7 recogniévis p oinibz que de déa fra exigi potunt sen madari - Ita q
dé Abbas 7 Conuent? pott obit déi dni - W - déam tra ci ptinenciis fuis
sii pt“diedde 7 obitaculo vel inpedim®to alicui? vt aliquoy 7 sii ftrepitu
indiciali tang” sui pp'um teneMita int*bit , 7 p libito voliitatis sue polli-
debit 7 ordinabit » Nos q°q, déam fram cf ptinéciis fuis d@o dno - W -
coad uiXit ot offis holes warantizabim’ 7 defendem? + In cui? rei tefti-
monid huie tfc'pto de originali sipto dés dns - W + de Duglaf sigilla
sui appofuit ; Dat i craftino pwificaédis be qarie virg ap’ Glafg in
plena curia intticiat ; anit ge Q)' , cc’ 7 septuag -


--- Kelso1_page289.png ---
to
S
a

204

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 169

Acta in? nos zy Wil folkard Sr teneméé de foleardti> -

3 Acta i eéa sti Jacobi de Roketburg i e“fiino ste Tnitatis » anno dni @° ,

ec? ; Nonog ; q'nto ; cord nob rtore ee de yetham comilia? Religiofi viri
dni Abbis de Duniinelyn ynici indicis seu executoris a fede aplica in? ptes
inf* sc'ptas deputati sedm forma omiflidis nob dir‘te in hac pte ; int Religiofos
viros Abbm 7 Couentii monasterij de Kelcti actores ex pte vna » 7 Wik
dém foleard rei ex alta dzis nelig , déis dic 7 loco p ffem Joh de Roketh’g
@onachii 7 pe’atoré eo legie oftituta cdpentibs » D&o q, W - pfonatr » cit
din Get altcatum in? ptes ta sup iuFdicébe fira g* Sr citagde ; demi p intdieée
fira pniiciauim? 7 iux* ofeflioné dei W - p citacdé afidtam ? petiit peator
dcoy reli# tenementii de folearditon noie dnoy suoy 7 sui conatt i andéi
tang® male alienatii a d@o monaftio » q°d q'dé tenementi dés W - tenebat -
7 diu tenuit i Bindicid d&oy relig 7 onattij afidéi ad ins 7 ppretaté dci
@o'ttij reduci » 7 d&im W - p nos ad he sitiatr odépnari » Dés q, Wills
peticom dei pe’atoris lite oteftando negau’ Ge vera » Nos volentes ordiem
in¥ obfuare ? a déo pe’atore de Vitate dicéda recepimus inraméti ; dés W -
vt dém iuraméti pitaret a nob sepi? req'fit? illad i indigo pliare exprefle
reeufauit - Nos ad ouincenda ci? malicia lie; durioré con* ea potuitiem®
de iure {ecitle peetlti ; ipm citauim? ut cdperet cora nob vt pmitla¥ iris vno
ut pluribs eni ut q'b intée ptiZit - i eGa sti Jacobi afidéa die Lune px

p’ feltti sti Barnabe apli anno sup*déo ; ad iurandi i déa ta 7 ad peedent

«

7 recipiend vitins sedm q exigit ordo inris -

Carta Re& Roberti sr deeé mareis ad Lumen fei Wachuti conceflis -

Vnitifs xpi fidelib3 hane carta vifuf ut auditu® , Robt? dei gia Rex Scott
. Ean eee Oo ae .
satm i dno , Nouit vniutitas tra me caritatis intuitu 7 p salute aie mee ; 7
Xx

Lesanaav.

fol. 84.


--- Kelso1_page290.png ---
Havoene.

205

170 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

aiay. Bdecetioy meoy 7 sucectloy + dedifle ; cdcefiiffe 7 hac plenti carta mea
oftmatie Deo 7 Be Marie v'g’ ; 7 sto A)achuto ac soonach ap* Lefmahag do
Suientibs 7 inppetua Suituk ; ad ‘minare eca Tumba sti Qaehuti ppetuo
fuftinend’i decé carcas ftlingoy annui reddit? de redditiby molendinoy
meorti de Qaldifley , lias 7 qetas ab omibs exacévibs 7 demandis i
libam , pura , 7 ppetua clemoiam ; Tenend 7 habend déis @onachis 7
fuceetforib; fuis inppetut ad huminare fup*dém ; ita libe , qete ; 7 pacifice ;
sict aliq” elemoia i regno Scocie libius ; q'ecius ; 7 pacificenci? a q'bzciiy,
religiofis tenet? 7 poflidet® ; Soluend cifdem religiofis vt coy attornato

vi

singlis annis inf* villa de Lanaré p man? vicecomitis firt ei’dem q' p ea

{Git ad duos anni fminof vids q'nq marcas ad fettu Pentecoft> ias

q'ng, Marcas ad feftii sti

Martini i hyeme ;
aliq‘li ; In cui? rei teftimoi pfentem carta
ri» Hiis teft> -

ine cont'dicébe vt strepitu
igilli mei munimine feci robo~

Y . a ~o. oo
Carta Bernardi de handen Sr vna carué tre i villa Hand -

Oiribs tee at's ede filiis 7 fideliby » Bernard? de handen fat» Nota
sit dibs ta poftis q* plentib; me cdceflifle » 7 hac carta cdfirmatte ecctie t%c
Warie de Kelch 7 conachis ibidé deo Suientibs wna carucata tre q’m hint

juilla de hauden , 7 huerit afiq® ego ut Bernard’ auuncts mens pdéam villa

hrem?- in ppetua elemofina p eafdé dinifas p q"s ed habucriit aiig* ego ut
bernardus auuncts me? ad hauden venirem? ; 7 ci dibs aifiamétis if* dinifas
ipius earucate fre - Conceffi F eis 7 hac carta mea céfirmaui ex donaéde
Bernardi auunt

a q‘nda toftd in ppetua elemofina i Pfata villa mea de
handen inx* pdéam tra illoy ti magna q’m q'lib3 ali? in pnoiata villa habet ;
7 ho q! ill tofta de monachis tenebit # liber er‘ ab di Suito ; 7 ab di auxilio ;
7 ab Oi alia ofuetudine , 7 hebit dia aifiaiita uille de handen sic* aliq's alius

; eG ena 5 + A
meli? 7 pleni? i Pdéa villa tuerit sedm fm tenure 7 im p%cunie - Concefli


--- Kelso1_page291.png ---
206

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 171

F cis 7 hae earta oftmani ex donade pdei nardi anunculi mei dece acras
tre i tritorio de hauden ex occidentali pte ei*dé nille » Concefli 7 eis ex alia
pte uille tra ill q° eft ex ut", pte uie q? uadit ad cara ptigua tre eoy int
blindewelle ; 7 aliti font q*  inx* acra q' dv eroe + wig, i diuifas Hoy i lidam
7 ppetud clemoii - Has aut tras gcefli eis p salute dni mei Reg Wiki 7
p falute aie mee 7 uxoris mee 7 aficetloy 7 succetioy meoy ; ita lihe , 7 qete;
hnda 7 ppetuo poflidenda # fict aliq‘m alia elemoia i regno Scotoy lihius 7
qeei? hint 7 poflidét ; Hiis teft? ; Sym Archid ; R~ Abbe de Waily - W.
prore de Carri - H + eapHo clico Reg ; Jolie deeano ; Jolie de hunted -
Wilt p* de Liftun -

eae ~ O45
Tim dés Bernard? $r octo acts 7 vna roda tre i Hauden -

Vnitifis fee aris cectie filiis 7 fidelibs ¢ bernard? de handene ; salt - Sciat

Hacpest

me dedifie 7 gceflitle 7 hae carta mea of'matte ecctic ste Warie de Kelch jor s5.

7 monach ibide deo Suientib; i pura 7 ppetna elemofina octo acras ‘tre 7
yna rodai tritorio uille mee de handene ptiguas ‘tre ifoy @onachoy qm
fint in ipa uilla mea de handene « pte orientali p eafdd dinifas q's ego ipe
plente Ganfredo eellerario de Kelch ¢ 7 aliis? eis affignaui Hane 4 elemoia
dedi 7 peelli pdt ecctie de Keleh 7 ei’dé loci {Fibs inppetuii_p falute dni
mei Reg Scott ; 7 oitium aitectivy 7 suecelioy suoy ; 7 p falute aie mee; 7
di aficctloy 7 suecefloy meoy / vt ipi @onachi Pdéam clemoia adeo lihe
qete ; honorifiee inppetuit heant 7 poflideat  sict aliq*m alia clemofina i
Regno Scott liberi? ; q'eei? ; 7 honorificenci? int 7 poflidét ; 1pi n° monachi
gcollerat m' 7 hedibs meis 7 familie mee inppetud capella i curia mea 7
Suicidi scdm tenoré cyrog“fti qd Sr hoe int me 9 int @onachos fem eft » Hiis
teft? , Sym Arehid - Hug capHo ; wagro Wilt de Hales ; wmagro Rog de
Richemid ; Johe Decano de Rokefbur ; Jotie de Huntenduy ; Rolto

capHo ; 7 aliis -


--- Kelso1_page292.png ---
Senovistuxe.

207

208

172 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Comnéeio i? nos et diim Euttachia vefey 3r eaplla hnda i

de Sproufir -

Nota fit oimib; vifuris ut auditu? has tras ; q anno qillefio ; ce? 7 vij? 7
ij aii cena dni, Ita ouenit int R. ADbm 7 Couenti de Kelehou ;
7 dim Evfiachiti de Vet

ad petiédem Bni Reg Sr capella q’m petebat
hire i curia sua ap" Sprouyften / seit; q pdés Abbas 7 Couent? ocefieriit ei
7 vxori sue filie Regis 7 hedibg suif de ea s’eeptis Capella i curia sua 7 ibi
audire diuina ea ibi venint ,» Ita in q fatdof q ibi eclebrab' fidelitatem
Pitabit Pdeis abbi 7 Couentui ? q @at'x ecctia de Sp%uefton i fillo ledetur
p capella ila p anni ad valencia q"tuor denarioy ; CapHs u° qat'cis eectie
peipiet omes oblagies Suientiii dni Evitachij 7 pochianoy ili? pochic siuc
diis ibi fGit sine nd, Ex" hiis q' ppte sit de curia dni Euftachij vt de curia
ane ; Et ex" hofpitibs Sruenientibs q“diu diis ut dna ibi fuerint ; ext eos
qi refidencia Tnit i ipa pochia de Sprouefton ; q°y oblages peipict satdof
qatteis cectic » Si aut placttit dno FEyftachio ibi aliqué eapelland annui
oftituere candé pitabit fidelitate q i Allo wat'x ecta de Sprouefion ledet? ;
Ca diis vt dna filint abfentes ? si qui hofpites supnetiint ; eoy blades
ecdent oio i vis @at'cis eectie » Hiis tefi ; Duo R + Qorauien$ Epo ;
Lambto capHto  Edwardo capo ; Jotic de Waxwel tiie vicecom ; B’nardo
de Haudene ; Wilt fit Rogi ; Eudone de Kelkou [Aerleolo 2]; ei multis
aliis -

Carta Euftachij de Vefey « de viginti solid in molendino de Sprouiftoy -

Vnitlfis ste cat's cectic filiis 7 fidelibs ; Evfiachi? de vefey etna i dno
salt - Notlint omis pfontes 7 fut’i me dediffe 7 cdceflifle 7 hac Pfenti carta
mea ofirmatie Deo 7 eectie ste Q)arie de Kelchou ; 7 monach ibidé deo
Suientibs i libam / 7 pura 7 ppetua elemoian viginti solid annuati i olen-


--- Kelso1_page293.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 173

dino de Sprouefton peipiendos de co q' molendini: ifm tenflit ad luminare srnovistese.
pfate ecctic de Kelch , s + ad duos tmios medictaté ad pentecoft> 7 alia ;
medictaté ad feftt sGi martini » Et h° p detis ipius molédini de Sp*nefton ;
Et reeepunt me 7 vxoré mea 7 fiedes meos ; 7 omes aiiceflores 7 snceciores
meos i ffnitaté 7 socictaté Kalchoon3 e&e 7 abfoltunt alam pris mei 7
firis mee ; 7 aias aficefioy 7 succefioy meoy / 7 pticipes feunt sium bonoy
sfualia q° itt 7 fient in monaftio de Kelchou inppetui » Q're volo ut pfati
qonachi heant 7 poflideant Pdéam clemofina inppetud ita lide 7 qete sic!
alig’m clemofina alia i Regno Scocie libins 7 q'eci? tendt 7 poflidét - Hiis
tefte » Jofie de Wacch’wet tic viceco » B’nardo de Handefi  Evdone de
Kerleolo ; Wit fit Rofij » Edwardo capHo dni Epi de sto Andé ; Pat'cio
cfico de Home ; Wal®o de Haliburtoit ; 7 Oltis aliis «

Corn az Euftachij sr QF firis i Sprouiftone -

209 Onid; ste mat's ccetie filiis 7 fidelib3 ta pientibs q® futtis has tras vifut fol. 86.
vi anditu® ; Eviiachi? de Vetcy salt , Sciatis me pceflifie 7 hac carta mea
pfirmatte deo 7 ecctic ste Qjarie de Keleh 7 monachis ibidé deo Suientib;
omes tras / poliefliones ; iura , 7 libtates / ta i cectiis qi aliis q° tenet

i tra mea ; Tenend 7 poffidend i libam 7 ppetua clemofina p diuifas nofatas
i cartis donatoy ita libe ; q'ete  plenarie ; 7 honorifice sict Fonabiles carte
donatoy teftant? 7 pfmant ; 7 sict alias clemofinas fuas libius qreei? 7
pleni? ; 7 honorificenci? tenét 7 poflidét . Hiis teft? , Comite Pat'cio ;
Ingelram de Baillol ; P ~ fit Comit ; Ingelraih de Vlecot* ; Ivoii de Car-
leol » WiHo de T’beruill tae sefi - Reginald de Capetot ; Rofito de Line ;
Pet? de Valofi ; Rit de Vefey f¥e dui ; 7 aliis -


--- Kelso1_page294.png ---
Haupene.

210

211

174 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Carta Margarete de Vefcy - Sr d?is vigit’ solid -

Onribs ste Gris ecctic filiis 7 fidelibs vifuF ut auditu¥ has tras ; Qargarita
de veley filia Re& Scott cina i dno salt , Notlint omes tam plentes gq’ fatii
‘¢ Marie

me deditie / 7 oceflifte 7 hac plenti carta mea pf*matle deo 7 ecetie s
de Keleh » 7 oonach ibide do Suientibs i libam 7 pura , 7 ppetud elemofina
viginti solid argéti annnati i molédino meo de Sproucfton peipiendos de eo
q' molendina ifm tentlit ad Inminare plate ce&€e de Kelch ; ad duos tminos ;
medictaté ad pentecoft* ; 7 alia medictaté ad fefta sti Martini ; 7 h° p deéis
ipius molendini de Sprouefton ; Ipi v? monachi recepunt me 7 dim mei
9 fiedes meos , 7 ofis aiicctlores 7 succetlores meos i ffnitaté 7 societaté
Kalchoens eé€e 7 pticipes febunt did bono» {pitualid q° fiat ut fient i ipa

e@a KalchoenS inppetnit + Q"re volo ut plati cotchi heant 7 poflideat

pdtam clemofind inppetnii ita libe y 7 q'ete sict aliq“m alia elemofina i regno
Scot? libins 7 qeei? tenct 7 poflidet » Hiis tefte Dno Bricio Qorauiens epo ;
Heng 7 Alexandg fiib3 ei? » Dno Evliachio de Vefey dno meo ; Johe
de Wachufwel tiie vieceom ; Bernard de Haudefi ; Evdone de Karleot 7

aliis «

Finalis ocordia it nos 7 Bernard de Haudene -

Hee eft finalis edcordia de omibs q'relis que facrat in? Abbm 7 Comuentii
Calkoenfé ; 7 B?nardi de Handeii ; 7 int cos ita fea  q Abbas 7 Conuent?
ocellerat ipi B+ 7 hedibs suif tre capella i curia sua 7 Suicit suit salna
indépnitate Gricis cectie i omibs ita q ipe + B+ 7 hedes sui 7 familia sna
7 hofpites fui toto anno andiant Suiciti sud i ipa capella pt tm tres dies
euilibs anni +s + die Natinitat? dni 7 die Pafehe - 7 dic sti Wiehact ; 7 illis
ths dieb3 venict ifie 7 fiedes fui 7 familia sua ad @at'eé cectiam de Spron-


--- Kelso1_page295.png ---
1

ww

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 175

efton ad andiend ibi Suiciti fui , Alij aué hoies de Haudeit a Grice cectia Hycvesn.
dia spitualia recipiét » 7 ibi Suicii sui toto ano audient - Ife a- B. 7
fiedes fui inueniét eapHin capelle sue 7 dia necia captto 7 capelle minift* bat
de suo abfiy di expefa Abbis 7 Couent? ; 7 Gricis eee ; 7 qeiiq, capHs cide
capelle Suierit ? aiig*i ea Suiat fidelitaté faciat ADbi de Keleh , 7 Grici ceclie ;
7 iurabit q offs obuendies 7 obla@es ipi? capelle Grici cectie reftituet ,
7 ipe b+ fidetr pmifit p se 7 ficdibs fuis q n° ipe n° heredes sui aliq'd
machinabunt® p q°d aliq'd dampni yt diminucionis pueniet ecctie Kalch
ul @rici ecetie occafione pdte capelle ; Q‘ndo u° pac @bachi hane capella
ei geetlerit / ipe + b - ituitn earitatis 7 ffnitatis dom? de Kalch habende
dedit cis - viij?- acras 7 vna roda tre in libam 7 ppetua clemofina pe tras
q's ipi oonachi p'us huerit in hauden - 7 illa tra ofirmauit cectie de Kalch -
tre i hauden ci omibs libtatibs fuis - 7 exitd

7 céceflit ut heant {ua carucata
ad pafena p candé tra. 7 ea utant? sed eartas fuas ita q n° ipe n* heredes

sui n® hoies fui pturbabit eis libtates fuas - n® utent? paftura ipins carucate sol $7.
tre abfq, voliitate ipoy ; Coceflit 4 eis decima molendini sui ppetuo + Ipi

w° relaxauerat cid» b+ 7 hedibs suis eomuna patture q“m petebant i pafi?a

de hauden rée ecctie de Sproueti> + Hiis teft- ; Symoi Archid. R + Abbe

de Mailros ; W + Pore de Carra- H- capo clico Reg - Johe de huntedui ;

W - p‘de ibtun «

Ps a wt oe Oe
w argareta vxor cuftachij de vesey &r libertat - firis ifra tra fuam -

Omnib; ste Gris ceetic filiis 7 fidelibs ta pfentibs q® fat’is vitut ut auditur
has tras Qargareta filia dni Re& Scocie vxor Evitachi de Vefey salt -
Sciatis me oceflifle 7 hac carta mca céfirmafle Deo 7 eectie ste Marie de
Kelch 7 monachis ibidé Suientib; - offs Pras pofieflices ; paft’as , iura ,
7 liftates + ta i ecetiis q%i aliis que tendt i fra mea ; Tenéda 7 poflidéda i
lifam 7 ppetua clemofinad p diuifas noiatas i cartis donatoy italibe » atete ,


--- Kelso1_page296.png ---
Hacpene.

213

vit

176 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

plenarie ; 7 honorifice fict Fonabiles carte donatoy e0ydé tefiant® 7 cofirmat
7 sict alias clemofinas fuas liberi? ; qteei? + pleni? , 7 honorificenci? tentt 7
poflident , Hiis 'Teft- Comite Pat'eio ; Evfiach de vefey dno meo ; Ingel-
ram de Baillol - P + ft comit , Ingelrait de Viecote ; Ivoi de Carleol ;
Wilt de T’beuill tiie fenefeald » Reginald de Capetot ; 7 ltis aliis -

Bernard? de hauden Sr colendifi 7 fiagno de Reucdene - :
7 ttag

Vnitiis tte Gris ecctie filiis 7 fidelibs ta jfentibs q” futuris bernard? de
handene salé » Notlint ds ad gy noticia cpt hoe puenit me edcellitie 7

‘e Marie de Kelchou 7 monachis
ibidé deo Suientib; q'eq'd petcba de inre siue de wolendino de Reucdefi

q'eta clamaffe inppetuii deo 7 eectie

fine de fiagno ei?dé molendini ; fiue de ptidla illa prati q* iacs a boreali pte
dimidie carneate eoyd@ monachoy wl ad foflatii fem int ila dimid
carneati fre 7 tra med uly in riuulii qt fuit antiy't? fmin? in? Handene 7
Renedene - Tenend inppetuai ably, di reclamadte ut de me ul de hedibs
meis i libam , pura, 7 ppetud elemofina , ita libe , q'ete » honorifiee ; 7
plena¥ ficut ali¢‘m alia elemofina , libius , grec’ ; honorificcei? » 7 pleni?
tenent ut poflident . Hiis teft> Johe de @aceufwell fit herbti vieeeom ,
Rolsto fie ei? » Andrea Mantel , Galtio ft Gillti , 7 Gltis aliis -

Bernard? filius Brien {up vna carucata terre i villa de Handene

Onib; {te Gris ecctie filiis 7 fidelib; Bernard? fili? Brien ? salt ; Nota sit
omibs ta poftis q’m Plentib; me cécefliffe 7 hac earta of"mafle ecetie fee
Warie de Kelcho 7 monachis ibidé deo Suientib; vn carneata tre q‘m tnt
juilla de handen » 7 habueriit afiq® ego Pdéam uillam habem in ppetua

elemofina + p eafdé diuifas p quas ca habuerit afiq* ego ad handen ueniré


--- Kelso1_page297.png ---
or

LIBER DE CALCHOU. U7

ee a ree 9 oye
7 cf dib3 aifiamétis infra dinifas ipims earueate tre - Dedi 7 cis 7 hac earta
a uilla mea de handen

mea pfirmaui q'ndam tofta i ppetud clemofina in
inx* pdzam tra illoy ti magna q* q'lib3 alius i pnofata uilla fit ; 7 ho q
illa tofta de monachis tenebit : liber erit ab di Snicio 7 ab di auxilio ; 7
ab 6i alia ofuctudine ; 7 hebit dia aifiafita uille de hauden fieut aliq's alius
meli? 7 pleni? i predéa uilla habuerit fedm tm tenure 7 tm peeunie ; Hane

aut tra dedi 7 ocefli cis i ppetua clemoii p falute aie mee ; 7 p falute
pentit 7-amicoy meoy 7 p falute dni mei Re& Wiki 7 aiicefloy 7 sne-
cefloy ili? Tenend de me 7 heredibs meis libam 7 q'eta ab di pfuctudie
7 fuicio fict aliq’m alia elemofina libi
Hiis teft- ; Niehof eanceH ; Hug chico Regis , Hug de Sartis ; Wito
dolepenne ; Rogo de valoines ; Roo eapHo de golin ; vikillo de haudey -

qreei? tenét i regno Seottoy ;

Radulph? de Veyre sup vna bonat tre in villa de Sprouifiune -

Unitlis tze Gris ecctie filiis 7 fidelibz ; Rad de veir ; salt - Nottint os
ta pofti q” Plentes me dedifle 7 peefliite 7 hae Pfenti carta pf"matte ecctie
ste Warie de Kelchon 7 @onaehis ibidé deo Suientibs una bouata tre in
tritorio de Sproweftun , Tenenda de me 7 hedibs meis inppetud i libam va
ppetua clemofina - Q¢ nidelies tra ines pxio loco inx* fra q‘m dedi vmf'do
hdi meo ; Hane ati tra dedi eis p falute dni mei - W + Reg Scot 7 p
falute aie mee ; 7 p aiabs dium aiiceffoy 7 suceefloy meoy i libam 7 ppetua
elemofina ; ut eam ieant 7 poflideat ita plenarie ; libe ; 7 qete ab di Suicio
7 ofuctudie » 7 exaedve ; fient aliq’m alia clemofina libius 7 q'eci? 7 pleni?
habent 7 poflident ; Tefte Robto fe meo 7 Robito fre W + de Wynde-
fovere ; Andy eapHo de Spronefinn ; Hug capHto Red ; Otto capHo de
Kelfou ; Robt 7 Witt elicis ; Robto porta® » Helya; 7 Pat'e> Suientib3 de
Kelkou » Walto capHo de C'neftun » Hug de Reueden ; 7 aliis Sltis -

Jobe 88.


--- Kelso1_page298.png ---
178 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Q . a. 2a ~ Oo 7
Havoene. Serlo clericus Pni Reg Sr dimid carut - tre 1 Sprouifton -

216 Serlo cficus Re% Seocie 2 Omibs amicis fuis 7 oii; fidelibs ste Gris

aly

cectie salf , Sciant ta pfentes q* futuri me dediffe 7 hac carta mea ofirmatic
eectie ste Warie de Keleh ; 7 monachis ibidé deo Suientib; dimidia carucate
fre q’m tui in Sproueftun ex dono A)aleolmi Regis libe 7 qtete tenenda
faluo Suicio Regis ; s - q'bufda calearib3 deauratis finglis annis ; Hane ait
{ra dedi Pdze eectic p aia Waleolmi regis dni mei ; 7 p falute Regis « W -
dni mei , 7 p falute aie mee ; 7 aiicefloy 7 succefioy meoy ; Hiis teft- ,
Wagzro Ada ; Wito capHo de Edenha ; Sanfone eapHo ; Robto capo de
Roeafbure ; Rofito frebeF , Rofo de barneuile ; WiHo fit Robti fil
Gundonis , Wito de Tiningham -

Tim bernard? fit Brien Sr « x + ac’s fre apd haudene «

Vnitiis f%e Gris cectie filiis 7 fidelib; ; Bernard? fit brien salt - Nonint
oftis ta pofti q® Pfentes me dedifle 7 geeffiffe 7 hae pfenti carta oftmatte
e&e ste Warie de Kelchon 7 @onachis ibidé deo Snientib; ? decem acras
fre i ritorio de Handene ex oceidentali pte ci’dé uille ubi eis affignaui ,
7 ex alia pte uille tra ill q* eft ex ut pte uie q* vadit ad carri ptigua
fre coy int blindewel ; 7 alia fonté q' eft inx® acra q! dr croc ? ufq, i diuifas
illoy ficut eis cord filtis pambulaui i libam 7 ppetua clemofina ; Has aii tras
dedi 7 peefli cis p falute dni mei Regis WiHi , 7 p falute aie mee 7 uxoris
mee 7 aiicefloy 7 succefioy meoy ita libere , 7 q'cte hnda 7 ppetuo pofli-
denda # ficut alig%m alia clemofina i regno Scottoy libius 7 qeci? int 7
poflidét ; Hiis teft»  Qargareta sponfa mea ; Ada capHo ; Q)agro Ada de
Nichole ; Andg clico de Sprouefion ; Rog clico , Gilbto ppofito 1 Rogio
nepote meo ; 7 aliis «


--- Kelso1_page299.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 179

Hugo de Reneden &r qd pte tre afid Reuedene - Revenone

218 Oni; hoe se'pti vifu¥ vi anditué , Johes fit hngonis de Reuedene
salf , Nowitis me i curia dni ADbis 7 Conent? de Kelchou apd ponté
de Eteriz p me 7 hedibs meis q'eta clamatfe 7 refignaffe p tuftii 7 baculit
dis abbi 7 couentui q‘mda ptem fre in fritorio de Reuedene q° voeat?

Floris tang* dominiei fui tottatr si aliq? reteneméto » Q'm q'dem fram -

ego 7 aficeflores mei con" iufticia 7 déoy abbis 7 Couent? voluntaté din
tenuim? 7 poflidem? ; Hec adta sit Anno gte @ ; ce? ; P ; viij® + die
Lume px* poft feftii sti Bartholomei apli « loco 7 curia fup"dzis « In eui?
rei teftimonid huie sc'pto sigillu mei appofni . Hiis tele » Duis Thoma
de Gordun ; Aylmero de handene @ilitib3 ; Alex® viceeomi de Selekirke ,
Wagro Hugofi de Bernby ; Robto fit Alani de Edenham 7 aliis -

_ - On + Qeeout ~ aan
Ti aes hugo &r totam tra suam i tritorio de Reuedene 7 afd Home similit -

219 Vnillis {te Gris ecetie filiis 7 fidelibs ad q’s pentes tre pueilint «
Hugo de Reuedene fit 7 heres Johis filij Hugoii de Reuedene falé i dno ;
Notlitis me Idus caij Anno gfe w” ; ce® octogeS q'nto i plena curia
dni Ricardi di ga abbis de Kelchou apd Reuedene ; tota ra q'm ego
7 afieeflores mei ta i fritoriis dée ville de Reuedene q’ de Home aliq?
tempe huim? # dnis meis Abbi 7 Couentui de Kelchou p me 7 hedibs,
meis p fufti 7 baculi furfi reddidiffe p quada siima peeunie q‘m idem
dni me m* i mea magna neceflitate pfolucrit , 7 si qd iuris ut clamei
ego 7 fiedes mei i aliq* ‘tra fritorioy de Reneden vt de Home tuim? vt
hre potuimns , illi iuri 7 clameo spontanea voliitate mea expresse reniicio
7 totii illud ins Pdeis dnis meis Abbi 7 Couentui de Kalchon p me 7
hedibs meis inppetuii clamo q'etii ; Volo 7 q si aliq’d inftrumentii vt

fol. 89.


--- Kelso1_page300.png ---
Haupnxe.

221

180 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

carta futuris tempib3 inueniat® ; q°d vt que m 7 fledibs meis in dis
tenemétis de Reuedene aut de Home alig'd inris att'buere videat? ; illud
inftrumenti ut carta dllius sit momenti 7 vacua feu vacua 7 virib3 careat ;
Salua ti mt carta q’ad varancia dimid carueate tre de Home die pfecddis
Plent ocefla 7 tdita » In cui? rei teftimonid Pfentibs sigilla mea appofui ,
7 q~ sigilla mei min’ eft nota: figilla dni hugoi de perythi tite vicecoM de
Rokifburg ; 7 Alexand' de Maxftofi tic Conftabula¥ ci%d vna ci sigillo meo
plentibs apponi peuraui ; Hiis tefie » Pno Radulph de hauden qilite ;
Bmo Rogo viea¥ de Sprouefton ; Pet? de kokeburne ; Walto aurifab?
burgen$ de Rokefburg ; Johe clico déo de Qalearuifton 7 aliis -

Ti Refignat dei hugoit Sr déa tra p vicet de Roxb -

Nobilibs viris 7 diferctis ; Bno H - de Perithy vicecoti de Rokefburch
7 Alex? déo de Qaxftoi conftabula¥ ci®dt loci » Hugo de Reuedeii fit
7 heres Johis de Reneden faim i saluatore dium ; Difetioné fram di qua
poffi Peat infiancia duxi exorand , q‘tin’ put i pfencia tra oftitut? i caft? de
Rokitburg alias vos rogaui ? tre refignaddis mee sup tra de Reuedene int
me ex vna pte 7 Abbm 7 Conuctii de Kalch ex alta sigilla fra appoile
velitis p meis Peibs 7 amore ; In evi? rei teftimonia has tras patentes
vob duxi deftinadas - Dat ap* Reuedene - Idus marcij ; Anno gfe m° ;

ec? » octo® + q'nto +
Refignae + W.- glafenens decani $r . x - maré - 7 det de Lagt- -
Viris veitabili 3 dnis ac amicis Kmis - H - di gfa abbi de Kelch 7 ei%dé loci

Conuentui ; W - Glafg eé¢e decan® ; salé ; 7 pati ad biiplacita voluntate
omer, = a a ae [Paltinte &
ci di retencia 7 honore - Annui redditii « x - marcay qué ex libalitate Fra


--- Kelso1_page301.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 1st

peipio ; 7 f'ma decimay de Langton qua a vob tenco vna cit inft*mentis Cass
eaydé donadis 7 firme tre donaédi refigno ; In eni? rei teftimonia Pfentibs

tris figilli mei appofui ; Dai ap" Glafg die sti A)ich Anno gfe ; m° ,

ec? » feptuages p'mo -

Carta Waldoueni Comitis de Lefmax sr ecelefia de Kamfy cit fuis libta-
tibus -

222 Oimib ste Gris ecctie filiis Plentibs 7 futuris has tras vifu vt auditui ;
Waldoneni Comes de Lefnax sali » Notit vnitfitas tra me dinine pietatis
intuitu dedifle 7 céceflifle 7 hac carta mea pfirmafle deo 7 ecctic ste Maric de
Kelchon / 7 onachis ibidé Snientibs p aia mea 7 dium aficefloy 7 suecelfoy
meoy Eectiam de Camfy eG oiib3 ptinenciis 7 libtatibs fuis - In libam ,
pura 7 ppetnd clemolina « ita libe 7 qete ficut aliq's pat®nus laicus i
regno Scocie aliq‘m ecctiam i elemotina libius 7 pleni? viris religiofis dare
poteft 7 cofirmare , 7 sicut i carta Comitis Danid ; 7 pfirma@dibus dni Wiki
Illufi's Regis Scocie ; 7 bone memorie Jocelini q°nda Glafz epi pleni?
otinet? , Ad hui? rei ppetna fee"itaté pfenti se'pto , sigilli mei appofui ,
Hiis teft? » Walto Sencfealdo dni Regis ; Gallepradhe ; Q)aleolmo begge
senefealdo meo ; Symone fit Symon ; Gillecrifi* ; 7 hafeway ffib3 dni
Comité , Gilbto Judice » Dufne caiilario meo 1-7 Oultis aliis «

Tn? nos 7 Wagim 7 fies tépli Jerti i Seot sr ea de Cult -

7 oe ~ oe ;
223 Qemorand q ea cora de Jeddeword 7 de sta cruce Wonaftioy Abdbib;
1 ac demi cora Sbptore 7

Judicibs a sede aplica delegat 7 coy commi
sac{ta de Dryburch coyd comifla¥ tottatr 7 i solidi fuillz queftio alig*diu agi-
tata int viros religiofos abbm 7 Concutit monaftij de Kalch actores ex pte


--- Kelso1_page302.png ---
182 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Corre. vna, 7 @agim ; 7 ffes @ilicie templi Jertitani i Seod reos ex alfa fup capella
dom? Templi ecetie de Cultir Abirdoi dyot q’m déi Abbas 7 Couent? de
Kalch i pochia de Cultyr Abirdofi dyot q‘m se i vfus pp'os candice optifte fol. 90.
dicebat de novo oftruéta ec aflerentes anc'te cui’da puilegij 7 yt nHs i pochiis
eceliay q's i pp'os vfus optinét eectiam uf capella Pe coy affenfa de novo
edificare valeat s* a felicis recordacionis p*p vrbano q‘rto indulti deni pecierit
fentenciatr fore dirruenda ; n‘ nd fup dezis maiorib3 7 minorib; ac obuen-
Gib; dimodis puenientib; ta de tris 7 culturis pptis eoydé wagri 7 frum
q* de aliis bonis fuis omibg infra déam ‘tra sua de Cultir exiftentibg ; q's iidé
Abbas 7 Couent? ad déam eectia pochialé de Cultir sp‘tare 7 a agro 7 fiibs
pdéis occupatas 7 iniufte detentas ec afferentes s' note de ecctie pochiat de
Cul reftitui pecieriit ; 7 ipos @agtm 7 fies ad eax reftituéem sentenciatr
odépnari 7 cpelli ? exhibueriit @agr 7 fFes Pai queda p*uilegia fedif aplice
ex q°y infp*cione cdttare videbat® fFibs fui ordinis geitalit ge indulta ab antiq?
4 libi sint 7 exempti a pitace deciay ti de tris fuis qs ad cult?am deduxerat
vt deduciit ¢ q” de tris illis q‘

pp'is manib3 a

siiptib; excolit ; n° nd de
ortis ; virgultis ; molendii ; p*tis 7 7 pifcariis fuis ac aialiai fuoy nut'mentis ;

qedg, lie

cide ordis {Fibs i tris deftis st pia deuo@e collatis ecctias seu
capellas 7 cimitia p se 7 hdibs fuis ibidm manétib; i tris ant cult’is st iufto
titulo collocatis p fe ac familia fua 7 t‘nfeuntib3 fab'eare ; pponédo fe hui’
modi puilegioy auctate d@am capella libam pleno iare ap" domi sua de Cult
ci cimitio 7 baptiftio ei’dé , n° né decias 7 obuenédes dimodas de ortis
virgultis ; molendifi ; p'ti

1 pilea® ; 7 cult’is pptis ; ac F aialid suoy
nut'mentis ; né nd de tris fuif + s - de Tulifchezirt 7 Blaris s' de torefta
Regis di deferte filant 7 inculte collatis q‘d“ginta annis 7 amplius pacifice
potteditle ? Ppofneriit 7 q snis hoib3 i aliis tris fuis « s - kincolfi ; Esttully ;
z de vt“q, Deliburry manétibs ; q°s tempatr fonere tenent? 7 tueri ; fepultura
cectiaftiea baptifina 7 alia sac“menta edtiaftica infian? petentibs ea egerct
negare nd potant n° debebant - Tum qr iidem hoief ¥ volentes ad
tam ecctia pochialé de Cult t'nf flumen g'nde fita venire pp? magni-



--- Kelso1_page303.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 183

tudiné ill? fluminis inte*rentis pontem ut poncion® nd fintis praro aeecde
poflit 7 potfunt ab antiq? ; ppt q?°d ta corpmm g* animay hoium ipoy
templi tras pdtas

frequés pictm hacten? iminebat - Tum 7 qv ipi f
i quibg iidé hoies cdmorant’ pp'is suis fiptib3 7 laborib3 ad cultura phnit?
redegeriit + ppt q°d sedm tenoré pruilegioy Pdtoy lie dieebant cis decias
7 e@iafticas obuendes dimodas Tray ipay utpote incultay fen defertay
lihe suif vfibg applicare - Tandé ut omis matia Gonis fup Pmifiis int ptes
pdéas inppetui tollerct? « antoritate Sbp'oris 7 sac'te de Dryburch comitla¥
fup*dtoy intudient - ptes pdée fup pmiflis amicabitr copofneriit i hie moda -
Videlic3 q magi? 7 fies Pdéi capella sua Pdzam pleno inre liham heant

. ah oe oe ope ~
inppetuii ci eimitio 7 baptiftio ei’dé p se 7 familia sua 7 t'nfenntibs ac # Pp

hdibs p tempe manentibs i tris fuis Pddis s' de forefta Regis déo m? collatis
5 p temp i is 1

n° no decias 7 obnenéd

dimodas ta de pp's cult*is ; molendiii ; pifea® ; p tis

‘tris st

7 aialia suoy nut'mentis , ac aliis bonis pptis suis omib; q* de pada
de forefta Regis collatis ; 7 hoinad i cifde Pris p tempe maneneii libe 7
q'ete Heant 7 peipiant inppetud sedm tenor? p'uilegioy snoy Jus F pochiat
7 deciay 7 obnéZonii » q°d 7 y‘le dém conaftiai de Kalchon 7 cide
loci Abbas 7 Coucnt? tueriit ut fre potit i aliis tris agri 7 fFum pdioy
sctt de Kincolfy , Efttully ; 7 de vt'q, Dulybuiry apptabat 7 edfolidabit
iidem cagr 7 {Fes Pdée eapelle sue inppetud ppt cas supi? aflig’s 7 ide

rij ppetui pochiat e&%e de

ins adeo lifa sict ipam capella saluo inre vie
Cultyr hebat 7 tencbit inppetuii » Reddendo conattio Pde de Kalchou
annuati p recdpenface fruetuii 7 pnentuit q’s Idm qonattia de tris
Pdis Kineolfy ; Efftully ; de ve'q, Duliburry 7 hdibs habitantib; 1 cifde
noie deciay 7 obuentonii peipe pfueuit ; octo warcas 7 dimid ftlingoy
annuas i domo Templi de Blantrodoc ad fefti sti Jacobi cui%libs anni ,
‘T’mino p'me soluédis incipiente i fefto sti Jacobi apli anni dni «* ect ;
Ixxx™ + octani - Et ut d@a cépofito rata 7 f'ma 7 inoeutla inppetui
pmaneat + ptes Pd&e se ad ipi? cépofi@is obfuagm ta inrafito corpalit
pitito g* legia ftiptoe obligarit ; 7 nichilomin? p ftiptdm legiam s* inuied

Cuttre,

fol. 91


--- Kelso1_page304.png ---
Center.

Ist LIBER DE CALCHOU.

altnati foltve pmiferat intée tociéf con® pte déam cépofigm nd Suanté
comittend 7 [p] pté cdpofigm ifam fidelit obfuanté exigend ? q°ciens pté
altutra con” cdpofigsm Pdzam i aliq? venire fen con* ed p*va wachinag&e
qeqd attéptare ptigit ; Rata nichomin? manéte i omib3 edpofige sup
dea ; Adiciétes 7 spali? cdcedentes q hui’modi intée q*eiéf comiflt fit
pbet’ solo sacméto pe’atoris ptis feped@am cSpofigm obfuantis ; Et ad
maioré hui? cdpofiGis sec’itate ptes pnotate reniicialiit i hac pte p fe 7
snecetloribs {uis inppetua excepéi doli 7 1 ftm codiGi ex lege 7 sii Ga ut
ininfia Ga ; biificio reftitudis i integra 7 nonay pftituto’ ; tris ¥ aplicis sup
bonis alienatis 7 diftractis ; n° nd g'tiis , indulgéciis , 7 p'uilegiis con®
copofidim Penté ab cadé sede optétis 7 optingdis ; ac di acei 7 excepédi ;
ofuetudini ; 7 ftatuto n° no Gi cauillagéi 7 inpignaedi ; ac dibs auxiliis ; 7
remediis ti iuris q* féi q'b3 d@a cépofito 7 ci? effectus poffent inftmari vt
ari seu inpediri ut diffri » Ad hee paei Abbas 7 Couent? vna cit
pdtis coagro 7 ffib3 peurabat 7 faciet q“ten? i cis
Abirdonen’ sup"d@am cdpofiim p fe 7 sue

impi

eft supplicando ; q eps

florib; fuis ratificabit 7 appro-
babit - 7 q Decan’ 7 capilm Abirdonen’ sup"déis ratificaGi 7 approbadi
ofirmatoria ofenfi pfiabat - In cui? rei teftimonia pti hui? infi*menti
cyrog*phati biptiti penes déos magtm 7 ffes refidéti ; Sigilla comune
conattj de Kalchou , 7 sigilla Pdoy subp'oris 7 sacrifie comillaF sit
appenfa + pti u® penes dém conaftié de Kalchou refidenti + appenta
i dom? Templi } Scocia » 7 comune sigilli Templi Anglie 7
cdmillarioy fup"dzoy + Dat ap' Laweder die wartis px" poft fefta dium
stoy , Anno dni @° ; ce’ ; Ixxx"° 7 septimo +

siit sigilla a:

Cofirt . Gilfti Aberdenés* - epi fup cectia de Culitre -

Vnitlis sto Gris eectie filiis 7 fidelibs ta plentibs q® futris Gilbtus
pmifiice diuina Eéée Aberd coinif? humit etna i dno sali. Vnilftati tre


--- Kelso1_page305.png ---
19

ot

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 185

nota facim® nos dediffe 7 cdecefliffe 7 hac carta fra ofirmatie ecctie tte
Warie de Kelchou 7 monachis ibidé deo Suientib; 7 Suituris Eectiam de
Cultre - cit tris ; decimis , obuécionib; » 7 oblagdibg , 7 dib3 aliis ad ipam
ecclefia iufte ptinentib; ; Tenenda 7 habend i libam 7 pura / 7 ppetua
elemofina , adeo life , qrete ; plenarie ; 7 honorifice ; sict aliq* eectia ab
aliq'b3 viris religiofis i tota dyocefi fira - Libins ; Qteci? ; Pleni? 7 Honori-
fieéei? tenet? 7 poflidet® - Coceflim? F eif Pfata ecctiam i vfus pptos olite /
Saluis epalibs , 7 falua vicaria » Hiis Teft- ; Bno Walcolit archid ; magro
Alex’ Decano ; wagro WiHo thefaurat ; agro Robto de Leicettre
dno Jurdaii capHo firo ; Bno Edward canofi » Symofi de Stuet ; 7 Bltis
aliis -

Qa ecctia de Cultre fit nob in pprios viuf -

In noie pris 7 filii 7 spt? sti Af - Nos A - cancellari? Qoranie ; KR -
thefaura¥ ; 7 magr Jotis de Ellley eanonici Dulkendens i ca de Benkori-
tarni oftituti anno gfe mM’; cc? / qing’ges ; die w’curii px" p? felt sti Pet
aduin@la  pfentibz pe’atoribs abbis 7 couent? de Kaleh ; oandato apilico ; 7
inftrumentis coy q° tnt sup ecectiam de Cultu®# i Epatu Abirdoi dilign?
soliciteq, infpectis ; hito p"denti viroy 7 inrispitoy ofilio evident ppendim?
Pdéam eéam filo iure st &e penfionarid s3 i vf? pp'os candice deputata ;
vnde auc“te aplica nob i hae pte edmifld

+ inhibi@&m_ q'm fecit vellabit pr

Cverer

Eps Abirdefi vicario fuo de Cultut 7 pochianis ei°dé eectie de redditu fuo jo. 91.

7 firma eis nd soluend fentenciali? penit? renocam? , refuata nob poteftate
cohercendi pt*déores 7 rebelles si qui flint inpoftum .



--- Kelso1_page306.png ---
186 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

cawsr. Carta Sr Ecctias de Camfy 7 de Altercunyii ci Pris 7 detis i Lewenas +

226 Vnilifis fe Gris ecctie fillis - DD - fF Regis Scott falé ,; Sciant plentes 7
futuri me p? decefli fly Radulphi de Cafia i libam 7 ppetua clemofina p
aiab3 omium aficelfoy mcoy / 7 p falute Willi Regis ffis mei 7 mea dediife
7 edceflifle ; 7 hac mea carta ofirmaffe ; Ecctie fe Warie de Keleh ; 7
ponachis ibidé deo Snientib; Ecclefiam de Camfy 7 eectiam de Alfmunin

in Lenenas ; ca tris ; 7 decimis ; 7 oiiib3 aliis r‘titudinibs ad eafdé ecetias

iufte ptinentib; ; QF uolo ut ipi Bnoiatas ecctias ita libe 7 qete ; plenat 7
honorifice teneat 7 poflideant ; ficut ipi alias cectias fuas in regno Reg ffis
mei lifins » q'eci? ; 7 honorificenci’ tenent 7 poflident , Tefie Hug Giff ,
WiHo fil Ete , Robto de Kernct , Wit de sto wich ; Witlo de Morten 1
bernard fit brien » Walto Giff ; ap' Rokefburg -

x a 5 , On een
Ceizex. Sup admiflioné Alani de Solt* capi ad viearia ecctie fire de Culter -

227 Radulfus mifacve dia Aberdenen$ Ept , Omibs pfens sc'pti infpediu® 7
audituris e€na in dno salt , Noflit vnitllitas tira nos ad Plentagm ADbis 7
q@onachoy de Kalch aditiffe Alani de Soletre capHm ad viearia ecctie fue
de Culter ; cifdé ADbi 7 cmonach in pp'os ufus edfirmate + Q’re volum? vt
dts - A - vica¥ nob de cura animay 7 de fpualibs refpddeat 7 déis Abbi 7
@onach de tempalib; ; scit; de decé 7 octo marcis Gnuis in suo ppetuo p
decimis garbay q's de cis ad firma tenet ; satiffaciat In cui? rei teftimoniii
fib: A+ 7+ J+ de Abirbroth 7 de Lundors Abbib3 ; Buo Maleolii
Archid firo ; magro R - offig firo ; Qagro- W - de Bofeo ; Bno J de
soletre ; 7 Gltis aliis «


--- Kelso1_page307.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 187

x ~ ~ an
Sup donaédm Pdée ecetie fdéo Alano - Cansr.

228 Oni; Pfens septa vifu¥ ut auditu¥ » Hugo pmiffide dia abbs de Kelch
7 eiufdé loci Conuent? etna i dno salé 1 Nowitis nos anno gic m7 cc? y
xP ; ad feftti sti Johis Bapt dediffe cdceffifle 7 pfenti carta céfirmatfe ;
Alano de Soletre capHo diléo 7 fideli cfico firo vicaria ecctie fire de
Culter ; ci dibg iuftis suif ptinéciis ; refuatis nob dimodis decimis garbay
ei’dé e€e » Q's eidem - A - i {uo ppetuo pceflim? ad firma p decé 7 otto
qarcis nob annuatim soluendis ad duos tminos ; videt medietaté ad
Afeenfioné dni ; 7 medictaté ad Affipéem be Marie virgy , Wemorand
tai q sedf fmin? foludvis de fme de anno pecdenti femp debet intelligi «
Dis u° A - dée xectie honefte faciet defuiri ; Et de omib3 epalib3 déam
Ecctiam otingentibs plene refpondebit - Ad ifta 7 dia pda fidelit obfuanda
7 q déam firma sii malo ingenio ; 7 abfq, 61 pt*dicdde 7 cauillage pfoluct ?
Idé A - cora viris vetlabiliby de Aberbroth 7 de Lundors abbib3 corpale
phitit inrameta , In cui? rei teftimonia pfenti se'pto i moda cyrog*phi
gfecto 7 pencs [nos] refidenti ad potiédm ipius A - sigilla vellabit viri
dni A + abbis de Aberbroth vna cit sigillo dni - J - ADbis de Lundors eft
appofita , Alti u° pti penes dém Alani refidenti ? sigilla capituli fri
appofuim? ; Hiis teft- magro Hug de Bofeo ; magro Wilt de Bofeo ; magro
Rig offi Aberdefi » dno J - de Soltre fe d@i A - vicarii 7 cultis aliis -

Compofito sup « x + mar ab edta de Camfy debit -

229 Onmnib; ste Gris ecctie filiis Plentes tras infpectu¥ ut auditu¥ ; Ricardus
Reetor Ecctie de Camfy 7 Cancellat Glafg salt in dno sempitna + Noucrit
vnitfitas ra q ci cora oft dni Glafé in? dnos Abbm 7 Conuentii de
Kelchon ex pte vna 7 me ex alta orta effet matia Gonis {up decé marcis


--- Kelso1_page308.png ---
18:

P

LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Caysy. annuis p cofd@ ABbm 7 Conuenti petitis ab ecctia de Camfy rde eni?da
cotiificionis fGe in? bone memorie dim Gautum Glaf® epm 7 ei%dé loci
capituld ex pte vna / 7 déos Abbm 7 Conuentii ex alfa , Et ei sup eifde
decé marcis annuis cord déo offié dinei? fuili5 litigatii , tandé ego - R - in
iudicio pfonatr oftitut? cord cod? offit confeftus fam me i d&o redditu annuo
decé mareay singlis annis eifd@ soluédo teneri ; Et sedm cdpofidis Plate
tenoré sine pt“diedée aliq® eifdé obligari ; De arreragiis afi d@i annui red-
ditus int d@os Abbm 7 Conuenti 7 me ita ordinati eft - q ego solua eifdé
decé marcas ad PPificaGm be Marie ; anni dni qilleS ; dueent ; sexak ;
sexti ; 7 decé marcas ad fefti pentecoft> px’ seqns pe annui reddita q'ng
area} ad dtm tmini debitay , 7 decé mareas ad fefta sti Qartini i hyeme ju. 92,
px? fegns simili m° pe annnii reddita q'ng, oareay illo fmino debitay » Et
fi potit aliq? tempe oftare q ego i maiori siima arreragioy tenear eifdé ,

ea 5

cauillag&e vel st’pitu indiciali me pmitto solutu¥ eifd@ ; Et ad ifta
solugin faciend sicut dém eft fide media me obligaui , Et fi ptigerit q abfit
q i soluée dti annui reddit? suif minis faciend ut in arreragiis Puoiatis
{minis fuis soluend defeo , ut aliq? Pdtoy tininoy ; centii solid p? qindena
cuilib3 tmini clapfi fab'ee eeclic GlafZ noie pene me pmitto solutu® » Ex-
penfas aii Cea déam lite féas ad fupplicaGom dni Regis Scott ; 7 q?yda
alioy magnatii ufq, ad q'ng, mareas déi Abbs 7 Conuent? sui gfa m* re-
mifunt ; q's qq areas ad fefta sti Martini i hyeme ; Anni dni «* ; ec;
Ix' ; vij / fide media eifd@ me solutura pftituo ; Sb pena supi? annotata ,
In eui? rei teftimonid vna cd sigillo meo sigilli officialitatis Gla{e pfenti
se'pto apponi peuraui ; Acta siit hee ap* Kelchou vigla Purificadbis be

Maric virginis anno dni W? ; cc? ; sexageS ; sexto -



--- Kelso1_page309.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 189

Sup Ecetia de Camfy - Cansy

230 Anno oilleS ; ducentes + vice’ p'mo ; In capella eaftelli de Rokefburg
die Innocenti Wartiré Ita guenit amicabili? in? dim. W . Epm Glafg et
Abbm z Conuentii de Kalchou sup cotta qf uertebat? in? fdéos Epm -
y Abbm 7 Conuentéi sup Ecctiam de Camfy ; fentibs dno W - de Bofeo
dni Reg Cancella¥ ; 7 dno Hug de mortuo mari decano gale ; 7 dnis Rob ;
7 Thomh canonicis Glafguens ; 7 aliis qagnatis plurib3 de curia dni Regis ;
videts q dei Abbas 7 Connent? q'eta clamattunt dzo Efio 7 ei? succefforibs ;
7 Ecctie Glafg inppetua ome ius q°d habuerit in Ecctia de Camfy ; Ita
q qeumq, tenverit ecctiam de Camfy de dono Epi déi ut succefloy ci?
foluct annuati domui de Kalchou decé areas argenti noie fimplicis biificii
qfetas ab di hone ; Et fidelitat® dée domui faciet ; q pdéas decé mareas cidé
domui foluet tminis ftatutis + scitz » medietaté ad Pentecoft> 7 medietatt
ad fefta sti Wartini , Et fi ceflatai flit i foluge ad aliqné fmina 1 Epe ut
eapitula Glafguense ei qui tenflit déam Ecctia 7 ad soluédm decé mareay

Pdéay facienda dée domui p cenfura x

tiattica. appHone remota cépellet ,
Omnia aii infitméta p que déa dom? de Kalch potuit s* ius vendieare i pdéa
eectia de Camfy ; déa cdpofi@e hine inde fidelit obfuata / virib; careat
inppetnd ; Vt ai hee amicabilis cdpoficio firma pmaneat 7 ppetua int
Ecctias de Glafehu 7 de Kalcbou dts Abbas 7 Capitlm Kalehoenfe pifenti
sc'pto sigilla sua appofnerit ; Hiis tefty ; Dno W + de Botco dni Reg

cancellat ; Bno Hug de mortuo mari decano Glafguen$ ; Bno Robto
ofticiali Glafguen$ ; magro Hugone de Pottun » @agro T - de Aneflei ;
Robto cancella¥ dni Epi; T - Gilbto , Ada ; Andrea clicis dni Reg

+ aliis


--- Kelso1_page310.png ---
190 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Cassy. Sup +x + @ard de ecctia de Camf} ; p magtm Abel pcipiend -

231 Omibs hoc septa vifuf ut auditut Herbert? dei gia Abbas de Kalchou
7 eid’ loci Conuent? cna in dno salé , Nollitis nos earitatis intuitu -
dediffe ; cdcefliffe 7 hac carta fira pf'maffe magro Abel ditéto 7 fideli clico
firo p fideli Suicio suo deeé marcas argenti singlif annis vite fue peipiendas
p mani qinifi‘ntis in ecclia de Kamfy ad duos fminos seit; q'nq, marcas
ad Pentecoft- 7 q'ng, ad feftii sti Martini ; In cui? rei teftimoi Plenti sc'pto
i moda eyrog“phi pfecto dés magr Abel sigilla sui appofuit , particle
w’ refe'pti sigillii capituli fri appofuim? ; Tefte caplo , Dat anno gife m° ;
ce? ; t'cefio qinto In e“ftino Inuendvis ste crucis ap* Kalchon -

Refignato - x + maré de Ecctia de Camfy -

e232 Viris venlabilibs 7 amicis i xpo Kmis ; Dno - H - Abbi de Kelchou 7 ei’de
loci Conuentui ; fuus ubiq, Rit Rector ee de Camfy Cancella¥ Ecctie
Glafg salé » 7 ad gta obfeq'a se pati  Sciatis q volo 7 gcedo vt de ecto
finglis annis toto meo ppetuo poflideatis 7 peipiatis decé marcas de ecctia
mea de Camf¥ scdm tenoré earte in? dim Waltii Efm Glalg Sr eifdé decé 4 93.
mareis pfée ex pte vna / 7 vos ex alta ; In cui? rei teftimof sigilli met
vna ci figillo dni - W - decani Glaf% appofui huic se'pto , Dat afd Glafg
die Sabbi px* afi feftai sti Warcij ewagelifte » Anno gfe m* ; cc? ; Ix® ;
sexto +


--- Kelso1_page311.png ---
233

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 191

Lita 3r libtates sp‘tantef ad ecctiam de Culter -

Oniibs has tras vifu¥ ut auditu¥ , Gautius byfeth etna i dno salt » Nota
fit vniulitati fre q ego i manu dni Herbti abbis de Keleh i pleno capitlo
KalchoenS affidaui p me 7 p dib; fedibs 7 7 succetloribs mcis ; 7 sac*mento
me obligaui fi? obSuare libtates ad eaéatn fui de Cultir sp‘tantes 7 in-
depnitate in dib3 7 p dia - ne oceafione [ J qué ad op? Templarioy
in tritorio Pdée ee de Cultir pftruxi ; aliq’d peat de reb3 ut de iure qed
ad eandé ecclefid pfueuit ut dinofeit? ptile » vt ad pifenti pagine fides firma
adhibeat? / eandé sigilli mei auctoritate roboraui ; 7 dim mei Regé Alex™
p inftancia pfirmare feci mei ; Hiis teft- , Bno Robto cognato meo , Wilt
Q)autalent » Ada de Bernewile ; Ada de Herithe ; Rig 7 Joh de Bowilden
Suientib3 abbis de Kelchou 7 aliis -

Sup +x + maré de Ecctia de Camfy -

Robtus dei gia Rex Scoté , Diferetis yiris » Decano 7 Candicis , totiq,
capitulo Eectie Glafg ac officiali curie eiufdé p ipos oftituto ditéis 7 fidelibz
fuis ; salé ; Q'a p Gtas cuidencias nob oftenfas veracit intellexim? 7 comi-
pim? + q cora bone memorie dno Robto di gia q°nda Epo Glafguenf fen-
tencia diffinitiua lata fuit p religiofis viris Abbe 7 Conuétu de Kelehou ;
7 p vos approbata Sr annua penfione dec marcay cif debita de Ecctia de
Camfy ; Vobis firmit peipiendo manda? ? q'tin? cand? sentencia exeeuddi
debite demandetis ; Ita q Bdti Religiofi de annua [pensione] pda plena
peipiant soluéém ; 7 h° in fide 7 fidelitate quib3 nob tenemini fillo m°
omittatis ; Dat afd Berewyci sup Twedda ; xij dic Ap'lis Anno regni

firi sexto decimo -

Cenreu.

Cast.


--- Kelso1_page312.png ---
Maw veusteN,

235

236

192 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Carta Sr Ecctiam de Walkaruftus

Vnitiis {&e cat's eectie filiis 7 fidelibs » Walt* Corbet ; Sciant ofis ta
pofti q* pfentes me dediffe 7 edceflifte 7 hae Plenti carta cdfirmatfe Ecetie
{Ge Warie de Kalchou 7 conachis ibidé deo Suientibs Ecctiam de Q)alkar-
ufiun eG toftis 7 fra ad eandem rcctiam ptinente p eafdé dinifas p qs ea
tenueriit in die q? hee carta fea eft ; ei decimis 7 omibg ad eandé ecctiam
infte ptinentibs ; 7 ed quada fra q'm cidé ecetie i doté ci dedicaret® dedi ;
qf iac iux" Tveda ap’ Broceheftorde ; Q'a u’ ptem fre ecctie que m° erat
necc‘ia eis excambiaui 7 peioré cis dedi p illi? exeambii emendaéde 7 p
amore dei dedi cis q’mdam tra que voeat? Gret rigefinedne Hane aii ceetiam
7 tra pi

aim dedi 7 cdeefli cis i ppetua clemofina p falute aie mee 7 p falute
aficelioy 7 sueceffoy meoy 7 p falute dni mei Reg Witt 7 aft
cefloy cius ; ita libere 7 q'ete tenenda fient aliq® alia elemoia libius 7 q‘eeins
tenet? i regno Scottoy ; Hiis teft- ; Bna Ata - Rod fit ei’dé Walt> ; Goiflino
prbo eaftelli » Gocenlino diacono ; Jacobo clico ; Ailauo clico de Walk: ,
DP fit Rod Widonis 7 aliis -

floy 7 sue-

Carta sr dimidia carucata fre i fritorio de Walkarwft- «

Vnittlis ste Gris ceetie filtis 7 fidelibs - Gaut Corbet ; salf Notlint offs
ta potti q® pfentes me eit affenfu 7 cdceflione sponse mee 7 fiedis mei -
dediffe ; 7 hac pfenti carta pfirmalfe p falute aie mee 7 pingis mee 7 aficefloy
meoy 7 fueceffoy meoy , Ecctie ste Q)arie de Kelchou 7 monachis ibidé
deo Suientibs dimidia carucata fre in tritorio de Waleareucfiun edi toftis
7 croftis ad Batam fram ptinentibs sieut ego ipe cas affigtui - Volo itag
ut hane pdam fram de me 7 fedibs meis ita libam 7 q'eta i multtis 7
omib3 aliis libtatibs teneat 7 poffideant ? fict i eadé uilla alia tra fua ad


--- Kelso1_page313.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 193

cectiam ptinenté libius 7 quicei? tent 7 poflident - ita 7 ut liceat eis cueinesrew
bladai fui de pdga uilla siceatt: 7 nd siccati , ad abbathia ut alias ad
tras fuas deferre q° uoluerint ; Hiis teft? , Robto fit meo 1 Gilbto de
Vmmfrauill » Bernardo fit Brien ; Antonio » WiHo fit Robti ; Jacobo

" es
clico 7 aliis -

Carta 8 duas acras fre 1 fritorio de Walkaruft> -

237 Unillfis « ste Gris ecetie filiis 7 fidelibs has tras visu¥ ut andit%is ; Wichacl
de Walkarwefiun 7 x‘ana vxor ei? salt ; Notlit vnitifitas fra nos dedifte
7 gecfliffe » 7 plenti carta ofirmafie » Deo 7 ecctie fee A)arie de Kelchou
7 Monachis ibidé deo fuientibs in pura 7 ppetua clemoiam 7 in fF

duas acras fre ab aq'lonali pte uie que defeendit de Lang

Ce secul:
aliq’m aliam elemofind libius 7 q'eci? tenet 7 poflidet » Hiis tefty » Robto
z Walt Corbeth ; Hug capHo dni ReX ; Reginald fit Antonij ; Wali fit
Robti de Scottun ; Watho de Hou ; 7 iiltis aliis -

Rokefb’e » Tenendas ita libe 7 q'ete ab di Suicio 7

Carta r afid@as duas acras -

238 Vnilifis {te Gris ecctie fillis 7 fidelibs vifut ut audit’is has tras , Walt
Corbet salt ; Notlint oMis ta plentes g* futuri me cdcefliffe 7 hac carta
mea cof'matie Deo 7 ecetie ste Marie de Kelehou ; 7 monachis ibidé do
Snientib3 illas duas acras tre ab aq'lonali pte nie que defeendit de
Jangtun vers? Rokefburg quas Wichael de Walkaruift’ cdfenfu 7 atfenfa
x'ane vxoris sue eis dedit i libam 7 ppetuad clemofina 7 i ffuitaté -
Tenendas ita life 7 qete ab omi Snicio sceulari 7 exacée fiet aliq’n alia
clemofina libius 7 q'eci® tenct 7 poflident , Hiis teft? » Robto 7 Walto

2B


--- Kelso1_page314.png ---
194 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Carssevstes. filiis meis » Hug eapHo dni Rex ; Reginaldo fit Antonij ; Walt fit Robti
de Seottun » Rié gualenfi ; 7 oultis aliis -

Carta sr eapella in euria dni p Abbm 7 Conucnt edcefiam -

239 Onin; hoe septa vilu® ut anditu¥ » Wilts fit Pat'eij coi de Dumbar etna
i dno salé » Notiit vnittfites tra dim Hugoné abbm de Keleh 7 ei%dé loei
cduenti g*tis 7 mere cdceflitfe m* 7 fedib; meis eclebraésm dininoy in
capella mea inf euriaé mead de Qalkaruefton fita ; Saluis ee wat'ei dée
uille tb; oblagib3; p anni , scilie; die Natat dni; die Pafehe ; die stoy
aploy Pet’ 7 Pauli ; et seit; ego ut hedes mei ibi fflim? , saluis 7 cidé cat'ci
e&e celeb“cionibs fponfalid 7 baptifmi piloy 7 Ita q capHs qui i déa eapella
p tempe defuierit ; fidelitat® wat'ei eée sup Pmiflis faciet » Ego n° de
cofenfu 7 affenfu Nichot filij mei 7 fedis p falute ate mee 7 Criftiane
Corbet vxoris mec 7 dium aficetloy 7 succetloy meoy lihalit 7 caritatine
déis abbi 7 Conuétui remifi 7 q'eti clamaui inppetud toti clamum q’d me
fre diceba aliq? tempe in tris ecoydé 7 i omibs aliis reb; ta felarib3 gq"
cGhticis 7 di aeGoi 7 ealapnie fup Pmiflis mote ut moucnde p me 7 hedib;
meis timplieit 7 abfolute reniiciaui np ipos ul coy fuceetlores fieterit » Et
ad h dia a me 7 hiedibs meis fidetr tentda i manib3 vettabilis dui Gaufredi
di gia DunkeldenS Epi affidaui ; Vt ig’ Gia fup*déa ppetue fmitatis robur
optinedt Pens septa figilli mei munimine vna ei appenfide sigilli dé
veblabit pat's Dunkelden’ Epi roboraui , Hiis tefte ; Bno Alex’ de Stuelin
tie conftabla¥ de Roketburg » Bno Ada de yetham qilite meo » Wagro
Robto de Stuteuill ; Wagro Johe de Euertley » Wagro Thoma r‘tore
scolay de Rokefh’e ; Nich fit 7 liede meo 7 zaliis » Aet Anno Natiuitat
dniee @ ; ec? ; xI°; p'mo 7 In e'ftino sti Wathei apli 7 ewangelifte i domo
capituli de Kelehiou -


--- Kelso1_page315.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 195

Carta sr hofpitale sti Leonardi de Vpfedelington - Veseenixotox.

210 Oimib; hoe septa viln¥ ut auditu® Robert? Byfeth diis de Vpfedilingtot
etna i dno salf , Nonitis me de cdfenfu 7 voliitate C'ftiane uxoris mee
diuine pietatis intuitu deditle ; coceflifie 7 hae carta mea pfirmatie Deo 7 ecte
ste Wa¥ de Kelkou 7 onachis ibidé deo Suientibs - 7 feruit’is 1 pura 7 yo. 95.
ppetua clemofina hotpitale sti Leonardi i tritorio meo de Vpfedilington iux™
Twede ex oppofito de Horwerdefi fundatii ; ei dib3 ptinenciis fuis 7 aifia-
métis 7 q'bsciig aliis libtatibs ta i aq's qi aliis locis ; ita in q ext fines fuos
7 limites tre d@ hofpitalis nulla cOmuna hebit » Infra uw limites 7 Tminos
vidint expedire

suol edificabit 7 pifcabiit 7 tot comodit fuad put magis
faciét » Ita videlic3 q abbas de Kalchon 7 onis fuceetiores fui inneniét inppetud
capellanai quemda i d@o loco p fidelibs dinina celeb‘ntem ; 7 fufiétabit duos
paupes i code loco 7 q’s ego 7 hedes mei duxerim? ibidé inflituendos 7 7 si
forte d@i panpes ibid infiitati cd habiles filint ad laborand noluerint labo-
rare ? p dém Abbm 7 p me 7 heredes meos fup hoe fiet correciio ; In eui?
rei teftimonid ofectit eft infi"mentii in modi cirographi in duas ptes diuift
quay vni penes déos Abbi 7 Couenti refidenti sigilla mei appofui - Aj
u? pti penes me refidenti sigilla dei ADbis 7 Conuent? apponit® - His teft-
Walto byfeth » @agro Ada de Qalkaruifion ; Bno Witto de Horwerden ;
Andy pfona de vpfedelington ; wagro Robto de Paxtofi » Hen¥ Belle ;
Witt Byfeth ; Robto de Corecg“ue ; Hen¥ seitfore ; 7 oultis aliis ; Hane
ait donaédm ego 7 hercdes mei warantizabim® inppetuai 7 defendem? con*

omnis +


--- Kelso1_page316.png ---
Estrpopivoston.

241

242

106 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Carta sr Treucrlen c& snif diuifis -

HL. filius Regis Seocie ; Epis ; Abbib3 ; Comitib ; Jutticie ; Baronib3 ;
vieccomitibs Prepofitis ; oinift's 7 omib3 fidelibs suif clericis 7 laicis ,
francis ; 7 Anglicis  Scottis » 7 Galwclenfib; ta futu¥ q* pentibs toci? tre
fue , salé - Sciatis me pcefliffe 7 fimul dedilfc ci fre meo Deo 7 ecctie ste
Warie de Kelchou 7 abbi 7 {7ib3 ibidé deo Snicntib3 i ppetua clemofina ;
Tretilen ca fuis reétis dinifis ficut vng* Vuiet ca meli? 7 pleni? tennit 7
habuit ; 7 C s 7 ego 7 Epé Johs 7 multi alij pag*uim? 7 dinifim’
int canonicos ecctie {te Crucis 7 pdem Vuict » Hane afi Trauert dedit ei<

—_ . Fi — Oe . ;
pr fis 7 ego i efeambio decé libratay tre i hardingetthorn - q’m acomo-

a fieut pr ii

daueriit pat’ mco ad fui magni negociad ; Volo itag, ut pd@am {ra teneant 7
habeat ita bi 7 i pace hibere 7 honorifice in fra 7 i aqua - 7 pafenis sient
meli? 7 libi? 7 honorificenci® cetas poffeflides fuas tenét 7 poflidet , Pre-
fentib; teftib; , Johe Glafguenfi Epo; Ethwaldo Carlonenfi Epo ; Gregorio
Epo de Dunealdin ; Wito nepote Reg - Dunceai ; Cofi » Cofpat'to fit
Gofpat ; Hugon de Qoruilt Herbto Cairlario » Wito de Lindefia ; Dauid
Olifard ; Robto Auene#l , Alfwin Qacarth ; Rit @ilit ; Thor de Trauernét -
Walbeth » apud ecaftella puellay -

Carta sup Eftirdoding{t» concefi* Thée fit Reginald de Bofcho -

Vnittis t@e Gris cectie filiis 7 fidelibs , Nbert? dei gfa Abbas de Kelchon
z eine loci onent? etna i dno salé ; Nofint ta pofti g® prentes nos de
comuni confenfu capitli firi ycefliife 7 hac pfenti carta tira pfirmaile Thome
filio Reginaldi de Bofcho ; 7 fiedibs suif tota tra de Eftdodineftuii p r'tas
dinifas fuas

‘0 iby ptinéciis fuis , q‘m Ricard? fit hugonis q'ctam clamanit i
capitulo firo p fe 7 heredib3 fuis inppetut , Tenebit ati ide Thom 7

nedes


--- Kelso1_page317.png ---
233

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 197

fui pd@am tra de nob in p*tis 7 pafenis 1 molendinis 7 aq's / 7 ectis aifia-
i 71 7 7

A qn. On SP a 5 7 ;
inentis ad pdtam tra de Eftdodineftun de iure fptantib3 + 7 ei medictate
petere de Camerii - libe 7 q'ete in feudo 7 heditate » Reddendo nob finglis
74 7 3
annis p pda ‘tra - decem cares

a

argéti ad duos anni tininos ; qnq,

videlicg ad Natiuitat sti Johis Bapt » 7 q'nq, ad felt sti » Q)artini 7 faeié@do
formfeeti Suiciai dno Regi 7 nob q"nta ptinet ad feiam ptem yni? uille *
Ipe u? Thom 7 heredes fui ppetua alienaddm de Pdéa tra ut de pte pdée tre
nd faeidt » n& Pdtam tra ut ipins fre medietaté inpignorabat sii alfenfu 7
voluntate fira + Tefie Caplo « Teftib3 7 hiis ; Bno WiHo de Bofeh caneett ,
Bno Nees de RameS ; Dno Wiehact Wymet / Wagro Steph de lillitelif

EsTIRRRANESTEN,

Hug le bret 7 Thoma f¥e ei? - Rit de Dodineftun ; WiHo QJantalent 7 sou. 96.

Teodorico de Reuedefi ; Alano de Hertefhcued ; Pet? de Handen ; Pet?
de faunes 7 multis aliis -

Carta Sr villa 7 teneméti de Eftrekranett: -

Ton pe we + pre ¢ = Os : .
WVilifis fe Oris cectie filtis ad q’s pfens fe'ptai puenit 1 Hugo Ridet diis de

Crancfion fat i dno fépitna - Noflit unitifitas tra me diuine earitatis intuitu
7 p falute aie mee aficetioy 7 sucectioy meoy , dedifle peeflitle 7 hac
plonti earta mea pfirmatie Deo 7 Eectie ste Warie de Kelehou ; 7 @onachis
ibide deo Suientibs 7 inppetnd SuituF , i libam pura 7 ppetud clemofina , villa
7 tenemita de Eftirkranefton que voeat? Preftoi ; vt Prettefton et fuis rectis
dinifis 7 ptinenciis ; Hndam 7 tenendam fup*dtis Monachis inppetui in
puram 7 ppetuam clemotina vt jin eft ef ommib; fuis ptinenciis liltatibs
z ayfiamentif quibufetiq, ad pata tra, sine tenementi speéiantibs , ut aliq?
m?° speétare valentib; i bofcis ; planis ; viis ; semitis » pratis 7 patenis ,
aq's » flangnis ; 7 @olendinis ; moris ; wareliis ; petariis ; turbariis ,
pifeariis ; viuariis ; 7 i dib3 aliis lois ta nd noiat

q® noiatis ; longe 7

ppe , inf* dém tenement 7 ext; adeo libe ; q'ete ; plenarie pacifice 7 hono-


--- Kelso1_page318.png ---
Crancstun.

244

198 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

rifice 1 omibg sicut aliq® tra elemofinata i Regno Scocie ; lihins ; q'eei? ; 7
lonorificenci? tenet? fen poflidet? » Et q ipi monachi 7 suceeffores fui libe
poflint p volitate fua de pd@a fra 7 teneméto ci dimodis fuis ptinéciis
ditpoiic 7 cdmodum snii vndiq, exinde fate put s' melius yidint expedire /
abl, dimodo Suicio forinfeco 7 int'nfceo ; 7 Fab Gimoda ofuetudic ; acGe 7 7
ab omi oie seculari ; Saluis m' 7 hedibs meis vigint solid bonoy {tlingoy
annuati inppetua ab eifdé co"chis peipiendis ; q’s iide Abbas 7 Comment?
debent m' 7 hedib; meis p dimoda cultura q? exigi potit de Pata tra ; ad
duos anni tminos ; vidett » vna medictaté ad feftii Pentecoft- 7 alii. medie-
taté ad fella sti Qartini i yeme / Et salno m' ¥ hedibs meis q nd licebit
déis ADbi 7 Connentui firmare molendina fap [aquam] de Tyne in pin-
peefliont
inppetud
offis holies 7

dicit mei » Ego u® fup“dés hugo 7 fiedes mei d@am donaém 7
mea pfate eectie de Kalchou 7 monachis ibid’ deo fuientibs 7
Suitu? ; i pura 7 ppetua elemofina fam ut pdem eft 7» con®
feminas warantizabim? inppetua ; acq'etabim? 7 defendem? ; In eni? rei
teftimoniit plenti carte sigilli met appofui , Hiis tefiy » Elya Abbe ste
Crucis de Edynburg ; Geruafio ADbe de Neubotyl ; Bno Hen¥ de sto
Claro + Bno Rot de Keth ; militibs » Wagro Johe de Keth rectore Eectie
de Creithofi ; Bno Ada de Keth reétore de eadé , Thoma de Creihton ;
Wito de Preftoi ; Galf*do de firefley 7 aliis -

Carta 3r villa 7 tencmata de Eftreeraneft> q? voea? Prefton -

Vnitiis ie cat's cectie fillis ad q’s Pfens fepti: pucilit » Hugo Ridel dis
de Cranefton fatm in dno sempitna 1 Notit vnitfitas fra me dinine earitatis
intuitn 7 p falute aie mee aficefloy 7 sucectloy meoy deditle oceflifte 7 lac
plenti carta mea ofirmatie deo 7 ecctie Warie de Kalehon 7 mo'chis
ibidé deo Suientibs 7 inppetuidi Snitu® ; i libam » pura 7 ppetua clemofina ;

Villam 7 Tenementi de Eftireranefion que vocat® Preftoh ut Preftefton® ,


--- Kelso1_page319.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 199

p has dinifas , vidett ; imcipiendo ad aqua de Tyne bt” Crancfton a pte
orientali ex oppofito hoge ; 7 s° tis? aq'loné defeendendo sedi antiqum
curfa 7 noud d&e aque de Tyne feorfti vw ad p*tum q°d vocat® le Abbotit>
medue ; 7 s° de incepée dei prati pyvetem curfti d@e aque e'ca dtm prata 1
qPulg, alias p cundd anticd curfa veilit i déam aqua de Tyne + 7 s° ex tTnfite
dée aque p vetem curfa cide vfy, in tra de Ormiftot » 7 s° p diuifas int tra
de Preftof ; 7 de Ormettoi ; incipizdo ad vna nallem ts? auftra afeendendo
furfa p syketit ; ufg, ad antiqua baleam q° eft antiq™ @arehia ad pedé del
Whitelawe 7 s° afeendendo p déam baled dir'te wlq, ad erueé que fiat i
carchia in? Preftoh 7 Ormettofi i via qf tendit tifus Hadington ; 7 a eruce
{tfus auftri orient ; vig, ad le Pethheuid ; 7 s° defeendédo i rinulii q! voea*

Wreke 7 afcendendo p d@m riuulii ; 7 i aliq? loco p antiqii curfa déi rivali
qruly, ueniat ad syeii q' venit de New eranefton ; 7 afcendendo p illd syketti
Cnfeunté int tram arabilé de Pretton 7 de Ormetion ; q! siket? & antiqua
qarchia , q’ulq, véiat ad syketit q' véit ext® le farenyacredene ; 7 afeendédo
d@m syketi del farenyaeredene p ext'mitaté tre del corehufes » q?uli,
puenit ad finé del kenelmore + Deifi p orientale ptem dee wore vers’ auttri
p baled lapidea iux* tra arabilé del @orehufes furti vig, ad caput ili? balee
ad q‘ndam gierid lapida , 7 s* G1” orienté vig, ad quédam lapide ad infiore
ptem de Rennechelire + 7 de illo lapide fifa fifns anfira p quada baled
lata ex pte orientali de Ryncheftir vig, ad quéda syketii a pte borcali dal
Tyh Witemore ; 7 p syketi UP orienté in? ext'mitates tre wig 7 quemda
antiga follati » 7 surf p illi foflatt fe autira p cocandi follati vig, ad le
Hareftafi ex pte orientali de Bereinbote 7 deinde furfa a pte boreali syketi
¢ vocat® Schanke ; p lapides pditos in antiqua marehia , viy, i capud del
Schanke ; 7 deinde uly, ad queda lapidem ex pte orientali riui cui’da fontis ;
7 de illo lapide p syketit fis? anti” orientis vfq, ad ext*mitaté borealé del
poules / 7 deinde ts? bored orientis p quéda syketa defeendédo i alia
syketit ; 7 p illa
‘syketi Qs? antiva 7° p quéda baled vers? orienté int tra de Ormettofi 7

centé i cofta illi?

ket Vs? auftra vig, ad quéda lapidd i

Crasesten



--- Kelso1_page320.png ---
Craxnsten.

200 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

{ra que voeat? Thewles vfq, ad quéda lapidé i fine balee ; 7 s° i auftri p
alia baled in? tra de Thoules 7 tra de Ormefiun viq i rivulit q! vocat®
-aynefburne ; i @arehia de Pafetoti ; 7 furfii p ila riuuli uf, uetit de Neu-
crancftoil ; 7 afeendendo p ill riuula ufq, ad le Brademedue ; 7 de illo riuulo
41 oceidétem p qnéda baled ufq, ad lapidé ex pte boreali del Brademedu ,
7 de illo lapide ffus borea ufy, ad capnd fontis q! voeat® poulefwell » 7
ab illo fonte fs? borea p gnda antiga baled q' eft coarchia vig, i le
Redyfirope? ; 7 p media illi? Rediftrope® » p qnda baled furfa vfq ad le
Tyhwitemore 7 p eundé balet vit* déam ora uf ad ext*mitaté tre
arabit de Neucranefioh ; 7 tls? borek p ila baled qrutq, yellit feorfa in le
orchidiardfirother ; 7 ex tifiifo ill? ftrothir p Gnda fofiatd vig i s:

yketit y 7
p sykett UP oecidenté ufg, ad petaria ; 7 p cofta petarie p syketii i eccident@
wf, le Oxinfalde p vni baled i oecident ex pte auti“li del Oxinfalde vfq,
i uid que venit de Nenerancfiofi , 7 p illa nia i antea q?’ufy, yehit 1 borealé
angula del Oxinfalde ; 7 deinde p cult’am q* vocat® Crofflatée 7 seorfit p ex-
t'mitates tre de Prefiofi , vfq i uid q° veit de Neucraneftofi , 7 p ill via
seorft p pede yelini vig, i uctem eurfti de Tyne ; q°uly, vehit p cundé curfa
iaq‘m de Tyne pt* molendina de Wefteranetion Sbt? hogam + Habend 7
tenend sup“dzis monachis inppetuti i pura 7 ppetud clemofina ut pdém eft;

ch omibs fuis ptindciis libtatib; 7 aifianctis q'bzetiq, ad Pdéam tra fine

tenefitt sp‘tantibs uf alig® m° + sp‘tare valentibg ; i bofeis ; planis ; viis ;

femitis ; pratis 7 pafiis ; aq's 7 flagnis 7 molendinis ; moris , marefiis ;

peta® ; turbaf ; viuat 7 1 omibs aliis locis ta no nofatis q” nofatis louge
7 ppe inf dem tenement 7 ex* » adeo libe qrete ; plena¥ ; pacifice 7 hono-
rifice } omibs sict alig® fra elemofinata i Regno Scocie libi® , q'eei? » 7
honorificenei? tenet? scu poflidet? 7 q ipi monachi 7 succefiores fui 7 eoy
tenétes libere poflint p voluntate sua de pdta tra 7 teneiiito et omibs {nis
ptinenciis difpote 7 cdmoda fui vudiq, exinde fate put st meli? viderint

expedire  abfq, dimodo Suizo forinfeco 7 int'ufeeo 7 F ab dimoda pfuetudie

~ = wr a] . . o + se
exacéde 7 demada ; 7 ab di one sélari , Saluis m' 7 hedibs meis vigint sot


--- Kelso1_page321.png ---
to
or

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 201

ftlingoy bonoy annuati inppetua ab ecifdé monach peipiendis ad duos anni
tminos , videlt vna medietaté ad fefta Pentecoft- 7 alia medietaté ad fefti
sti Martini i hyeme ; q’s idem Abbas 7 Conuent? debut m* 7 fedibs meis
p dimoda filtura q? exigi potit de Bdéa tra; Et saluo mt 7 heredibs meis
q nd licebit déis ADbi 7 Couentui f'mare molendina fup aqtm de Tyne i
Piudicit mei ; Ego n° sup“dés Hugo 7 fiedes mei déam donagom 7 geeflioné
mea pfate eéte de Kalchou 7 monach ibid do Suientib3 7 inppetua Suitu¥
i pura 7 ppetua elemofina fam ut pdém eft ot* off hoies 7 feias waranti-
zabim? inppetuii aeq'etabim? 7 defendem? ; In cui? rei teftimoniai Pfonti
carte sigilli mea appofui ; Hiis teft» , Elya Abbe {Ge Crucis de Edynburg ;
Geruafio Abbe de Neubotil ; Bno Henf de Sto claro » Pno Robto de Keth
qilitibs ; Wagro - J. de Keth r°tore ecetie de Creyhtofi ; Bno Ada de Keth
r'tore eéte de eadé ; 7 aliis +

Carta sup v + carucatas tre in Vifkelift-

Vniitis f&e Gris Ecctie filiis 7 fidelibg » Alanus fit Rolandi de Galweia con-
ftabulari? dni Regis Seottoy ; Salém ; Notiint ta fut?i g pfentes me dediffe
7 bfe Plenti earta mea ofirmafle deo 7 Eectie ste Q)arie de Kelehi 7 oonachis
ibidé deo uientibs p redditu qué solebant tre de Galweia tempibs pde-
ecfloy meori q'ng, Carrucatas fre in Vifkelyftoi i lawederdale i libam 7
ppetua clemofina ei omib; cOmunibg ayfiamentis ci’dé uille , In pafturis ;
In focali 7 cetis ayfiamétis » et @olendino si voltint 7 habuerint ajfiam i
pte sua / Et si neceffe habflint ? licencia heant firmadi ftagnii colendini ex pte
meaad fra mea ; Et Prati qonachi remiferdt m* 7 mat' mee 7 hedibs firis » 7
animab3 pat's mei Rolandi ; 7 aui mei Huhtredi ; 7 dceefforibs meis omibs
7 suecefloribs omem Reddita qui folebant peipe de fdecefloribs meis de
Galweia ; Et calipnias q%s hebant adifa nos inppetua p pdéis redditibs ,
Et tot reragia q°d petebant a dieb3 Huhtredi aui mei vfq, ad dié q? carta
2¢

VirxentsTon.

fol. 98.


--- Kelso1_page322.png ---
Virgenistox,

246

202 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

pfens {Za eft » 7 abfoluerdt animas pat's mei Rolandi 7 aui mei Huhtredi ,
7 reecpunt i cOmune bificii Kelchoei Ecctie ; Simitr geeticrat nob ; 7
reeepit nos scitt me 7 firem mea 7 ofis fiedes firos / offis aficeflores 7
sueeellores firos / i societaté 7 fFnitaté dium biificioy spualia q° fiat 7 fient
inppetud i pfata ecelia Kelcboefi - Q#re uolo ut pfata ecctia Kelchoeft ;
7 mo%chi ei’dé loci heant 7 poflideat pdtam clemofina de Vifkeliftoh p
eafdem dinifas p quas ego ifie ea pambulaui ; eG probis hdibs ; vidett a
capite del Holdene defeendendo p Riuula de Holdene ufq i Deretirete ; 7
s* p Dereftrcte fifus borea ufy, fulcforde p dinifas Samfonis ufy i ledre + 7
s° p ledre reéto t'mite afcendendo ufq, ad eapud orientale ei’dé uille de
Hulfkelifton ; 7 a eapite orientali de Vifkilift- recto t‘mite p vied auftralé
afeendendo ufq, ad Derefirete ; Ex" toftis 7 eroftis Willi de Colilawe ; 7
Rieardi fit Gautredi ; 7 s* p eand via tins anftra ufq, ad erneé ; 7 inde tins
oecidenté fie’ ernces pofite sit 7 fofle fee sit nfq, ad wid uenienté de
ia uly, ad capud de Holdene, Libera 7 q'eta ab oni

Holdene ; 7 s° p eand
stlari Suicio 7 cofuetudie i sempitna ; Ita libere 7 q'ete et honorifice fiet

aliq’ Elemotina ; i Regno Seottoy us ceci? 7 honorificenei’ tenet? 7
poflidet? ; Hiis tefie ; Dno - Joh Epo Candide cafe ; dno Hug capto ;
m@agro Ad pfona de Lawedcr ; Thoma de Colewilt ; Heni de ferlint ;
Pet? de haga ; Alex? de Heeford ; Walto Anglieo ea qultis aliis » Tefte

# Capiilo Kalchoens -

Carta sr viij - sot peipiend anuuati de Wio de hertitheued 7 hedibs 7

succefiorib; fuis -

Onid; ste @ris Ecelie fillis ad q’s pfens fe'ptit puenit 7 A fit Rolandi
Scot cdttabula® ; sal ; Sciatis nos cdceflifle ; dedifie , 7 plenti carta fra
of'mafte deo 7 Ecetie ste Marie de Kelch ; 7 @o'chis ibidé deo Suientibs
ppe q’cta clamagim toci? iuris 7 clami inppetud q’d habuerit ut tre


--- Kelso1_page323.png ---
»

AT

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 203

pottiat i carucata tre de fulwidnes qfm dedim? i clemofina domui de Soltre » txrrawve.

octo solid annuati peipiendos de WiHo de Hertifheued 7 fedibs ut suc-
cefforib; fuis de ra q fuit Gillefalyi i vikillefton ; medietaté , s - ad
Pentecoft> ; 7 medictaté ad fefti sti Martini ; 7 vnii tofta 7 vnii crofti i
orientali pte ei%dem uille fup ripa « q’d +s + Rog fit Ailif tenuit » Habend

7 tenend inppetnd libe 7 q'ete ab oii Suicio ofuetudie 7 fWlari exacée 1

Vt aii pdéa rata pmaneit 7 illibata ; ea fienti septo 7 sigilli fri appone fe 29.

comuniuim? - Hiis teft? ; Bno - A - abbe de [Qelros] Catantis eectie
El@o ; Duo Pet? de la haga  Bno Rad de Campania ; Bno Robto de
Ros , Bno Wiko de la are ; Pno Viuiafi de Mulynaus » Buo Wito de
Geueleft» ; Buo Pat'cio de Culwefi ; magro A - de Thofentoi » Bno
Rit 7 dno Helya capHis ; 7 aliis -

Carta sr fra g'm Walt dapifer ded* nob i Pritorio de Innerwyé -

Vnififis te cat's ecctic filiis 7 fidelibs ad q?s fens tpt pueiit » Waltus
fit Alani dapifer Regis Scocie ctna i dno sali ; Notlit vnilifitas via me
caritatis intuitu 7 p falute aie mee ; 7 dni mei illuft's Re& Scot Alex
7 omium aficefloy 7 succefloy meoy dedifie peeflifle 7 hc pfenti carta
mea ofirmatie deo 7 ecctic ste arie de Kelch ; 7 mo*chis ibidé deo
Suientibs 7 inppetud Suitu , i libam , pura 7 ppetua elemofina tota tra
mea in tritorio de Inuerwit que otinet® int has divifas » vidett a Bothkil
aicendendo p riuuli q' cadit a Scoulande vig, ad Scoulanddetheued ; ubi
sule? t*hitur ; 7 p illi suleti vig, ad uid que tendit de Rifibrigg tis?
Imuerwié / 7 s° ab illa via afeendedo p sulka fs? orientem viq, ad q’nda
foila 7 s° ab illa folla defeendédo p sule& ufg, ad Qeldrefeloctheued ;
zs p riuuli de Weldrefet femp defeendédo uf i Q)aninct » 7 s* semp
defcendédo p Q)aninet vig, ad buccé de Efifulhope » 7 s* afceudédo p
Eftfulhope Vs? oceidenté iux" diuifas de Ellum 7 de Rifibriga , uly i


--- Kelso1_page324.png ---
Invenwre.

204 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Weftfulhope ; 7 de Weftfulhope ufq, i Withedre ; 7 de Withedre ; viq,
i Bothkil , 7 s* femp afeédendo p Bothkil vfq i pdém riuula q° cadit de
Scouland ,» Libam ; 7 qet& ab Gi Suicio int'nfeco 7 ext'nfeco ; 7 ab di-
moda ofuetudic 7 exacéne 7 ab di hoile sedlari 7 ece“ftico » Dé ait @o"chi
libe p voliitate sua de déa tra difpontt , 7 cOmodi sud modis dibs faciet ;
N* ego n® fucceffores mei n° aliq's alius infra dtas diuifas aliq? tempe
cdmunicabim’? cu eifdé , Ego 7 p me 7 succefloribs meis q'eti clamaui
inppetuti cifdé monachis anui redditii viginti solidoy 7 duo paria botay ;
q’ noie feude firme p pafia de Inuerwi m' 7 fidecefforibs meis folfte
ofucuertt » Dedi ¥ 7 ocefli déis monachis licentia inppetud firmandi ftagni
molendini sui fup rad mea 1 uf ego n° fucceffores mei inpediem? cos
qn poffint hre aq‘m sufficient? ad molendini ; Q*re volo vt pdéi @o*chi
dtam fra ci omibs ad ea sp%tantibz , ita libere ; 7 q'ete , plenarie ;
7 honorifice de me 7 fiedibs meis inppetua tenet 7 poflideant sict aliq*
clemofina i Regno Seocie libius q'ecius , pleni? 7 honorificenci? tenet?
7 poflidet? » Si u® aialia Bdéoy q@onachoy egretia filint diuifas fuas 17
deuefint i pafi2as meas nd ducent? apt Inuerwie s3 tencbunt? i faldicio
feo iux” diuifas q°’ufq, vn%q'fq, paftor p impareadbe afalii suoy solliit
ynii denarii - Si ati paftor dederit uadium ? aialia nd impeabunt? - Simili
m? faciét paftores mei eifdé @ochis 7 coy Suientib3 p aialibz meis ; Ego
uw? 7 hedes mei déis @monach pdéam fra ca Sib; pnotatis warantizabim?
cont® ois hoies 7 inppetuti defendem? ; In cui? rei teftimonia fens
se'ptu figilli mei inp*ffione duxi roborandi ; Hiis tefte ; Bno- A « Abbe de
Welros ; Pno- W - Abbe de Paffelet ; Bno Rogo - Abbe de Neubotle ;
Robto de Wundegumeri ; Robto Wohaut - [Roberto] Croch - Witlo ; 7
Rit de Hauccarefton qilitib; , Robto vicaé de Cranefton ; R - Captto
Pni; W - de Cluniii cfico ; 7 aliis «


--- Kelso1_page325.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 205

Conf'mato sr Conenéim in? nos 7 hoies de Innerwick - Isvenwre.

248 Vnilifis ste aris Ecctie filiis 7 fidelibs » Alanus fit Walti dapif Reg Scott
salé + Notiint offis ta pofti q* Plentes me pceflifte 7 hac carta mea ofirmaffe +
Abbi 7 Couentui de Kelcho puenéSm que eft in? eos 7 hoies meos de
Inuerwit ; scitt - Robta de Kent 7 Roberti Hunand ; 7 Roland genet
Nichot de Conftant ; de tra 7 nemore 7 paftura fritorij de Inuerwie » q°
videlics tra 7 nem? 7 paft?a eft ot® Gram eoydé monachoy de Kelcho ; sicut jo. 100.
uidet3 riuunlus de Edwardefcloch cadit i Bothkil inx* Elziethalech ; 7 ita
ficut Bothkil defeendit vfg, ad bucca de fulhope ; 7 p fulhope in enfta Pp
dinifas de Inuerwic ; 7 de Ellum + ufg ad Q)aninct 7 p Qaninet viy, ad
aq'lonaré ptem de Witflede ; 7 ab aqilonari pte de Witflede i t'nftlfa uly i
Edwardefeloch ; [ubi] cadit i Bothkil ; Tenebit afi hane tra 7 nem? 7
pafiam inf* Pd@as dinifas de Pdzis hoib; meis ad firma t'ginta {'bs annis -
lifam , 7 {eta ab Gi Suicio - 7 de Inwarde ; 7 de vtwarde ; 7 de dib3 auxiliis
7 ab dimoda ofuctudie 7 exacéde ; Reddendo eis 7 fedibs coy finglis annis
viginti solid ad fefta sti Jacobi - Liceb* ai Paeis wo%chis ubicig, nolitint
int* Pfelptas diuifas habitatla 7 scalingas s* 7 hdib3 fuis » 7 alibus fuis pft*ere
7 habitare ; 7 alio m° q? uolucrit cimodi sui fate » Nec liccbit alieui nt Pp
ipos int* diuifas pleptas fealingas ut caulas pone 7 nf @antiones fate Ipi 7
qonachi 7 hoies coy accipict de bofeo aifiaiita fua ad ardendi 7 ecdificandi
qinta uoluerint ; ti ad uilla de Sptildun - gad illa tra q'n tenet de Pacis
hdibs meis , $3 nd licebit eis q'eq* de bofeo uendere ; s3 de bruere licebit
eis 7 hdib3 coy uende » Ponét ¥ pfati wochi i defenfione vua ptem nemoris
ad aifia {ua sic Pdi hoies mei cis ocefferiit » 7 se'pto suo oftmatint ; 7 pont
foreftarii ad ifim nemus eufiodiend ? fi uolflint + Ita q nis inde q'eq*m
accipiet n° p licéciam ipoy wo%choy , Si afi alig? cafu ut euentu otigit ut
pda uilla de Inuerwic sive pdéa fra nem? 7 pafi?a i mana ied ut alicui?
heredi meoy inf* [tempus] Pfeptum ueiit ? offiem hance ouendm oto


--- Kelso1_page326.png ---
Iscenwye,

249

206 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

ex integ® ego 7 fedes mei tenebimus Pdzis Mo%chis de Kelcho uly, ad
+ solid + fic

platis hdibs meis rede pfueueriit ; si nu” ego ut hedes mei aliq’ tempe ultins

‘mind pnoiatii 7 ipi reddent m’ 7 hedibg meis finglis annis

pacam fra 7 nem? 7 paftura alic! uende ut ad firma pote ut i clemofina
dare noluecrim? ? filli e& uendem? ut ad firma ponem? ut i elemofina dabim? ?
n' pddis @o%chis de Kelch si ca ehle ut ad firma fire uolucrint Nee
paciem? ego ut fiedes mei ut ia d@i hotes mei ut hedes coy pd@am ra ali?
tépe alict uendat t ad firma ponat ti elemotinam dent ¢ n° Pnoiatis @o"chis -
arantizabim? eis 7 defen-

Hane fram 7 hane puenéim ego 7 fedes mei
dem? adfifus offis hoies - Hane eni ouenéom fiabili? tenenda p me 7 fiedibs
micis fine malo ingenio affidaui - Ineefi aii fmin? ad fefti sti Wartini pximai
p’q® Philipp? Rex francie 7 Rit Rex Anglie inerit icrofolimam ; Q' fuit
ann? qillefim? , centefim? , nonagefim? ; ab inearnadde dni ; Hiis tette ;
Dépuo Rieardo Abbe de Drieburg ; WiHo canonieo ei? ; Hug capo elico
Reg , Thoma fit ci? ; Jeruafio Anenel , Wito de Sumirwitt ; Ro® de
Berkeley ; Robto eroe ; Wil Paffelehu ; Qaleolono de Keth ; WiHo de

Swatham ; 7 aliis -
Carta gr sexta ptem de Pritorio de Inuerwick «
Vnililis ste Gris ecctie filiis 7 fidelibs » Rohtus Hunand - xepos Niehiot de

Conftantifi » salé ; Noltint des ta pofti qe plentes me dediffe ad fenda firma
inppetud 7 hoe fe'pto meo pfirmatle Abbi 7 monach de Kelcho tra mea 7

nem? 7 pafturd que ad me 7 hedes moos ptinet ; scilé sexta ptem de tritorio
de Innerwie que ett con® Pri eoyd® mo%ehoy de Kelcho ; fieut videlé
riuulus de Edewardefcloch cadit i bothkil iux" Elziefhaleeh , 7 ita fieut
Bothkil defcend' ufq, ad bucca de fulope 7 p fulope i t7nfllit: inx* diuifas de
Elhun ufq, ad [Wa]ninet » 7 p maninet ; ufg, ad aq'lonaré ptem de Witflede ;

y ab aq'louari pte de Witflede in eniata ulq, i Edwardefelochs ; [ubi] eadit i


--- Kelso1_page327.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 207

bothkil ; Tenebit aii fram 7 nem? 7 pati’am que ad me 7 fledes meos ptinet ;
s + sexta ptem de Inuerwic inf” pdéas diuifas de me 7 hedibs meis ad feuda
firma 61 tépe inppetua ; libam / 7 qeta ab di Snicio ; 7 de Inware 7 de
vtware ; 7 de ofib3 auxiliis ; 7 ab dimoda ofuctudie 7 exacébe » Reddédo
inde m' 7 hedibs meis finglis annis inppetuti quad’ginta denaf ad felta sti
Jacobi ; 7 duas botas ad fefti sti Andree ; Licebit ait pdzis @onach ubiciq,
noluint int® dinifas Pietptas habitatla 7 scalingas st ut Ldibs fuis vt aialibs
fuis pftruere 7 habitare , arare ; 7 feinare ; 7 alio m? q° uolitint omoda fui
fate » Nee Clibet licebit * p ipos mo*chos int*® dinifas pleptas fealingas
poile vt canfiones fate / Tpi q’q, wonachi 7 hoies eoy accipient de boteo
aifiaméta {na ad ardendai 7 cdificandd q‘nta noltint ta ad uilla de Sper-
teldun / g® ad illa ‘tram q’m de me tenét 7 $3 nd licebit eis q'eq* de bofco
vendere ? {3 de bruere licebit eis 7 hdibs coy uende + Ponét F ptati @onachi i
detenfione una ptem nemoris ad aifiam fuam + 7 ponent forefiariii si uoliint
ad ifm nem? euftodiend - ita q nHs inde q'cq‘m accipiet n' p licencia
q@ochoy + Hane tra 7 haue ouenddm ego 7 fiedes mei warantizabim? eis 7
defendem? inppetuii - Hance eni puenéom ftabilit inppetuii tenenda p me 7
fiedibs meis fine malo ingenio affidani ; Iliis teft- ; Hug~ capHo elico Red
Thoma filio ei? » Radulpho clico ei? 7 Robto hote ei? » Hotbt eapHo ;
Robto 7 Wilt clicis , Robt de Kent ; Roland de Inuerwie ; Waleolmo de
Keth ; Robto de Edenha ; Thoma de heriz ; 7 aliis -

Sup sextam ptem de fritorio de Innerwyck +

Vhittis fee @ris ecctie filiis 7 fidelibs Rolland? de Inuerwit 7 Helewis uxor
ci? salé - Notlint des ta pofti g® plentes nos dedifie ad fenda firma inppetni
7 Ue septo firo ofirmafie abbi 7 @onachis de Keleho tra jiram 7 nem? 7

pattura - que ad nos 7 fiedes firos ptinet + 3+ sexta ptem
Inuerwié qf eft pt® tra coydé mo%choy de Kelcho ; fic’ uide

Ixverwre.

sole WL,


--- Kelso1_page328.png ---
lyurewre.

208 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Edwardefeloch cadit i bothkil imx® elziefhalech - 7 ita fict bothkil defeendit
ufq, ad bucca de fulhope 7 p fulhope i tnfifa iux” dinifas de ellum ufg, ad
waninet 7 p maninet ufq, ad aq'lonaré piem de Witflede 7 ab aq'lonari pte
de Witflede [in] tnfifa ufg, i Edwardefcloch « 7 ita fict riuulus de Edwardef-
cloch cadit i bothkil , Tenebit at dem tra 7 de nem? 7 ofiem pafiura que
ad nos 7 hedes firos ptinet + s « sexta pt de Ingwié infra Bdéas diuifas ta i
bofco q* i plano de nob 7 fiedib; firis ad feuda firmam omi tempe inppetud
iliis 7 ab

libam 7 (eta ab di Suicio + 7 de Inwaf 7 de vtwa¥ 7 de omibs am
dimoda pfuctudie 7 exacée ; Reddédo ii nob 7 fiediby firis singlis annis
inppetua - xl - dena¥ ad fefti sti Jacobi ; 7 unas botas ad feftai sti Andi ;
Licebit 4 Pdtis @o%chis ubiciq, uolilint int® diuifas Pfe'ptas habitatla 7
fealingas s* ut hdibs fuis ut aialibs fuis oft*ere 7 habitare 7 alio m° q° uolaint
gmodé fui face » Nec cuilibg licebit n' p ifios @o"chos int” diuifas pieptas
fealingas potle ut manfiones fale » Ipi gq conachi 7 hoies eoy accipiét de
bofco ad aifiamenta sua ad ardenda 7 cdificand q*nti uolint ta ad uilla de
Sperdeldun q® ad ila tra q'm de nob tenent ; Sed nd licebit eis qeq® de
bofeo vente s3 de bruere licebit cis 7 hdibs coy uende , Ponét & pfati
@ochi i defenfione una ptem nemoris ad aifia fua ; 7 ponét foreftaria si
uoliint ad ipm nemus cuftodiend’i ita q nHs inde accipiet q'eq* n" p licencia
ao*choy , Hae tra 7 hae pueném ego 7 uxor mea / 7 fiedes firi warantiza~
bim? eis 7 defédem? inppetud - Hae eni puenéom ftabili? inppetui tenenda
p nob 7 hedibg firis sii malo ingenio uty, affidauim? » Teft> Erkenb + abbe
de Dumfermet ; Hug capHo - 7 clico reg ; Hercb de Machu ; Gaufredo
clico regis de Rokefburg ; Walto fit Andi de Rokefburg ; Witt fit Pet de
Walkarueftoi ; 7 Gltis aliis «



--- Kelso1_page329.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 209

= Dans Qetrae
Carta sr duas ptes ‘tre i tritorio de Innerwyé + Ivcenwye

251 Vnillfis fee mat's e%e filiis 7 fidelib3 - Witt de Hanekeriton , 7 Ada vor
ei? , Rit de Hauekeriftoi 7 Banna uxor ei’; Johs de Wundeguiti 7 + Helena
usor ei? 7 hedes Rob de Kent 1 salt; Notlint des ta pofti q Ptentes nos
dediffe ad feudam firma inppetui 7 h? se'pto ofirmafie abbi 7 monach de
Keleho ; tra fram 7 nem? 7 pattura q° ad nos 7 hedes firos ptinet ; s - duas

ptes in tritok de Innerwit que eft ot® fra eoydé mo“choy de Kelehy sic
videlic3 riuulus de Edwardefclouch cadit i bothkil iux" Elzicthalee ; 7 ita sict
bothkil defend! vfgqad bueea de fulhope / 7 p fulhope in tr“fttu ins dinitas
de Ellum ufg, ad caninet ; 7 p caninet ufq ad aq'lonaré pté de Witflede ,
z ab aqilonari pte de Witflede i t*nftifim ut i Edwardefelouch » 7 ita sic!
riuulus de Edwardefelouch cadit in bothkil ; Tencbit & tra 7 nemus 7
pafi?am ; q° ad nos 7 hiedes iiros ptinet ;s + duas ptes inf* pdéas dinifas de
nob 7 ficdibs firis ad fenda fma 61 tempe inppetyd lifam 7 q'eta ab di
liis 7 ab dimoda plue-

Suido , 7 de Inware ; 7 de vtware , 7 de omibs au
tudie ; 7 exacébe » Reddendo inde nob 7 fedibs, fris finglis annis inppetni
vna cared argenti ; ad feltii sti Jacobi , Licebit & pdéis @o*chis ubietiq,
volitint int® pfe'ptas diuifas habitatla 7 sealingas fibi 7 7 hioibs suis 7 aialibs jo. 102.
fuis ofi*ere 7 hitare ; 7 alio m? q? uoltlint omodit A favo 1 Nee licebit
alicui nt p ifios @o%chos int® diuifas jietptas fealingas poe ut a@antiond

fale , Ipi quoq, 7 hoies eoy accipiét de bofco aifiaitita sua ad ardendi

7 edificandi qnti voluint » ta ad uilla de Sperteldun ; g* ad ill tra q* de
nob tenent ; 3 nd licebit eis qeq* de bofeo nende s3 de bruere licebit cis
7 hdibs coy vende » Pont F jitati coo'chi i defenfice vnad pte nemoris
ad aifia fua 7 si voliiint ponet foreftariti ad ifm nem? euftodiend - Ita q
ns ifi q'eq® accipiat 2 nt p licencii @o"choy , Hae tra 7 ‘hae onécioné nos
7 hedes firi warantizabim? cis ; 7 defendem? inppetuii ; Hie - fi - ouenéom
ftabili? inppetua tenenda ; p nob 7 hiedib; iiris sii malo ingenio aftidanim? ;

2D


--- Kelso1_page330.png ---
IxueRwre,

210 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Hiis Teft? ; Bno - P - Abbe de Jeddeword ; T - ptore de Coldingha - T -
deColewil » Gillto de la val ; @agro » W + de Grenlaw ; magro Rad
de Erth medico ; Alano de Wundeguily 1 Wilt de Heriz ; 7 Gltis aliis -

~ Oe ~
Carta $r sextam ptem de tritorio de Inuerwy

Voilifis ste aris ecetie filiis 7 fidelibs » Vineenei? fit Rolti Auenel ; salt ;
Nobint ofis ta pofti q® pfentes me dedifte 7 pceffiffe ad feuda firma inppetnit ;
7 hfe carta mea ofirmafie Abbi 7 @o"chis de Kelcho fra mea 7 nem? 7
paftura que ad me 7 hedes meos ptinet + s + sexti pt? de fritorio de In-
uerwie q° & ot" tra coxdé woTchoy de Kalcho , sic‘ videt3 riuulus de
edewardefeloch eadit i bothkil iux* elziethaleé , 7 ita sict bothkil defcendit
uf, ad bueca de fulhope ; 7 p fulhope in tnfufa iux® dinifas de Ellum uly
caninet / 7 p @aninet ufq, ad aq'lonaré pt? de Witflede ; 7 ab aq'lonari pte
de Witflede i t%nftfa uf i edwardefcloch » 7 ita sic' riunl? de edwardef-
cloch cadit i bothkil » Tencbit 4 tra 7 nem? , 7 pati?am q° ad me 7 fiedes
meos ptinet + s - fexta pté de Inflwie int® Pdéas dinifas de me 7 fledibs meis
ad feuda {ma di tempe inppetud litam 7 qieta ab di Suito 7 de Inware ; 7 de
ytware , 7 de oiib; auxiliis ; 7 ab dimoda pfuctudie 7 exacéde - Reddendo

ii m' 7 hedib; meis finglis annis inppetuii - xl - dena ad felta sti Jacobi ,
7 unas botas ad fefti sti Andé , Licebit a pddis @o%chis u'etig, uoluint
int* diuifas pie'ptas habitatla 7 fealingas pone st ut bdibs fuis ut aialibs
fuis oftYere , hitare ; arare 7 selare , 7 alio m° q’ uoliint cdmoda fui fate /
Nee licebit eli

miafiones fate ; Ipi q’q, @ochi 7 hoies coy accipict de bofeo aifiaméta fna ad

3 n° p ipos mo"ehos int diuifas pleptas fealingas pone ut

ardenda 7 edificandd ; q“nta uolfiint ta ad villa de Spteldun g* ad illa tram
q'm de me tenét 1 {3 nd licebit eis q'eq* de bofco uende s3 de brucre licebit
eis 7 hdib; coy able 1 P*fati F @o'chi ponét i defentione una [partem]
nemoris ad aifid fuad , 7 ponét foreftar fi yoluint ad ipm nem? e°todiend ; ita


--- Kelso1_page331.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 211

: ae <n ao Sux & has =

q nits inde q'eq* aceipict n° p lic conachoy ; Hae tra 7 hac onenGm Isrerwre.
A penmeione A pi —

ego 7 fiedes mei warantizabim? Pdéis co%chis 7 defendem? inppetuii ; Et ad

Gree - - Poa Aan er
hae ouendSm ftabilit inppetui tenenda p me 7 hedibs meis sii malo ingenio

tactis fac’{tis ewan
de fidzo tenemto pt
pat® meo ; Alano de Mundegnmery « J - fit ei? » Nich fit Rolandi » Wito
de Hauckeretiun ; Rit f¥e ei? ; Wik capHo de Kaleh - Wilt Ribaud ,
Wichaele fit Salomdis de Norrha ; 7 Dltis aliis -

is ci juramento affidaui ¢ q niieg” p me vi aliqné meoy
. . Oe son os
‘atis Monachis pt°nfia monebit? » Hiis tefi Rofto Anenel

Conftmacio & quada conuenddm int nos 7 Robti de Kent? -

253 Vnitlis ste aris ete filiis 7 fidelibs - Walt- fit Alani dapife? Reg Scocie ,
Salé - Nowlin des ta poli q” plentes me oceflifle 7 hae carta mea ofirmafie
monach de Keleh toté cducnGdm ex integ® q*m feceriit ch militib; meis -
s+ Rohto de Kenth - 7 ectis « de tra - 7 nemore + 7 pafiura - 7 aliis aifiamétis
i fritorio de Inflwit , sict in infi*mentis inde in? cos féis otinet® - 7 sie’
carta Alani pris mei teftat? » Hiis Teftib3 « Bno Walto de Lendefeia » Wilt
de Lend - Joti - vicecofti de Rokcfburg ; Bernardo de Handefi ; Robto de
ypfetlingtune ; Walcolono Lochard ; Rob Crok ; 7 aliis -

Carta sr vna Salinam in Lochkendeloch «
254 Vnitlis ste Gris ede filiis 7 fidelibs Roland? de Galweia fit Vehtredi

oftabularius Reg Scott , salé - Sciant ofis ta pofti g* plentes me deditle 7 fol. 108,
oeeflifle 7 he carta mea ofirmatte deo 7 ecctie {te Qarie de Kelch ; 7 cona-

chis
Lochkendeloch ; 7 aifiamentii de bofeo meo ; sufficiens ad patella fuftinenda
7 patturaad q*tuor boues ; 7 ad und caballai, 7 vit mefuagit ; 7 eurtilagia ;

ibidé deo Suientib; i liberi 7 pura / 7 ppetna clemofina vna salina apd


--- Kelso1_page332.png ---
Iscenwye.

212 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Hac & elemofina dedi eis 7 gcefli - ita libe 7 qlete bndam inppetua 7
poflidenda # sie alig® alia clemofina i Regno Scott libius , 7 q'eei? hint 7
poflident - Sufcepi ¥ Pdtos w*achos 7 eoy hoies qui i page loco manfuri
sit I firma pace 7 ptecéde mea ; His teft? - R- Abbe de Qailros - G+
pore » Hug eapHo 7 + clico Reg ; Hug capo meo ; Gaut clico meo ;
Henk de sto claro ; Alano de Thirleftano ; Pet? de la haga ; Alex? de

Crefiewell , Gillito de Worewit , Alano de Clapham -

e Oe On 7
Carta sr duas ptes tre in ‘tritovio de Inuerwyé -

Vitis fee Gris ecctie filiis 7 fidelibs , Robtus de Kent salt , Nottint ons
ta pofti q® pfentes me dediffe ad feuda firma inppetuai 7 h? fe'pto meo
otirmafle Abbi 7 @onach de Keleh tra mei 7 nem? 7 patturd que ad me
7 fiedes meos ptinet + s+ duas ptes in tritorio de Intlwid que & ot" ‘tra code
m@onachoy de Kelch siet uidett riuulus de edwardefeloch cadit i bothkil ; iux*
elziethalech 7 ita fieut bothkil defeend' uf, ad bucea de fulhope ; 7 p fulhope
it‘nfata iux® dinifas de ellum , ufc, ad caninet 7 p waninet » vfq, ad aq'lo-
naré pté de Witllede ; 7 ab aq'lonari pte de Witllede i ena ulq, 7 Ed-
wardelcloch 7 ita fie! Edwardefeloch cadit i bothkil » Tenebit ati tra 7
nem? 7 pafi’am q° ad me 7 hedes meos ptinet + s + duas ptes inf* pdéas
dinifas de me 7 hedibs meis ad feuda firma i pe inppetua - liham 7 q'eta

ab di Suicio » 7 de Inware 7 de viware ; 7 de omib3 auxiliis , 7 ab dimoda

ptuetudie 7 exacce ; Reddendo i ifm 7 feds wneis finglis annis inppetud

A warea argeti ad felt sti Jacobi Licebit ati paddis M0" chi wefiq, uoltint
int® Pfe'ptas diuifas habitaéla 7 scalingas st 7 hoib3 fuis 7 aialibs suis ptt*ere
7 Nitare ; 7 alio m? q° uoliint eSmoda fuii fave » N¢ licebit alict nt Pp ipos
@o*chos int* diuifas pletptas scalingas pote t mantiones fate Tpi q 7 hoies
eoy aceipiét de bofeo aifiamita fua ad ardendi 7 edificand’ q*nti volitint ta
ad villa de Spteldofi q* ad ila ‘tra qm de me tenet ; 53 n6 licebit eis q'eq*



--- Kelso1_page333.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 213

9 at = Qh
5 coy uende + Ponét F pfati tsveawre.

de bofeo vende ; s3 de bruere licebit eis 7 ho}
«o*chi i defenfione una ptem nemoris ad aii
foreftaF ad ifm nem? cuftodicd - Ita q nls if q'eq® accipiat nt p licencia
mochoy ; Hae tra 7 hae ouenddm ego 7 fiedes mei warantizabim? cis 7
defendem? inppetui ; Hie + fi + puenéim fiabilit inppetuad tenenda p me
7 fiedi 3 meis sfi malo ingenio affidaui , Hiis Teft: ; Hug capHo clico Reg ;
Thoma fit ci? ; Radulpho clico ei? 7 Robto hoie ei? » Orbto caplt + Robto ,
7 Wito clicis 7 Rob Hunaud ; Roland de Intlwié » Walt de Keth 1 Rob
de Edinha ; Tho* de Heriz -

= . 0. a,
sua / 7 si uoluint ponét

+ =f sO .
Conuencio &r q‘inda ‘tram i tritorio de Inuerwyé -

256 Wnitiis {te aris ccctie filiis 7 fidelib; » Robert? de Kent + 7 Robt’
Hunand ; 7 Roland gefi Nichot de Conftant® sali; Notint ofts ta pottti
q® plentes nos dedifle ad firma t'ginta t'b3 annis 7 h° se'pto firo ofirmaffe
Abbi 7 q@o%chis de Kelch tram jiram 7 nem?, 7 pati’am i fritorio de
Iniwit q? & ott tra coydem @o'choy de Kelcho ; sic uidett rial? de

Edwardefeloch cadit i bothkil iux" rlziefhaleeh ; 7 ita sic' bothkil defeend*
ufg, ad bucea de fulhope 7 p fulhope i enfufa p diuifas de Inuerwit ; 7
de Ellum uly, ad maninet » 7 p Maninet uf, ad aq'lonaré pté de Withilede ;
7 ab aq'lonari pte de Withflede i nftva ulg, i Edwardefeloch » 7 ita sie’
riuul? de Edwardeloh eadit i bothkil - Tenebat ait tra; 7 nem? / 7 pafi?am
inf* Pdéas diuifas de nob 7 hedibs firis ginta t'b3 annis , liba 7 q'eta
aux! 17 xb dimoda

ab di sflizo » 7 de Inware 7 de viware 7 de Gi
gtuetdie 7 exacéde ; Reddédo nob if 7 fiedibs firis p fina finglis annis
viginti sot ad fetta sti Jacobi - Liccbit 4 Pdéis @o"chis u'eiq, uolflint int®
ple'ptas diuifas hitacula 7 scalingas st ¥ hdib; suis fT alalibs {uis ofttere
7 hitare 7 alio q’libs m° comod fui fate - N© licebit eg'in nt p ipos fot. 104.

@o*chos int pfetptas diuifas scalingas potie t @anfiones face » Ipi q?


--- Kelso1_page334.png ---
214 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

isorawre. 7 holes eoy accipitt de bofeo aifiafita sua ad ardend 7 edificand q‘ntii

noltiint ta ad uilla de Spteldun ; q® ad illa fra q’m de nob tenét  s5

nd licebit eis q'eq* de bofco uendere ; s3 de bruere licebit cis 7 hdibs
eoy uende ; Pontt ¥ pfati co%chi i defenfione und ptem nemoris ad
aifiam sua ; 7 ponéet foreftat si uoltint ad ipm nem? euftodiend ; ita q
nls ind q'eq® accipict n° p licencia co"cboy + Si u® nos ut fiedes firi aliq®

Oe ae =
tempe ultius pdtam tra nem? 7 paftura al

Fy nee}
vende uf ad firma pone
. = 9» ays ox ° 7 ;
uf i clemofina dare volttim?® ? Alli e@ uendem? ut ponem? ad fina - uti

—_ F yen , : . en
elemofina dabim® nt pdzis @o*chis de Kelcho si ea eme ut ad firma

oO. o. 7 on p =: Pant,
fre uoltint » Hane tra 7 hae puenGm nos 7 hedes firi warentizabim’

cis 7 defendem? pats iij -annis + Hane cni puenéom fiabilit tenédam
p nob 7 hedibs firis sii malo ingenio affidanim’ , Incept aii tmin? Imi?
ouenddis ad fefta sti Qartini pximi: p°q* Philipp® Rex francie 7 Ricard?
Rex Anglie ineriit icrofolima ; Q' , fuit ann’ ; cillefim? ; centefim?
nonages’ ab incarnaéve dni; Hiis Teli» duo Ricardo abbe de Driburch -
WiHo canonico cius ; Hugone capHo clico regis + Tho" filio eius « Guatfio
Avenel +7 @-a-

Carta & s

a ptem de {ritorio de Inmerwyt -

257 Vnitlis ste Gris ecctie filiis 7 fidelib3 , Robert? Aucnel - salt Nohint ofis
tam pofti q® pfentes me dediffe ad feuda firma inppetui 7 h° s¢'pto meo pfir-
mafie abbi 7 @o"chis de Kelcho tra mea - 7 nem? - 7 paftura - que ad me
7 heredes meos [pertinet] « s + sexta ptem de fritorio de Inuerwid « q° eft
ot” tri cortidé Monachoy de Kelcho - sict vidett riuulus de Edwardefeloch
eadit i bothkil iux* Elziefhalech - 7 ita sicut bothkil defeendit ufg, ad buced
de fulhope + 7 p fulhope in tufufa iux® diuifas de Ellum ufq, ad qaninet +
7 p oaninet ufy, ad aq'lonaré ptem de Witllede 7 ab aq'lonari de Witflede
in taf wig, i Edwardefeloch - 7 ita sient riuulus de Edwardefcloch eadit


--- Kelso1_page335.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 25

i bothkil » Tenebiit afi fram 7 nem? 7 paftura q° ad me 7 fledes meos tsenuwre.
ptinet - s - sexta ptem de Innerwit ; infra p[dictas] diuifas de me 7
fedibs meis ad feuda f'ma omi tempe inppetud - libam 7 quiet ab di Suicio
7 de Inware 7 de vtware , 7 de omibg ausiliis , 7 ab dimoda ofuetudie 7
exacéde ; Reddendo inde m* 7 heredib3 meis singlis annis inppetua , xl -
dena ad fefti sti Jacobi - 7 unas botas ad fefti sti And , Licebit &
Padis monach ubiciq, uoluerit int diuifaf pfeptas habitala 7 fealingas
fibi ut hoib3 fuis ut aialib; fuis oft*ere 7 habitare arare F 7 feminare ;
7 alio m° q? uoluerit cOmodi fui fate » Nee clibet n° Pp ipos mo*chos int®
diuifas Pfctptas fealingas potle ut @anfiones fate - Ipi gq’ monachi 7
hoies coy accipiét de bofco aifiaita fua ad ardendi 7 edifieanda q‘nta
noluerint tam de Spteldun ; q* ad illa tra qm de me tenét ; s3 nd
licebit cis q'eq* de bofeo uendere s3 de bruere licebit cis 7 hdib3; coy.
uende +» Pont 5 pfati @o%chi in defenfione und ptem nemoris ad ailid
sud ; 7 ponét foreftaria si nolitint ad ipm nem? cuftodiendi ita q nHs
inde qcq* aceipict nt p lieéeiam conachoy - Hane tra 7 hae ouenéom
ego 7 heredes mei warentizabim? eis 7 defendem? inppetui ; Hance - ii -
ouendom fiabilit inppetua tenendd p me 7 heredib3 meis sii malo ingenio
affidani , Hiis Teft?. Rob de Kent - Alano de Wundeguiii + Joh Hote ,
Rollando de Intlwit - Nich fit ei? ; Henn de Kent , 7 aliis -

Carta sup paft’am de Inuerwyek -

258 Wnitilis ste Gris ecetie filiis 7 fidelib; + Rob « de Kent salé - Scidt ois
ti lentes q pofti » q ego Robt? de Kent ; 7 Rad pal Ms fidei intpofigone
fmanim? @o%chos de Keleho ; q si pafiura de Inuerwid alict ad firma dare
uellem? : filli n® eis ea darem? - Si ig? Qailro’ ut quilib3 alii aliq'w carta
dnderint ad pband q ipis Pdéam paftura ad firma ycefferim / Sciat
des fideles ili carta ot* fid@ mea p subrepédm fnifle inpet“ta » 7 icctco


--- Kelso1_page336.png ---
Iyurrwye,

216 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

fillam vim T cfficaeia prorf? Tre debet - Neg, eni ego hui’modi earta
gt® Kalchoenfes ivfte dare potam neq Qailrofenfes ea n ininfte potant,
impet*re - Volo g* firmit 7 pfenti carta mea pfirmo ut @o%ehi de Kelch
pdtam paft’am de me 7 fiedibs meis inoenfle teneat inppetud / sicut
eyrogffi tefiat? q’d in? me 7 illos ftm eft » 7 sic’ ego 7 fr Mis affidanim’? -
Hiis Tefte . Hug capto ctico Reg - Oftto capHo de Kelch + Ingolf ; 7
Abfalon 7 Ada eapHis de Rok ; 7 oultis ali

Controtifia int Abbm 7 Couen? de Kelch » 7 dim Alani de Wunde-

gunly cilitem -

Oinib; ste Gris ecclie filiis « Hugo dei gia Abbas de Dribure + Thoit p'or
de Coldir y Laurenei? Archid
iteret? int diim Herbert Abbm de Kelch 7 ei%dé loci onenti ex vna pte -

And? salf i dno + Cai c& queda

7 dim Alani de Qundegumery milité ex alta » Ead@ nob a dno legato

yt finé ot®tfic imponem? + In h Vba et fuit omitia + fF Jacob? dni pp
phiari? 7 capHs aplice fedis legat? + Ditctis 1 x° filtis Abbi de Dribwg -
P'ori de Coldigha - agro» L + archid sti And? salé ; Accedentes ad nos
dildi filii iri AbDYs 7 Mo*chi de Kelch + fui not expofuere q'remonia -
4 Alan? de QundeGumery wiles Sr exaccde qvida decimay 7 dapnis
illatis - Refpond@do fimplicit + nd + Q'a uw’ mora nd pofliun? longioré i ptibs
itt
q‘tin’ ptibs onocatis audiz

+ Dif Fre ancte legaédis q* fungim® difitée Pcipiendo mandam? «

7 _ yn ac
cim - 7 ca fine debito tminetis - facientes p

cenfura cceliaftica fruit obfuari + Teftes a q fuerit noiati + fi fe gFa + odio +
ul timore sbt*xerint + 7 ccta « € si nd offis hiis excqndis intée pottiitis ?
duo ufm nichomin? exeq’nt? - Dat ap? Kelch i q*dragefia - P? filta
g¢ cdi&a ptibs i pfencia fira oftitntis + multis q hie inde ppofitis » Demi
int ptef amicabilit s° puenit ; 7 illa otlifia cora nob i hae for* sopita eft -

Videlt q pds A - de Wundeguily pmifit i fide faa p fe 7 hedibs fuis

fol. 105,


--- Kelso1_page337.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 217

7 7 oiiib3 aliis fuis cora nob i pleno eapitlo de merfkes ap* Edinha - die tverewse
velis px* p? dnicam qua cantat? « Letare iertin « oftituto » Anno ab inear-
nacde ow ; ec? 7 xxi + fe ndeq® aliq‘m moturi ot'ifia erga déos Abbm
7 o%chos - sup exacéBe decimay tre sue - q’m ipi Abbas 7 wo‘chi de
Kalch colere fedunt de vafto i fritorio de Infwit 7 ut multure ex fructu
ciufdé tre puenicntis - fup q'b3 ipe - A - t*hebat® in cam cori nob ab cifdé
Abbe 7 wo%chis - N* F aliq’d eis illaturi: g‘uamé fup alig” re ad déos
Abbm 7 monach ptinéte - Promifit 7 ide A - qiles fe p pofle suo ipis
Abbi 7 wonach - 7 reb illoy - sicut st 7 suif fore puifurdi - ofiliatura 7
auxiliaturii - Vt 4 h que cord nob i indicio acta sit ti enidentia - q* ppetua
fut‘is tempib3 obtineat fmitaté - Nos iuraiiito a d@o - A - milite ad pacis hui?
obfuaédm corpali? Pitito - 7a nob recepto - 7 sigillo suo appdito - cdpofiGom
ifta auc"te q* fungebam’ roborauimus - 7 plenti se’pto figilla fira i teftimonit
appofuim? - Tefte toto capitlo d A)erfkis -

Conftnacio sr gvendem féam cit dno Rolito de Kent qilite -

260 Vnitlfis tc cat's cectie filiis 7 fidelibs - Alan? fit Walfi dapifo® Regis
Scot ; Salf - Noflint ds ta pofti q” pfentes me goceflifie « 7 hac carta mea
pfirmafle monachis de Kelch tota puenéSm ex integro q‘m fecerit ci
coilitib; meis - s - Robto de Kent - 7 cctis de fra 7 nemore - 7 paftura -
7 aliis aifiamétis i fritorio de Inuerwit - fict teftat? eyrograffi in? cos inde
fam - Hiis plegiis 7 teftib; « Symone Locard ; WiHo Pafteleue - 7 Rolto
Croch - Audoeno de Witflede - Hiis i teftib; OfBto eapellano de Kelch -
Robto diacono « Walt de Keth -

to
ro


--- Kelso1_page338.png ---
Ixcerwye.

261

218 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Té Confmacio sr eandé puengom féam i2 Abbm 7 Couent de Keleh 7
R - de Kent - 7 alios -

Vills dei gfa Rex Scot? - Omibs pbis hoibs toci? Pre sue cficis 7 laicis
Salé - Sciant jfentes 7 fut’i me dediffe 7 hac carta mea pfirmaffe oucnéom
feam in? Abtm 7 Connenti de Kelchou « 7 Robta de Kent 7 Robtum
Hunand - 7 Roland geilum Nichot de Coftentin - s - de tra. 7 paftura - 7
botco i fritorio de Intiwit p cafde dinifas ficut i Cyrogpho in? cos fo
ptinet® + 7 ci omib3 eifdé iuftis ptinenciis - Tenend a fefto sti Qartini px?
p°a® Ricard? rex Anglie « 7 Philipp? Rex francie plecti sit tls? Terofolima -
uly ad fining tginta Cum annoy pactum - Ita liBe 7 q'ete ; plenarie 7
honorifice sict Cyrog“phii in? cos fem teftat® 7 feut ofirmacio Alani fit Walti
dapifi Regis ofirmat , faluo Suit meo + Tefts Rofto captto meo « Philippo
de Valoii - Walt fit Com Dunekaii - Witt Comyii -

Sd poftum? licite ingdi tram de Bothkyl -

2 Pateat vnitifis q nof Pat'ei? de Dumbak Comes carchic volum? 7 cécedim?

p pfentes q Abbas onaftii de Kelch 7 ciufdé loci Conuent? pofiint licite
na de Bothky] cf dib3 suif ptinenciis + que eft inf* diftrn@? firos -
7 ei pacifice poflidere - 7 q poflint dimoda vtilitaté fua exinde fale , modif

ing*di t

dibs q'bs eli? vidint s* expedire + sit pt*badve fira 7 caliipnia « ac ballinoy
firoy - In cui? rei teftimonid fifentes tras sigillo firo fignatas déis ADbi 7
Couentui ficri fecim? patentes - Dat ap* Dabar - die cartis px* p? fefta
Inuenddis ste Crucis - Anno gie « qille’ ; t'eenteS - decimo -

fol. 106.


--- Kelso1_page339.png ---
263

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 219

Refignago sr calipnia i ftagno Qolend de Sperteldon -

Vniliis sto Gris ecctic filiis ac fidelibs Edulf? fit Cramet + salt - Nottint ds
pofti 7 Pontes me q'ctd clamafle omné ealfipnia q‘m tui i ftagno wolendini
de Spteldun + Gd eft sup Whitteder - de me 7 de dib3 meis inppetu’ -
Ecctie ste Q)arie de Kelehou ; 7 Monachis ibide deo Suientibs - Dedi F eis 7
he se'pto pf'maui i lidam 7 ppetua, elemofina ofie ius q’d inde habui ; Hiis
teft: - Gilbto Bpofito - Leuenad piftore » Alano de sart'n Rit de Suafha .
Rié Scotto - 7 aliis -

Carta sr Werchelye -

Oinibs ste Gris xeetie filiis - Walter? de Bolebech - salé - Sciatis me dedifie ;
7 oceflifie 7 pienti carta mea pfirmatle inppetua - Deo 7 ste Qarie - 7 ffi
Witto de Qercheleye 7 dibs ei? suecefforibs q’dda hemitoria q’d voeat?
Werchingleye + 7 fundat’ de valto meo iux* Qerchingb’na ci oé€a ste
Warie ibide pfiréta - 7 ct dibz ad Pdém loca ptinentibs ilibam , pura ; 7
ppetua elemofina - i bofeo - i plano ; i p'tis 1 aq's - i ftagnis 7 wolendinis 7
i cdmunib; aifiatitis ; 7 1 dib3 cdib3 pafcuis alalib; suif p tota tra mea - 7
forefta mea / 7 libum exitd 7 int’iti Loibs suif 7 aialibs fuis p tota fra mea
ex q’cumg, pte dd loci voltiint - 7 accipient ext dinifas fuas de viridi bofeo
meo ad edificand 7 de mortuo ad pburend q‘nti volflint - 7 q'eti erat de
panagio de dnicis poreis fuis - Hane & clemofinam dedi 7 peefli 7 plenti
carta mea pfirmaui inppetua pdto {fi Wilo + 7 dibs viris religionis pdzo
Witlo i pdto hemitorio de Qerchingleye suecedentibs p anima mea 7 sponse
mee sibille - 7 p aiabs fieda meoy ; 7 aiicelioy 7 succefloy meoy + tenendai
ita libe » 7 qlete fict aliq® clomofina ab aliq'b3 viris religionis » libius » 7

Wencuenye,


--- Kelso1_page340.png ---
SCERCHELYE.

265

220 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

qeei? ; tenct? ; Hiis teft- ; Sibilla de Bolebech ,; Regifi de kenebelle +
OfBto monacho ; Wdardo p* , Symiido de Kent ; Robto de Grej 1 7

aliis «

Conf'rmato sr Wercheleye -

Vnitifis ste Gris rectie filiis 7 fidelibs ta futtis q* pfontibs » Walter? de
Bolbech salé + Sciatis q ego Walter? de Bolcbech + fit Walti de Bot - ad
petiédm 7 affensi Hngonis de Bolebech ffis mei 7 fedis mei p aia mea
7 fponfe mee 7 aiahs aficelloy 7 succefloy meoy dedi 7 geefli 7 hie prenti
carta mea pf'mani inppetud Deo 7 ste Warie » 7 Wik 7 Rogo monacti
de ordie Kelchoenfi q’ddam fiemitorid q°d vocat? O)’chingleie + q°d fundat?
de vatto pris mei 7 meo ius* Q)’chingb’na + cit eectia ste Marie i code loco
oft"@a + 7 ei dibs ad pdem locé ptinentibs - i liBam ; pura 7 ppetna
clemofina p has vidett dinifas q'eq'd otinet® inf* claufi’as fuas ex vt", pte
O)chiub’ne p cenitd de vado figuloy vig, ad vadii ut ftainefdenb’ne defeendit
1 Q)’chinb’ne + i bofeo - i plano ; i aq's ; i ftagnis ; i molendinis 7 i p*ti

a eae pees en . “Oy
dibs edibs aifiametis , 7 libtatibs ¢ 7 i cdibz pafenis ug p c'euitii pdei heme-

torii + ex ut"q, pte )°chingb’ne p {ra mea 7 forefta med - 7 u'eig, pdes -
Wil - ut pd%s Rog pafi?am Hucrit aialibs fuis in tempe pat's mei 7 alioy
z imeo tempe / 7 libum exiti 7 int°itum st 7 hdibs fuis p tota tra mea
7 forelti mea ex q'ciq, pte Pdti loci uoluerit » €2 si un? PaGoy co'choy
deceflerit ¢ dedi 7 ocefli 7 hae carta mea oftmaui pdem femitoria de
fuis tenenda inppetud ita lide 7 qtete
is tenet? + Poft deceflti

OY’ chingleic alti illoy ef dibs pti

sict aliq’ clemofia lihius 7 q'eei? ab
u® ut’riig, Co"choy Wiki vidett 7 Roi dedi 7 veefli 7 hac carta mea oftmaui
pdem hemitoria de A)’chingleie ei Pdea eta Marie ibidé oft*@a 7
ci dibs ad jdém loci ptinentibs femp inppetuii vni monacho ut duobg



--- Kelso1_page341.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 221

de habitu 7 ordic Kelchoenfi 7 filli? ordis ut habit? religidis u’ ordis 7 hitus @eruexe:
e&e Kelchoen$ {i {Bieccione tai cée Kelchoens ut alicui? dom? religiois

altius ordis - tenend ita lihe qete , 7 honorifice fic aliq® elemofina lidius

qeei? ; 7 honorificenci? tenet? ab aliq'b3 viris religionis - Hiis Teft- - Sibilla

de Bolebech ; Hud de Bot fit ci? ; Gilbto de launal » Rofito de Infula ;

Regi ; de Kenebelle ; Robto morell ; 7 aliis -

Conf'mato Sr Pra de O)°cheleia +

266 Sciant des ta Pfentes q” futuri q ego Walte® de Bolebech fit Walti de
bot + petiéde 7 affenfa Hug de Bolebech ffis mei 7 hedis mei p aia
pat's mei Walti de Bolebe » 7 p falute aie Sibille de Bot mat's mee 7 p pot. 107.

. Ged Ge a a 5

aia mea 7 ffis mei pd@i Hug de bot 7 p aiabs dium aiicefloy 7 suecetloy
meoy dedi 7 gecfi 7 hve pfenti carta mea of'maui inppetuii Deo 7 ste
Marie» 7 {ti WiH 7 ff Roo wo'chis de O)’cheleia 7 alii
y Suituris inppetudi - toti ‘tra heremitorii mei q’d fundat? fup )’ching

bid& deo Suicntib;
ena +

i pura 7 ppetua clemoiam cit dibs libtatibs 7 aifiamétis q’s jdés fF Wilt
z sui habueriit i tempe pat's mei 7 alioy 7 i meo tempe - Tenenda de me
7 hedibs meis inppetui + like ; qiete honorifice in 7 integ? +7 p? deectilii
pdei Wii - ut Rogeri 7 dedi 7 ocefli ; 7 of'maui pdém hemitoria de chit -
duob3 wo%chis inppetnad de habitn eodé - s + de ordie Ketchoucn$ - sii
5 PI

caliipnia tai 7 exac@e / 7 Sbiccée tam Illi? q® alicui? dom? rcligionis -
vt duo tanti @o%ehi 7 nd plures
> teneat adeo lite » 7 q'ete » 7 honorifice ; 7 integ® - sict Pdéi cotchi -
7 74 7 7 3 I

W .7 R- tenverit p has diuifas - vidett qeq'd ptin
We p qeqd 5
pd%oy co*choy p ceuitti de vado figuloy ufq, ad uadii u’ Stainefdefh?na
defeéd' 1 Q)’chinb’ne - Hiis Tefty ; Dna Sibilla de Bolefb - Hug de bot -

fit ci? - Gilbto de Laual - Rob de Infula - Witlo de ffenwid ; 7 Oltis aliis «

semp heant pagan elemofina de )°chet

inf® clanfi?am



--- Kelso1_page342.png ---
Heveycuestnes.

LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Conftmaco sr « xxvi - acras fre ius* Heleycheftres

267 Sciant itentes 7 futuri q ego Hugo de Balliolo geefli 7 hae Pfenti carta

268

mea ofirmaui inppetuii Deo «7 ste Warie 7 Roo monacho de M)’chingleya
7 dibg ci? suecefloribs @Monachis i loco de Q)’chingleya deo Suitu¥ inppetud

viginti 7 sex acras ‘tre iux® heleycheft q's Euttachi? pa? meus it dedit i

liberam - pura + 7 ppetua clemofina - Hane 4 clemofina dedi it 7 ofirmani
inppetué tenenda ita lihe ; qrete ; 7 honorifice , et omib; cOmunib; aifiafitis
sieut aliq? cle-

7 libertatibg - s' 7 hdib; fuis 7 aialibs fuis u'q, sup tra mea
moia libius » quieci? 7 honorificenci? 7 meli? tenet? ut teili poteft ab aliq’bs
viris religionis « Hits teftib3 ; Ingelramo de Balliolo - Bernardo de Bal -
iIen¥ de vi + Guidone de fontib3 » Hug de Normauilla - 7 qultis aliis -

Carta &r Ecctiam de Halyburtoun -

Vnitiis ste Gris ecctic filiis 7 fidelib3 - Danid fit Tructe « salé « Seitit ds ta
pofti q” plentes me deditle - 7 peefliffe 7 hae pfenti carta ofirmatte Ecctie {ee
Q)arie de Keleho + 7 @onachis ibidé deo Suientib; - Eectiam de Halyburé
villa mea et tofta 7 crofta - 7 duab; bouatis tre + 7 eft dib aliis ad ipam
cectiam infie ptinentibs - i libam 7 ppetua elemofina - Hae aii cectiam dedi
7 geefli cis p aia dni Cofpat'eit comitis - 7 p falute aie mee - 7 aficefloy 7
suecefloy meoy - ita libe , 7 q'ete - tenenda 7 poflidenda sic alig* alia elemo-
fina libi? / 7 qeci?  tenent 7 poflidat , Hiis Tefte « Gaut Arechid sti Andi -
Sim Archid de Teuid - Gaut clico - Joh fit Decani - Wagro Nichot - J -
chico de ffoghou « Pat'cio clico fit comit 1 Rog fit Robi freb ; 7 Gltis aliis -


--- Kelso1_page343.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 223

Conftmacio r Capella de Halyburtuy - Hacysurtes.

269 Wnittis ste cat's rectie filiis 7 fidelibs ti Pfentibs q® futuk vil ut anditut
has tras » Waltus fit Dauid filii Trnite « falé - Nott vnilifitas fra me intuitu
caritatis dediffe 7 pceflifte 7 h*e carta mea of'naffe Deo 7 xectie ste Q)arie de
Kelchou + 7 monachis ibidé deo Suientibs 7 Suituris Capella de Halyburtuii -
fra mea 7 ef refignaffe @at'ci ecctie de Grenelawe que ifoy wo'choy E sict
ius illi? ecctie ci fris ; decimis ; pafeuis 7 focalib3 , 7 dib3 aliis ad ca infte
ptinentibs , Hae ati clemofina feci cis p falute pat's mei 7 aie mee + 7 p
aiab3 dium aficefioy 7 succeffoy meorii - Q‘re volo ut paei c@o*ehi pdtam

coy 7

plenarie , sic* aliq‘m alia ecctiam ut capella i regno Scocie hihi? qreci? ;

honorificenci® , 7 pleni? tenét ut poflident - Siw’ alig? tempe alig’d se'pti
ut Epi uf alicui? altius pt" cos - 7 ot® hui’modi conceflioné 7 refignaém ab

capella teneat 1 pura 7 ppetua clemofina - ita libe » q'ete ; hono

alig? fait inpet'ta ut plata ; nolo 7 pccdo ut se'ptii illud uirib; careat + 7

loci nd tencat - Ipi u? @o%chi recepiit pat*m mei 7 me - 7 ds aficeflores 7
succetiores meos i ffnitaté dom? sue de Kalcho - 7 pticipes feccrit dium

ofonii 7 biificioy que fiiit ut fient i coy eectia inppetuii - Hiis Tefie » Coit jul. 108.
Pat'cio ; Euftach de Vefci » Witt Pat ; Rig Nano - Joh vicecom de Rox-

burg - Bernardo de Hauden - 7 Gltis aliis -

Conf'mato 3r capella de Halyburtun -

270 Omid; xt fidelibs Pions s¢pti vifu¥ ut anditu¥ - Philipp’ de Halyburton
etna i dno salé » Nowit ynitifitas fra mo dinine caritatis intuit « 7 p salute
aie mee 7 ofium aficelloy 7 succeffoy meoy dedille ; gceflifie 7 hac carta
mea of'maffe Deo 7 Ecctie be A)arie de Kelchou 7 monachis ibidé deo
Suientibs 7 inppetud Suitu¥ 7 eoy ecctic cat'ci de Grenclawe i lifam , pura


--- Kelso1_page344.png ---
224 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Usrnentes. 7 ppetud clemofina + Capella de Haliburtun - ci tris ; deeimis ; 7 dibs aliis

ptinéeiis - libtatibs 7 aifiamétis {uis - Et e& d@e Ee de Grenclawe tang*
filid coat’ sue sp’tanté p me 7 hedibs meis ut aflig“is inppetuai refignalie 7
qreta clamatte + Q're uolo 7 ocedo ut dt mo“chi déam capella ei dibs
libtatibs ptinenciis 7 aifiaiitis fuis - adeo libe qete » plene ; 7 honorifice

abf, oii inpediméto fen clamio mei ut meoy heant ; teneat / 7 poflideat
inppetuii  sicut alig* ecctiam ut capella i Regno Scocie - iby ; ieci? ;
pleni? 7 honorificcnci? fint tenét ant pofiidet , 7 put carte Dauid fit Trute -
paui mei - 7 Walti fit cid@ aui mei sup eadé capella collate eifd @o*chis
pfeete pleni? 7 elins teftant? » In cui? rei teftimof pienti setpto sigilla
mei appofui ; Hiis tefty (agro Rolando de Lambedefi - Canonico Q)ora-
uicn$ - Bno Hérico de Haliburtoii qilite ; Wagro Hug de Bemmby ; Rob
de Edinha + 7 aliis -

Refignato & Jus 7 clamea i capella de Halyburtuy -

271 Onib; x' fidelibs he septa vilu¥ ul auditu¥ ; Philipp? de Haliburton salt
in dno + Noftit vuitifitas tira me ius mea 7 clamed q°d tui ut tre potui i
eapella de Halib’tun qat'ci e@&e de Grenlaw q° eft dnoy abbis 7 Conent?
de Kalch refignafie p me 7 fiedibs meis ut aflignatis inppetuii 7 collaéim
pdeceffoy meoy Sr cadé capella déis abbi 7 guentui ftam ratifieafle 7
ofmatic . Et ne ot* hui?modi eta clamaém ; ratificagdm feu ofirmagom
ego 7 Redes mei ut aflignati - jfentando + feu alio q’ciiq, m® ius dtoy abbis
7 Couent? i dea capella inpediendo venire potim? + obligo me 7 fiedes meos
ut aflig’tos infdicddi ipi? abbis q' p tempe filit - vt poffit nos p sitiam ex-
oicadbis i pfonis firis sii cle cogni@e fulminand , 7 p dia loca p que vidit
expedire q’ciens 7 q‘ndo folempnit publicand - fine p quiciq, alia cohgm
qm i nos extcere yolulit edpellere ad centi libras ftlingoy fab'ee cectie
soluend + qPeiens ius ipoy i d@a capella pfentando ut aliq? m° impedire


--- Kelso1_page345.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 225

attéptallim’ - Reniieio ingr i hac pte p me 7 fiedibs meis ut affig‘is piuilegio Cavorsccrms
fori fpeciatr 7 di acéBi » execpédi ; 7 defenfioni ; regic phibiGoi 7 dibs tris

inpet“tis 7 inpet“ndis - 7 i q°d potit obici pt* iftud fem ut Pfens infi*menta «

7 Gi ta inris civilis q* canonici remedio + In cui? rei toftim Pfonti se'pto

sigilli. mei appofui p me 7 hedibs meis ut afigttis - Dat qinto kt octob

anno dni - Q)°- cc? ; Ix? - p'mo -

Carta sr Ecctiam de Kamb?naythan ci dibg iuftis ptinéciis -

272 Uniilfis ste Gris Ecetic filiis 7 fidclibs has tras vifu ut auditu# » Radulph?
de Clen fit Rad de Clef salé - Noflit vnifitas tra me de cdfenfu Rogii

fiedis mei - 7 ad petiéom ci%dé gcellific 7 hae carta mea oftmafie Deo 7

ecelie ste Marie de Kelch 7 mo*chis ibidé deo Suientib; Ecctiam de Cam-
bgnaithan ei dibs ad candé iufte ptindtib; , iliba , 7 pura, 7 ppetua ele-
moiam ; Pea geofli eifdé 7 cée de Cambgnaithan tota decima Glture 7

exit? molendinoy meoy de Cambgnaithan i libam 7 pura 7 ppetua clemo-

fina - volo 7 7 ocedo ut cadé eé€a bladi sui molat p*mo p? quéciig, molenté
inuehit i Pdéis qolendinis ; siuc diis siue ali? yctiq fit Ipi & monachi
gectierit m' ut facia ptuata capella inf* curté mea sii det'méto ut dipno
aat'cis ce + Hac aii gceflioné feci cis 7 Pdée cectic p falute aie mee 7
afiectfoy 7 succeffoy meoy , Et qx ad pens sigilla meat magni i habui

sigillo mco scercto vna ci sigillis @iliti meoy - 7 sigillo dni Willi Auenel sot. 109.
Blens sept corroboraui - Hiis tefty ; Ricardo de Langetoft - Thom de
Wireceft? ; WiHo Auenel ; 7 Gilbto fit ci? » Rofo de Clef ; 7 Gltis aliis «

to
cy


--- Kelso1_page346.png ---
Syarrina,

i

a

i

=
we

Lo
uw

LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Carta sr Ecctiam de Symp'ng: ei ptinenciis fuis «

Onnib; uifu¥ ut auditu? has tras Hye de Simpriné ; salé - Sciatis me Bente
Petro filio neo 7 pecdente dediffe 7 oceflifie » 7 hac carta mea pf'maffe Deo
7 cectic ste A)arie de Keleh 7 monachis ibidé deo Suientib; Eccliam de
Simprine ; ci tofto 7 erofto + cit dect 7 oeto acris fre + ita life tenenda 7
poflidenda i libam , pura / 7 ppetua elemofina ; ci fris , deeimis ; 7 aliis
Eccliafticis biificiis siet aliq’m alia cectiam i Regno Scocie libins » q'eci? 7
pleni? tenct ut poflident ; Hae ati elemofina feci cis p salute aie Regis
Dauid 7 p falute dni mei Regis Qalcoloni ; 7 p falute mea 7 dium aiicefloy
7 succeffoy meoy « falua tenura Thor Archid i vita sua - Hiis teft> - Berculfo
de Hupfetligtun ; Ricardo Q)archaldo ; Wicio de Wieeftun ; Dodino de
Dodineftun ; Jotic pfona de flogghou ; agro [ ]de Hupfetligtii ;
7 cutis aliis -

Carta sr Eectiam de Lyntunrnderye’ cit ptinétib; -

Unitifis ste Gris ecctic filiis 7 fidelibs » Rig Cumyn « sali ; Seiat des ta
pofti q® pfentes - me dedifte 7 oceflifte 7 hac pfenti earta ofirmaffe ; Ecctie
fee Marie de Kelchou 7 monachis ibid@ deo Suientib3 ; Ecctiam de
Lyntunraderie ef dib3 ad ifam eectiam infte ptinentib; » Dedi 7 Pdte
cectie i liam 7 ppetua clemofina dimidia carneata tre i uilla Pnofata p aia
Henrici comitis dni mei ; 7 p aia Johis filii mei , q°y corpa ap* eos tumn-
lant? 7 p falute aie mee ; 7 aficeffoy 7 succefloy meoy + Volo itag, ut eectiam
jidtam 7 tra Pnoiatam « ita libe 7 qlete teneat 7 poftideat sicut aliq’m alia
clemofina lihius 7 qeei? tent 7 poffidet , Abbas u° 7 Couent? - me 7
Hestild sponfa mea - 7 filios firos i {fnitaté sua fufeepunt ; 7 bfificia eée
sue nob ocefferit - Hiis teft> ; Hextild fponfa mea - Od filio meo ; Ada de
Boncekil ; B’nard fit Bricn » Gaufredo Ridel -


--- Kelso1_page347.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Carta sr Ecctia de uilla thancardi - s - Wodekyrke - Wovenvinen.

5 Unillis ste Gris ede filiis 7 fidclib; Anncis de Brus falé i dno « Sciant ta
plentes q' futuri me deditfe ; 7 pceflitie ; 7 hac mea carta ofirmafie Deo 7 {te
Warie 7 eeetie de Kelchou 7 Coucntui ibidé Deo Suienti Ecctiam de uilla
Thaneardi - s +» Wdcekyrch ca dib3 ptinéciis que ad candé eectiam de iure
ptifte debent ; ilifam 7 pura 7 ppetua clemofina - tenenda 7 poftidenda
inppetua + ita libe qete ; plenarie 7 honorifice ? sicut ipi @o%chi de
Kelcho aliq’m cectiam i aliq? feudo alicui? qilitis i regno Scocie lihi? qteci?
pleni? 7 honorificenci? tenét 7 poflident - Hiis teft? » Buo Jot glal¥ cfio -
Hug capHo Reg ; Wito aleuié - Johe decano de Theuidale - Walt 7 Johe
clicis Epi + Pet? de Biggres ; 7 coultis aliis -

Si infpec6Om q"ydé cartay 7 pf'matofi Sr q‘sda ecctias i epatib; sti And?
7 Glafe -
7 iS

276 Oni; x fidelib3 ad q’s plens sc'pti puetlit- N - O - de Jedd» 7 de
Dribure - Abbes 7 prio de Coldingh*m sti Andi 7 Glafg diot - salt etna
i dno . Nofiit vnififitas fra nos q“fda cartas n° nd 7 ofirmades + sigil sti
Andi 7 Glafg q’nda efoy n° nd coydé locoy ecaploy sigttas fap q'b3da
ecetiis ac aliis bonis i Pdzis dioceS viris religiofis ADbi 7 Conucntui de
Kalch ordis s¢i Biidicti sti Andi dioceS n° nd 7 ptoratui ipo de Lefmahag
caritatine 1 pp'os ufus collatis - fi cancellatas nd rafas « nd abbolitas « n°i
aliq” pte suc forme viciatas + s3 sii di vitupade 7 vicio diligent infpexifte «
7 efficaci? ofidatte - q"y tenoré i forma inferi? annotata de Ybo ad tba
duxim? t‘nfe'benda - 7 ci sigillis firis fignand -


--- Kelso1_page348.png ---
Sraprixe,

2’

vw

77

228 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Couf'macio sr Ecctiam de Symprine i pp'os vius -

Oiiibs lv septa vifa¥ ut auditu¥ - Dauid pmiffise dia Ecctie sti Andt
coinif? humit ctnd i dno salé . Cai vnittfoy Sbicctoy vtilitati teneam? patna
sollicitudine puidere - ad coy in vtilitaté pe’anda speciali? obligam? « q' q*
sua sit ad fuftentaéom hofpitii - paupti - 7 peg'noy - effundiit « 7 i reli
augmenti oktit + Hine eft q ci dom? Kalchoen3 » paupib; 7 pegtnis se
exhibeat hofpitalé / nos tnquilati mo‘choy ibidé deo Suienciai puidere
cupientes + puida dclibagdc ordinanim? « 7 fiatuim? vt Pati co"ehi ecetie de
Scmprine + q‘m eis ad ufus pp'os dam? - 7 ocedim? - nd p vicariai s3 p

honefta capHni q nob 7 suecefforibs firis de fpualibs refpadeat - 7 p clict
lat inppetuii defuiri - Ipi & 5s frnét? d@e Ecctie i ufus fnos
ppetuo olltant + n® ad vicarioy plentacom teneant? + ci modici aut fere
nichil cis accrefeet + si ad candé vicarios Plentarét - Vt & h donato fira
ppetuii robur optineat ¢ Pens septa sigilli firi qunimine fecim? roborari -

fufficient@ fa

Saluis epopalib; nob 7 fuccetforibs firis - Dat Anno gfe m° ; ec? ; I? -

“no + In nat be Marie v'ginis -
8

Si infp°Gdem cui’da se'pti DD Hpi sti Andi -

Ontibs h° septa vituF ut anditn# - Johis p'or sti Andi 7 ei%dé loci Couent?
i dno salé + Noflit vnitiitas fra nos se'pta veilabit pris firi- DD - di gia
Epi sti And? infpexifle i hee Yba - Oimib; hoe septa vifu¥ ut audituF -
BP - pmiflide dia Ecctic sti And¥ @inif? humit cna i dno salé - ca
ynitifoy Sbiectoy vtilitati teneam? - 7 ¢ ~ Nos g' fupc'pte ordinaci 7
puifioi déi vetlabit pris firi g*ti Pbentes affenftii - ad maioré sec’itaté ea
of'mam? - 7 sigilli capitli fri robore cémunim? - Tefie ipo eapitlo firo -

fol. 110.


--- Kelso1_page349.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 229

] ~ ex pa a ~
Conf'mato Sr des Ecetias 7 Elemofinas firas i Epatn de Glasg -

279 Walt dei gia Glafg Ept - ynittfis ste Gris filiis 7 fidelibs ta fut’is q*
pfentibs, « salé ; Noflitis nos ad imitaéoim aficelfoy firoy + s + Mebti 7
Jocelini - yeefliffe - 7 Epali auctoritate pfenti carta ofirmaffe - Ecctie ste
Warie de Kelch 7 mo%chis ibid deo Suientib; offis ecetias 7 alias elemoias
q's hint i Efiatu Glafg + de gceflide Pecefloy firoy 7 fira - vidett Ecetias 7
scolas de Rokefburé burgo Reg - libas ; 7 qretas ab di pfuetudie « s - ab di
redditu sinodi 7 ab dib3 auxiliis - 7 holpiciis 7 prediis sict bone memorie
Hb - 7 Jocet - GlafZ ci cif@é monach earta fua pfirmanerit - 7 flea -
Ecetia de Qackefwel + 7 capella de Harlawe « sic' in? ipos @o%chos 7 lepfos
paei loci de ipa capella ouenit - Ecctiam de Sp’uftun ; Ecctiam de Qolle -
Ecctiam de Boulden - Ecctiam de Seleki
Eééam de Dunfres
de Lintonrotherié - Eééam de Infilethan - Eectiam de uilla Wice c& duabs

) Ecctiam de alfa Selekire -

Ecetia de Lefmahag - Eééam de Kilmaurii - Ecctiam

cape + s + ville Robti ffis Lambini - 7 ville Johis Priningi ; Baldewini -
Eectiam uille Thancardi que dr Wdekirke ; E@am de uilla Symonis
lockardi ; Eectiam de Cambuineithan ; Eectia de Dunfye* - 7 dec® marcas
duuati p mand cimifi“ntis i eéta de Camfy - E@tam de Stapilgorton -
Ecctiam de Dung‘i + Ecctiam de T*uerflat - Eectiam de Qortun - Ecctiam
de Kilofebern - ci dib3 earidé eectiay capllis - 7 aliis ptindciis

. Puoiatas
aii cectias + 7 capellas 7 offis cay obudcides - ed tris ; decimis - 7 dib; eay
ptingciis - 7 r°titudinib; - 7 pfonatii eaydé ecctiay plibate ecctic de Kalchou
7 pp'is ulibuf 7 fuftetagdibs mo*choy ibidé deo Suienciai ¢ Epali auc*te dam?
7 of'mam? inppetui + Saluo not 7 succefloribs firis iure Epali i omib; -
Hiis Teft?- Bno- H.- Archid fro. Dno- R - de Craf- canonico Glatz -
Puno + Ada - eapHo firo - Wagro Symone de Bigex ; 7 @ultis aliis - Dat ap*
Alnecrom - Anno gfe @° - cc? + xxx? ii? - die Potenciane Virg



--- Kelso1_page350.png ---
230 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

steanavas. Conf'maco Sr decima bladi tre Rit de Barde -

280 Oinibs x' fidelibs has tras vifuF ut auditut - Walt mifadve dia - Glafg
ecetic cinif? efni i dno salé - Nott facim? vnififis - nos ad inftancia
Hugonis fit Robti de Bigris pat®ni ee de St*hauan - 7 Reginaldi fit dni
Reginaldi de Crauforde - pfone eééc de St"hauan - deditle 7 oceffifle - 7
hae pfenti carta jira pftmaffe - Deo 7 eéée bi Q)achuti - 7 monach ibidé deo
Suientibs - 7 inppetui Suitut - ilibam . 7 qeta - 7 ppetua clemofina tota
decima bladi tre Rit de bard iacentis ex pte auft‘li de Avan + s - caioris
Kipe 7 winoris Kipe - 7 Glengeuil - 7 Polnel - 7 Lowuhir - 7 ofiiti tray ad
pnoiatas tras de iure ptinenciii - que ia culte sat - ut inpoftum coli potat -
Tenenda s* noie simplicis biificii - libam 7 q'eta - ab di Suicio - pfuctudie «
exacdve + 7 hole stlari 7 eectialtico - Hoe ex’? q wo"chi finglis annis -
vigint bollas fa auene - reddent eapHo Suienti capelle ste Brigide - de Kipe -
Hiis teftibs - Reginald de Cranford - Arkenbaldo de Duglas - R - p* de
Cultir - H - de Cormannoe + 7 cultis aliis -

Conf'mato sr Eectiam de Kilmaut i Cunygham -

281 Vnitilis x* fidelib; + hoe pfens septa vifut ut auditu¥ - Wits mifaéve dia
Ecetie Glafg cminif? - cna i x® salf - Nottit ynitifitas ¢ra nos die pietatis in-
tuitu - Eectiam de Kilmau¥ i Cunygha - p'ori 7 viris religiofis q' p tempe
fuerit ap" Lefinahag i ufus pptos pcefliffe - Ita in ut bona 7 fetus ei?dé
ecetie de Kilmaui - i ufus 7 cOmodi dom? de Lefmahag integ* expendant? -
Siu? peefiu tempis nob oftare potit / q puent? dée ede de Kilmanf i alios
qi pplos ufus de dom? de Lefmahag + alias expendant? / uolum? ut Bdéa yo. 101.
ea de Kilmau¥ ci Sib ptinéciis fuis i p'ftina ftatii quo aii hae pceflioné
firam fuerat / redueat? « Salua tenura Wii de Cunygha i uita sua nt ceffit



--- Kelso1_page351.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 231
uf deceffit « In cui? rei teftimofi figilli ntm apponi feeim? hnie setpto + Dat Kuatarns

ap* Cafteltarris die ddica px* p® Exalta@dm ste Crucis - Anno Natiuitatis
dilice «° ; ce? , xl°v? - Pontificat? fri anno - duodeeio +

Té Conftmacio sr eand Eectiam -

1
nD
1

Uniilis x fidelib3 has tras vifu¥ ut audit’is - Wis de Lyndefheye deean? -
7 Capittm Glafguens - salé i dno - Nottit vnilifitas tra nof ad inftancia
veilabit pat's iri WiHi Epi Glaf® « pfmatfe donaéin 7 peeflioné illa qin
ipe Epé fecit P*ori 7 Conuentui de Lefmahag de cectia de Kilmauros in
Cunygham i coy pp'os ufus habenda 7 retinéda + Ita ut bona 7 fruet? ipius
eeetie i ufus 7 edmoda dom? de Lefmahagu 7 i domo de Lefinahag ex-
pndant? - @ si ali? aliq? tempe de pais bonis 7 fructibs fieri ptiZit 2 co ipo
déa gceffio diocefanis pdéis P'ori 7 Conentui f@a de déa eéa i vfus pp'os
poflidenda no valeat s3 uirib; careat 7 effectu - Hie & oftmaédm firam

Pdeis mo%chis fecim? / Epali 7 magri WiHi de Cunigh‘m r‘toris dée ecctie
i omibs iure + saluo - In hui? rei teftimo’ sigilla cdmune eapituli firi pfenti
se'pto feeim’ apponi - Tefie eodé Capitlo » Ap" Glafg + vij - kt - Ap'lis -

nno anuneiaddis dnice « « - cc? - quad“gefio - sexto +
Anno 4 di juad'geli t

Carta Sr Ecetiam de Kylmau¥ ea ptinentib; -

233 Vniuertis ste mats ecetie filiis 7 fidelibs + Robert? fit Wernebaldi + sali -
Nollint ds ta pofti gq” pfentes - me dedifle - 7 gcefliffe 7 hae pienti earta
ofmatie « Eeete ste Q)arie de Keleho - 7 monaehis ibidé deo Suientibs « Ee-
ctiam de Kilmauro - uilla mea de Cunyghm ei dimidia carueata tre ad
ipam ecctiam ptinente - 7 ef dib3 ad ijiam eectiam iufte ptinentibs - Hane
aii ecetiam dedi eis i ppetua elemoiam p falute aie mee ; 7 p falute afteetloy


--- Kelso1_page352.png ---
Kiraaons.

LIBER DE CALCHOU.

meoy 7 succefloy meoy - life 7 qtete tentdam sic* alig® alia elemofina libius
7 qeci? poflident - Ptea recepunt ie i finitate fua ; 7 ego si uita mea
mutare voliio afi morté mea ? p pfiliti coy mutabo ; Vbiciig, u° mortuus filo ?
dedi fifate ecctie de Kelcho + duas ptes fubftancie mee q° m* otingit - Hiis
teft> - Tefte codé capitlo - & Waldwuo de Pndergefi> - Hugo de )°botyl -
Rofo de )*botele - Wilone de Stichele - 7 Gltis aliis -

Conf'mato ér Ecctiam de Kylmauro ci dimid carueata tre -

Vnititis ste cat's eectie filiis 7 fidclib - Robert? fit Rofti filii Wernebaldi ,
salim - Notiitis me ocefliffe 7 hac pfenti carta mea ofirmaffe cectie ste
Warie de Ket 7 monach ibid deo Suientib; donaéom q‘m feeit pat ihs
FEectie de Kilmauro villa mea de Cunygha + cit dimidia carueata tre ad
ipam ecctiam ptintte - 7 ef dib3 ad eandé eectiam infte ptinentib; - Hane
ecctiam platis c@onach de Keleh sic! ea illis pat ms donaut ? ocefli «7 annui
p falute aie mee - 7 p aia pris mei 7 aiabg aficcfloy 7 succeffoy meoy - life -
7 qiete tenenda - fieut alig® alia ecctiam libins 7 q'eci? poffident - Pretea
sup"d@i co%chi - recepunt me i ffnitate sua - 7 ego si uiti mea mutare
uoluero aii corte mea 7 p confilit coy L® facia - Vbictig, u° coortuus flo dedi
pfate eectie de Kelecho duas ptes fubftancie mee q m’ ptingit - Hiis teft- -
Rit de Wort - confiab Reg Scocie - Waldef* vieccoM - Jacobo de Drafan -
Thoma fie Erkenebaldi - Wit fit Lungfve - 7 cule aliis - .

Ti Conf*mato & eandé Ecctiam ei ptinenciis -
Unitifis ste Gris ecctic filiis 7 fidelibz « R° de Woreuilt . Conft- - Reg

Scot + Salt - Nolfint ds ta pofti q® Pfentes me pvcoffiffe « 7 hac pfenti
earta conf'maffe ee ste Marie de Kelcho 7 7 mo*chis ibidé deo Suientibs


--- Kelso1_page353.png ---
286

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 233
Féam de Kilmauro - uilla Robti filij Wernebaldi de Kunigham - cit dimid
carrucata tre + ad ijam eéam ptinente - 7 ci dib3 ad ipam e@tam infte
ptinentibs - sict carta ipi? Robti teftat? - Hiis teft’ - Bma Avice » Wio
fil meo - Ofmiido pore de Derby - 7 Gt? aliis -

Te Conftmaco &r candé Ecctiam -

Eng dei gia - Glafg Epé - Vnififis ste Gris eectic filiis 7 fidelibs toci?

diocefis fue salé + Sciant oifis ta fut’i q® plentes me gceflifle - 7 hac pfenti
carta pfirmaffe Ecclie ste Marie de Keleho - 7 @onach ibidé deo Suientibs
recfiam de Kilmanro - de Cunigha - life , 7 qete ; tenenda « sic' carta
Robt fit Weremb 7 carta Ri de Worenilla teftat? « falua tenura Hug de
la Rokele de medietate pdée ecctic i nita sna - Hiis Telt- . Ofbto Abbe
de Gedd - And¥ Archid + de Lawdofi . Syfi Archid de Thenidat « Rit
de Haftaned + 7 cult? aliis «

Carta §r Eectias de Home + 7 de ffoghoh «

7 Epis - Archidiaeonis » Abbatib3 - Comitib3 ; Baronib; - 7 dibs fidelibs,

é
+ Comes Cofpat'ei? salf i dno - Nofcant
ta Pfentes q” pofti me i ppetua elemofina dediffe « 7 pilenti se'pto of'matie «
Ecctiam de Home ci dib3 ei inure appendentibs - co tenore q? Horm

we mete an em Marg
ste Gris eé€e ta pfentibs q* fu

satdof libius ; qteei? ; 7 plenari? poffedit « 7 eccliam de ffoghoh ci nnififis
appendiciis fuis Ecctie be uirgis Q)arie de Kelcho « 7 fiib3 ibidé deo
Snientib; p ata pie memoric- DD - Re& Scottoy - 7 filij- H - comit: -
pat's 7 at's mee + 7 dium Paeceffoy meoy 7 mea Saluo iure pontificali -
Hiis Teft - T . Archid - W « Abbe ste Crucis - Nigello satdote Qagro
Andé - 7 @ltif aliis -

26

Rirserrs.

fol. 2.


--- Kelso1_page354.png ---
Home.

234 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Carta

= as a ee
vna carneaté tre i Houm - cand uilla - 7 dimid Gordune -

Nota fit dibs fidelibs ta clericis q’ laicis - me Cofpat'ci comité ocefliite
ecctic Nicholai de Houm i honore dni fri ihu x' - 7 ste Marie
vainis - 7 sti Nicholai - 7 dium stoy - i die dedicaébis fue - i - caruca tre -

pochia - s+ eandé uilla - 7 dimiditi Gordune - ad redépém p‘camina -
z saluté ai x-kt- Ap't- Nota sit - Cofpat'cia - 7 Edwarda -
5 Edgari filios comitis - 7 fponfi illud ide ocefliffe - Teft? - Rodfito Epo,
Thora decano + deldredo pthito « de Dalwenfide - Hugoi de Tingheha -
Vikillo fit meldredi ; 7 cultis aliis -

Carta sr tota tra q'm Adam Long? tenuit i tritorio de Home -

Oitiibs has tras vifut ut anditu® « Pat'ci? @iles fit dni Walti de laynale -
salt cli i dno + Nott vnififitas fra me red'diffe deo - 7 be Qarie de
Kelch 7 conach ibidé deo Suientib; 7 inppetudi Suitut tota ila tra et
cefuagiis - toftis + 7 croftis - ptis » 7 pafenis ; libtatiby » 7 dibs aliis

ptingeiis - q°efiq, note appellant? + q’m Ada Long? - q°nda tenuit i tritorio
Sz q'm Roftus de Home fit dé Ade m* otulit - put
carta dei Robti inde pfecta pleni? teftat? - Et ome ius 7 clamia gd

hui ut hre potuii cadé p me 7 hedibs meis inppetud refignafte 7 q'eta

4

de Home de e

clamatie - Ego v° Pat'cius 7 fiedes mei ut affign“i Bd@am fra ci ptinenciis
fuis pdéis oo"chis ot" oms hoies warantizabim? - aeq'etabim? - 7 defendem?
inppetua - In eui® rei teftimonia Pfentibs Iris sigilla mea appofui - Hiis
Teli - maaro - G - de Batonya - magro Hug de Bernbi - Rofo de Home -
Thom de Prefton™ ; RoBto de Hedenha - 7 aliis -


--- Kelso1_page355.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 235

Ohbligato ad signand quada tram of*matoria - Howe

290 Oinibs has tras vifuF ut anditu# « Wits diis de Home fil nobilis viri dni
Wiki ilitis q’nda dui dée ville de Home sali i dno sempitna - Notit
ynitifitas ¢ra me teili religiofis viris Abbi 7 Conentui de Kaleh + 7 p hoe
septa. eifdé obligari ad signandi cifdé tram pfirmatoria sup eéa de ville
de Home - ei fris 7 aliis libtatibs dée eé&e ptinentibs - 7 ctia illa pticula tre

7 AAG see . Oo as renee
que dv Pullys sigillo mco efi ptigit me arma sume oilitaria - 7 7 afliipeione
armoy sigilli mei mutare - Liect ego déam eeclefia de Home - efi dibs tris -

libtatibs - 7 dibs iuribs suis- 7 ecia illa pticulam re - que dr Pullys i tritorio
3° 7 ONS 5 7 L fl )

de Home - alias d@is Abbi 7 Conuttui - pfirmatiim - In eni? rei tettimonii

igila met appofui - Dat ap? Kalchon i c‘ttino sti And? afihi -
ui de Stychit - fie

Bloutibs tris
Anni gie @! + ee 7 sexadé - Noni - cora dno Willo vi
Jolie de Brygha @onacho - Johe déo de Eboy conach de Keleh - Robto
de Edinha - 7 @ltis aliis -

Conftnato %r Ecetiam de Home ci ptinentibs -

291 Onib; has tras vifuF uf anditn® - Wits diis de Home fit 7 heres Nobilis
viri dni WiHi qilitis «7 q’ndi dni dée uille de Home - falé i duo sempitna
Nowit vnitifitas tra me ocefliffe 7 hae pfenti carta mea oftnatle » Deo + be
Warie de Keleh - 7 onachis ibidé deo Snientibs 7 inppetniti Suitn Eectiam
ville de Home + q‘m diis Cofpat'ci’ q’nda Comes de Dunbar eis contulit p
sua carta» cf tris. detis » 7 dibs ad déam ecctiam ptinentibs « fiet i carta
AZ Ani Comitis pleni? ptinct? - Et F ill ptitlam tre « q'm dna Ada d@a
de Curteney - q° dr Pollys - 7 iacs ad pté occidentale tritorij de Home ér
rinula de Edyn - sic’ i carta dée due Ade pleni? ptinet? - eifdé monach -
p fua carta ptulit + 7 peeflit + Q're volo 7 peedo p me 7 hedibs meis vt fu. 13.


--- Kelso1_page356.png ---
236 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

. as <a. . oy Oe a.
Howe. aflig“is + vt déi monachi déam eectiam - ci dibg tris - iuribs - 7 ptinéctis

fuis + 7

a afidtam tra de Pollys + inppetuai heant - 7 poffideant - i
liberam + pura + 7 ppetua clemofina « Et p eafdé dinifas + q%s d@as tras
habuerit - 7 tenuerat die q? ifta tra eft ofecta + Tenend - 7 habend . s* 7
succefforibs suif . adeo libe - 7 q'cte + fieut aliq’s alias clemofias i regno
cocie libius 7 q'eci? tenet - 7 poflident - ably, feéta curie - cultura - 7 dibs
sacévib; 7 demandis - q° de dtis ecctia 7 Tris aliq? vfu ut ofuetudie exigi
pottiat + vel potat - infutura sii pe‘diccione 7 inpediméto mei vel meoy feu

wh

aliis

fuceetloy meoy + Volo #7 vcedo p me 7 hiedibs meis 7 affignatis - q aiidei

Abbas 7 Couent? totii comoda fui de dibs {ris fuis - q’8 ijdem hot i tritorio

de Home « faciaut - 7 de cifd@ put s* meli? viderit expedire - ordinét - 7

dilponst - sii inpediméto inet - feu meoy - vel aliq’y alioy m* succedentia *

Reniiciaui hits p me 7 hedibs meis - 7 aflig“tis « Oi inri si q’d i de

eta + 7

iq? tempe habui - vel fire potui + In cui? rei teftimonit - Pfenti sc'pto
illa met appofui - Hiis tefi> - Duo Pat'cio - Eadga¥ milite - Bno Ada
¥ de Stuclyfi tie tempis oflit dui Archid Laudoi . Dno - W « vica¥ de
Svyutoii tie tempis Decano de O)'schis - @agro Hen peento® corauiens -
wagro Robto de Oley elico « J + de mortuo qari + 7 aliis » Act apd Kel-
chou i e“ftino Concepédis be Maric - Anno gfe m° ; ce? ; 1x? viij’ -

vi

Refignavo fup tra qm Ada long? tenuit i fritorio de Home -

292 Oimib; he fe'pta vifuF ut auditut - Ada Long? de Home ctna i dno salt -
Nouit vnitfitas fra me dedifle ; ocefliffe « 7 hac carta mea of'maile « Rofito

filio meo ficut aflignato meo tota tra qm tenui de dopno « Robto Abbe - 7
Youentu de Kaleh i Pritorio de Home sii aliq’ reteneftito - 7 ecia tota ins

7 clamiai q°d i déam ra hui - ut hre potui cide Rob fit meo 7 aflig‘to re-
fignaui - 7 q'etii clamaui - Tenenda 7 habenda s' 7 hedibs suif de dzis dopno
Abbe 7 Couentu « 7 coy succefforibs + Ita libe 7 q'ete i dibs sict ego déam


--- Kelso1_page357.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 237

tra de déis dépno Abbe 7 Conuentu tenui - put meli? z pleni? i carta Move.
ytinet? qm dés Abbas 7 Conuent? mt de déa tra dederit » Pdés uw? Rob

7 hedes fui ploluct p pdéa Tra dopnis de Kelchou 7 eoy succetiorib;

singlif annis decé folid « p dib3 § s+ que exigi poiliit - s+ q'ng, folid ad
fefta sti Martini - 7 q'nq sot ad Pentecoft> - Kt vt hee mea donato - 7 q'eta
clamacio ppetua heat f'mitate 7 fiabilitate pfenti se'pto sigilli mei appoiie

feci in teftimonii - Hiis Tefte - Bno Hen¥ de Haliburtun qilite - Pno Hug

de TTome 7 aliis

Decano de Naithaneithyrne - And¥ Q)aninfel - R

Carta &r fra q'm J - de Cnolles tenuit de nob i villa de Home -

203 Oinibs hoe fe'pta vifuF ut auditu® - Rohit? dei ga Abbas de Kaleonie - +

cide loci Connent? cfna i dno salé - Nofit vnitlitas tra nos cOmuni olenta
fira [confirmafle] Ade Longo de
suif+ qm J - de Cnolles de nob

Capituli firi deditie « peeflitie + 7 car
Home tot train ci dibs inftis ptinene
tenuit i villa de Tlome + ex*® duabs bouatis fre q's idé J + dedit Galf'do

{fi fuo i villa de Home » Tenenda 7 habenda d@o Ade 7 hedibs fuis - vel

fuis aflignatis de nob inppetuit - adeo libe + q'ete - 7 pacifice p dia - sict
candé tra uneg® dés J - de nob tenuit 7 polledit - Reddendo inde nob
annuati p Pdea tra qing, solid ad feta sti Martini « 7 alios q'nq, ad Pente-
coft? + p di Snicio 7 demanda - q® nob de déa fra potiit ptile - Coneedim? #
Ade 7 hedibs, fuis ut aflig*tis p dia ef intiis
t? Johs ca tennit ut tele potuit - libius 7 fol. M4,
7 qeei? + Nos v° Pdéam tram pd@is Ade 7 fedibs suif uf affig"tis con® ois
Qs warantizabim? 7 defendem? inppetua - In cui? rei tefie plenti se'pto
sigilla Capiili iri appofuim? - A@a Anno dni @° ; ec® - I? - menfe Vaij

ap* Kelchou -

7 of'mam? ifia plata tra pfatis

ptinéciis fuis 7 aifiaMtis « s



--- Kelso1_page358.png ---
Dower.

2o4

a5
wus

238 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Lia

Sr q"mda fina tre de Home -

Oniibs vitut ut anditué has tras - P - comes de Dabar - 7 P - fit ei? + salé -
Ad vynitilitatis tire noticia uolum? puenire + q ca Abbas 7 oonaeti de Kelch -
WiHo de Curteneya «7 A + vxori ei? teneant? refponde i fine septimi anni
gnenddis int cos fee de f'ma tre fue de Home + Ipi ad peti@om ipius » W -

7 fram + sexto anno ouenddis inite - p mand Jordani fit uri - xx 7 v +

couré solueriit + ita qi fine septimi anni - eid@ - W- de + xxv - @aré tenent®

satifince + 7 s° tota f'ma dee afloy ex integ® ert soluta + 7 q ab vis nieh

ampli? exiget’ / plegii fum’ + 7 ad tefiimonii uitati ¢ figilla tira - ci sigillo

J. fif urfi hic se'pto fecim’ apponi + Hiis tefi: de solucde sexti anni fea
Gaul? Burnald - Rob de Aneleia - Rog de W'ley + 7 wuli aliis -

ss ~o ee
Lita Sr yna earneata tre i tritorio de Home +

Procentor de Scona gerés vices dni ptoris de Coldingha - judicis pineipat

tottalr Sb altnaGe » viris difcttis adro wonialiti de Ecel

+ 7 Deceano

de O'thys falé i dno + Ci mup tras iiras vob direXim® ptinétes q dopnos

Abbm 7 Céuentii de Kaleh - i potteffione vni? carneate tre i tritorio de Home

fra imo poci” aplica inductos + p s
i

E

anette as exoica@is feu intdei

ruercmini # Ae Rob de Home q‘m poffeflioné d@oy wo‘choy ipedienté
Tone tuiGdis vob comifie exoicaflis « p° shiam + eand@ pofiefiidm i dim -
Pavia Edgat cilit® qi i potentoré ut d@i mo'chi suo inre defrandent: -
ido

uc jutellexim? tuttnlerit ¢ Dife’cioni Fre 3b pena s°penfidis funit inin

mandam? q'tin? Gna @onigde pmitia pdém - cilité 7 eetos q°s inuchitis

7 seu intddi - ad

punoiate detentores p sentndas s°penfidis 7 exe

—— ree Ae F c ; an 5
refiitagin poiiefiionis deoy @o%choy eelerit gpellatis + 7 sian expicaé

pdt Rob fulminat yna cit siciis i dtm q@ilité + cetos detétores fulminadis



--- Kelso1_page359.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 239

fp t= nme . Pa Cm = ry
q’ufy, biificid abfoludvis Muerint - p totii deeanat de O)’chis solépnit Laurnns
iat» Dat ap’ Sconam - ij - Noi + Decembr + Anno {

publicari fa
ec? 7 I? viij?-

Carta 8r vni tofta 7 croft i villa de Lambedeii «

296 Vnithis ste Gris ede filiis 7 fidelibs - Johis de Lambedene talé » Notint
ons ta p°teri q® plentef - me dedifie 7 oceflifte «7 hac earta mea plirmalle «
Ecetie ste Warie de Keleh 7 mo%chis ibidé deo Suientibs i libam 7 ppetua
elemoia toftii 7 crofta i uilla de Lambedene inx* tofti cectie ipi? uille ab

orientali pte - sict ung* Nigellus capHs ifm tofti 7 crofti meli? 7 pleni?
tennit - Hite a toftii 7 croftit dedi cis p falute aie mee + 7 dium aicelloy
7 succefioy meoy + ita libe 7 qete tenendi - 7 i ppetwa clemofina
poflidendai - sie’ aliq'm alia elemofina libius qreci? ; 7 pleni? tenct
7 poflidet - Hiis Teft? - Hug capo clico Res « Ofbto capHo abbathie -
DP fit Truite - 7 Hlt- aliis -

Carta sr ynii Toftit 1 Lambedey -

297 Unitlis ste Gris cectie [filiis] 7 fidelibs - Joh de Lambdene falé - Notint
os ta polti q pfentet me pceflifie » 7 dedifie , 7 hac mea carta oftmatie ,
ecctie {ée Marie de Kelch 7 wo%chis ibidé do fuientib; - vni tofti i Lam-
bedene - q°d eft i pxio loco inx* toftii eectie - 7 dnas acras tre i e&po pate
uille « vna - s - acm i ext*ma pte cult’e + q° dr Qorilan - fifus orienté « alia
n° acra i cult?a q® dr Crofta Arthnri « illa nidelé actm q° eft i ext*ma pte
ei’dé cult?e fins occidenté - Pfata afi tofta - 7 iftas duas acraf fre geefli
7 dedi cis i HBam 7 ppetua clemotam - ut ea ita libe 7 q'ete hant 7
poffideat fict aliq’'m alia clemofina « libi? 7 qeci? tint 7 poflidet » Tefte


--- Kelso1_page360.png ---
240 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Jaancors. Gant fit inco + 7 Hiis $ reftibs - Hug capHo 7 clieo Re& « Ofbto capt
de Keleh » WiHo capellano de Lambedefi + 7 aliis «

Carta Sr Tofti 7 Crofti i villa de Lambdefi eit viij® acts fre i ead villa «
7 )

208 Vnilifis ste Oris cectic filiis 7 fidelibs tras iftas uifu¥ ut audit?is « Johs de
Lambedene fit - W . de Stuelyii falé - Sciatif me dedifie 7 veeflifle 77 he yo. 15,

earta mea pfmatle i libam 7 ppetua clemofina eectie ste Marie de Kelch +

z Monachis ibidé deo Suientibs + vna tofta 7 crofti i uilla de Lambed -

q° eft psia ili tofte qtu Nigellus eapHs dudii tennit - 7 + viij® + aeras

‘tre i agro cidé uille - videlics q‘twor aeras ex una pte uille i cult’a g ar

Worilau + filas orient® «5 - iii’ + aeras i artnre croft - fifus oecidenté -

Hai dia dedi 7 peefli cis i liham 7 ppetua elemofina - p salute aie mee -

+ dium aficetloy 7 succetloy imcoy + ut ca ita libe 7 qrete hant 7 poflideat ,

fic’ aliq'm alia clemofina + libius 7 q'eci? Tint 7 poflidét - Tefte Walto

fil meo - 7 idipm pcedente ; Hiis 7 Teft- - oagro - Ada de Lyneolfi. BD -

fit Trnite - Rit diacono - Joh fii Henn - 7 Gltis aliis -

Weormey. Carta Sr Capella de Wedirlye et tris 7 aliis libtatibs -

299 Vnitifis ie Gris ecclie filiis 7 fidelib; - Gilb fit Aldani de Hom « salé -
Nouerint offis ti pofti q* plentes me pceflifle - 7 ‘nti ad me - 7 ad ofis
meos ptinet dedifle - 7 hae earta pfinafle rectie ste Marie de Kelehou -
7 Monaehis ibidé deo fuientibs Capella de Wederleie - ci dib3 eectiafticis
biificiis ipius ta de uinis g* de @ortuis - 7 cf - v + acris tre eulte ad tofta 7
crofta + 7 aliis . v - acris - tre arabit i eampo - 7 eit paftura ad centii ones +
7 xi-atalia + 7 agnis + e + onium - 7 vitulis « xl - aialiti dont copletiint anna
ynii + 7 Coneefli cis Gia omnia aifiaméta pdée ville « siet p* e&e debet


--- Kelso1_page361.png ---
300

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 241

hre + q° dia dedi fifate eapelle + 7 Ecctie ste Marie de Kelchou + in liham
7 ppetua clemofina - Hac afi clemofina feci pate ecctie de Keleh + p aia
pris mei - 7 p falute aie mee + 7 dium aficefioy 7 sueceffoy meoy + ut ea ita
libe 7 qtete heant - 7 i ppetua clemofina poflideat « sic aliq’m alia elemofina
libins 7 q'eci? tint 7 poflidet » Hiis Tefts « cagro Andi Archid « 7 Andt
nepote ei? - [lug capHo reg + Joh decano - Hug de Duns 7 Gt> aliis -

Contifia in? Abbm 7 Conent de Kelch + 7 Gilbt> fit Alden de Home sr
biificiis ece“fticis de Wedirlye -

Noflint des tras iftas le@*i 7 audit’i - q q'ftio q* Gtebat? in? ADbem 7
Couenti de Kelcho + 7 Gileberé - fit Alden de Hom - de bfificiis ecctiafticis
de Wederleye - q° petebant Kelchoenfes - dicentes ea ptine ad ecctiam fua
de Home ? amicabili edpofide ita sopita eft - Prefat? - G + oceflit 7 q*nti ad
se 7 ad ds suos ded 7 inppetui oio q'eta clamauit ecctie Kelehoenfi - 7
mat'ci eectie sue de Home dia penit? bfificia ecctiaftica ta de uinis g" de
qortuis de pdéa uilla de Wedirley - Abbas att 7 Couent? de Kelcho
oeefterat Pnoiato - G - 7 hedib; suif ut faciant 7 hant capella i Pdea villa
de Wedirt - s3 7 pdés - G - dedit 7 pceflit 7 carta sua oftmanit eidé capelle
7 @onach de Kelch i pdéa uilla de Wedirt « v « acras Tre culte + ad tofta 7
crofta i cdpetenti loco 7 ad aifiaitita eoy + 7 alias - v + acras fre arabit i
capo in? hofes fuos + 7 pafv’am fufficientd - ¢ + onib3 - 7 xl afalibs - ct
cetis aifiamétis - q* pfone ecctie debent’ in liam - 7 ppetua elemofina - Ad
th Abbas 7 Couent? de Kelch - ad peticom 7 p amore ipi? - G - gcetferiit
eandé capella ei? nofe tenenda i uita sua de ipis - Reddendo p singlos
annos eifdé @onach dimid pet‘m cere ad f* {@i Jacobi - Ipe u’ chic? coy
q‘diu uiSit faciet cid@ capelle Suire hg dicb3 i ebdomada - 7 i feftis dieb3
q' ftatuti sit i efiatu - 7 ecia cotidie si voltit » Poft cui? obita - Bnoiati
@otchi de Kelch - de ipa capella - 7 de dibs bfificiis ei? - facict libe qed
Qn

Wroretey.


--- Kelso1_page362.png ---
Wepinuye.

301

242 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

nolint - 7 ed cui uoluerint t'dent + 7 faciét ei Suiri ths dicb3 i cbdomada
7 feftis dich3 i diocefi oftitutis - a capHo de home ut de Halyburtun - ul a
g’ciiq, alio uolilint - i aii fut?o tempe ti i diebs pfati clici coy - gp?
morté ei? inppetua - ia corpa mortuoy fepedéi loct de Wedert deferent” ad
cat'cé ecctiam sua de Home sepelienda - fita eft edpofito ifta sub teftio
Sinodi ap" Berewit + Teftibs - A + Archid laod - Hug capHo Re& - magro
And? iuniore - Wagro + T - Offno eapHo - 7 aliis «

Conf'maco sr tras 7 paft’a i villa de Wedirlye -

Nolfiint def tras iftas le@i 7 audit?i q queftio g° Rtebat? in? Abbm 7
Connentii de Kalehou - 7 Gilbta fit Alden de Home - de biificiis
ecctiafticis de Wedirleye « que petebant Kelchoenfes dicentes ea ptite ad
e@tam fua de Home + amicabili cdpoficione ita sopita eft - Prefat? . G -
vecllit + 7 q’ntii ad fe 7 ad ds fuos dedit - 7 inppetuii ofo q'eta clamanit -
ecetie Kelchoenfi 7 wat'ci ecctie sue de Home - dia penit? biificia ecctiattiea
ti de uinis q" de mortuis de pdéa villa de Werdirley » Abbas aii 7 Con-
uent? de Kelcho pceiterit Bnotato “Gea fiedibs, fuis + ut faciat - 7 heant
capella i dea villa de Wedirt + s3 7 Pdés G + dedit 7 veeflit 7 carta sua
of'inanit eid@ capelle 7 mo"chis de Kelcho i fdéa uilla de Wedirt « v - acras
tre culte ad tofta 7 croftii i ppetenti loeo - 7 ad aifid illoy - 7 alias - v - ac’s -
tre arabit + i efipo + 7 pattura sufficienté centa ouibs 7 agnis coy - ufg, di
oplefiint anni vn. 7 x1- aialibs + 7 vitut eoy uf, da opleflint anni yni -
ci aliis aifiaMitis q° pfone ecetie debent? - i libam + 7 ppetua clemofina -
Abbas w 7 Conuent? de Keleho facient fieri Suiciti i pPdta capella t*b3
dieb i ebdomada - 7 feftis dieb3 i diocefi oftitutis a capHo de Home - t de
Halyburtun - t a q’ciq alio uolftint - Oia afi corpa Mortuoy fepedti loci
de Wedirt . defent? di tempe ad qat'cd ecctiam fua de Home « fepelienda -
fea € ati h cdpoficio Sb teftimonio Synodi ap* Berewye - Teft magro A -

fol. 116.


--- Kelso1_page363.png ---
302

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 243

Archid + Laod - Hug capHo Reg « wagro And¥ Juniore » Thom - Ofbno +
eaplt . Gaufi de Lipedlaue + 7 Gltis aliis

Conf"maéo sr tres acraf fre i fritorio de Wedirlye «

Onin; x fidelibs jifens septa vifut ut anditu® - Robtus de Poulwrth
ciles - salé i duo + Noflitis me ex aflenfu 7 voliitate Beat'cis sponte mee -
diuine caritatis intuitu + 7 p falute aie mee + 7 dium aficetloy 7 succefioy

meoy + dediffe + cdceflifie . 7 hac pienti carta mea oftmafie deo 7 ete

Warie de Kelchou + 7 @onach ibidé deo Suientibs « 7 ippetud fuit’is ilibam
pura - 7 ppetud clemofina + tref acras re i fritorio uille mee de Wedirleye
++ tofti 7 croft + que Otbert? tenuit i villa de Wedirt iux* ecctiam - vna
efi duabs acris tre pping'oribs iux" illud tofta 7 crofta dei Offi fins
ecctiam + i efeambiii duay acray tre q%s dei @onachi dée dom? de Kalchou
huoriit 7 medio ville mee de Wedirt - ex dono Gilbti fit Aldani q’nd de
Home « Ita lie , qete ; plena¥ ; 7 honorifice » 7 pacifice , fic’ aliq’m alia
elemofina i Regno Scot ; libius / geci? ; pleni? ; honorificéei? ; 7 pacifi-
cenci’ tenet 7 poffident + Nich oio p déa tra faciendo n* folas ofones ad
saluté aiay + Et volo 7 pcedo ut d@i monachi dée dom? de Kelch - 7 coy

hoies ti de dis tofto 7 crofto - g* de duab3 acris tre + ut s“dém eft
cdmodé {ud p voliitate fua faciant inppetuii - fine aliq? inpedifito mei -
heredai ; suecetioy ; ut hoind ; meort g“uamine ; 7 exacée ; Et uolo ut libuin
heant int*tii 7 exita ad déas tres acras tre et f'@ibs dimodis ad cafdé acras
{p*tantibs ppetuatr » Ego u? des - R «7 hedes mei ut affig’ti déam donacom
ut s“dém eft o* des héines 7 feias déis mo*chis dée dom? de Keleh inppetua
warantizabim? 7 defendem? - Ad h afi dia obfuanda 7 fidetr adimplenda
Shicio me 7 hedef 7 fucceflores meos iurifliegi Epi sti And¥ , 7 Archid

dia

Laod q' p tempe fucrint ut poflint nos cdpellere p cenfura ecctiaftica
fupfe'pta inuiolabitr obfuare + In eui? rei teftimof pfenti sc'pto sigilli mei

Weoiniye


--- Kelso1_page364.png ---
O44 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Foouov. eft appenfa + hiis Teft- Bno- T+ de Gordun - Pat'cio Edegef ailitibs -
Gilbto de Totherig - T + de Dauchb’ne 7 @lé aliis » Dat ap‘ Kelch «
sexto Id? Julij anno g¥e - m° 7 ee? ; l’viij? -

Carta Sr Ecctiam de ffoghouh ci ptinenciis -

303 Wnilifis ste @ris ecctie filiis 7 fidelibg has tras vifuF ut audit’
q® futu¥ Wits fit Comitis Patcij de Dibar falé i dno - Vnitifitati tre
noté facio me dedifie - cdceflifle . 7 hac pfenti carta mea , pfirmalie Deo 7
ecctie ste Qaric de Keleh 7 monach ibidé deo Suientibs 7 inppetud fuituf -
i libam - pura - 7 ppetua clemofina - Ecctiam de foghou + ef omibg ptinen- jor. 117.
ciis fuis + videlé ci illa manfione qm Johs Decan? poffidebat tépe fuo -
cii crofto adiacente + 7 q’nda ra cide

7
crofto otigna tendenté fifus auftra
7 ex tnftfo Grenriz p quanda antig* femita ufg, ad p*tum
mei q iac3 int Grenrig 7 Aldefoghou ; 7 ab illo p'to fifus occidenté vfy, ad
lapides pofitos p diuifa int tra coydé monachoy ; 7 fra hoind ville ; 7 de

vig, ad Grenti

lapidiby uly, ad q’nda rinula defeendenté de Blyndewelle Et q*nda alia tra
i orientali pte uille de foghou ; et toftis 7 eroftis ; 7 domibg fuppofitis - Dedi
ecia cifd@ monachis 7 ocefli tota i

a tra i tritorio meo de foghou gtm Johs
Decan? teunit tempe fuo noie eectie de foghou + 7 p iftas diuifas - vidett a
quada spina q° sita eft int fra eoydé ronachoy defeendendo p quanda ficam
tus aq'lon@ ufq, i blaky Eder - 7 s* i defeendendo p blakeder fifus orient’ ,
ci p*tis , paft’is » 7 hawhes ; 7 hogis adiacentib; ufq, ad Ricardefflatt -
7 8 aleendédo i dirti fifus auftra p quéda fonté ufq i Eftbucterftrothir
afeendédo fifus oceidenté p qnanda sica ufq, i Weftbucterfiroh - 7 de Weft-
buéterftroh Qfus occidenté p queda riuuli ufq, ad pdéam spina - Pfea dedi
eifde @onachis q“tuor acras tre otiguas re eoydé monachoy ex orientalt pte-
iacentes ex vt%, pte uie q? tendit {ls? Berewic que vocant®? Ricardflat inx*
blakeder + Q%re uolo ut d@i monachi de Keleh hant 7 poflideant inppetud


--- Kelso1_page365.png ---
305

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 245

pfata Ecctiam ct dibs ptindciis {nis - vids - cf Pris 7 p*tis adiacentib; 7 ca
dibs liftatibs ei9dé ecetic 7 dibs aifiamétis ipinf ville de foghon qb3 Johs
dean? vtebat® toto tempe {uo - Hae ati Eectiam ; manfides ; tras / p'ta ;

paflas y 7 ecta aifiaiita intuitu caritatis dedi eifdé mo*ehis 7 gee i libam ;
pura ; 7 ppetua elemofina p falute aie mee 7 p aiabs did aficelloy 7 suc-
ceffoy meoy + ita ibe » q'ete 7 7 plena¥ tenéda ppetuo 7 poflidéda ? tic!
aliq’m alia clemofina libius q'eci? ; pleni? i regno Scocie tenét 7 poflidet -
vt aii h mea donagto [et] veeflio fut*is tempib; firme pmaneat 7 fiabiles -
Plens sc'ptii sigilli mei appoficione corroboraui + Hiis Tefte - Bno P - te
meo +» Bno Walé de Lyndefei te vicccomite de Berewie - B*nardo frater -
Ada de Poolword - B’nard de Haudeit -

Conf'mato sr vnitifas potieftioes dataf ee de Kaleh - p Cofpat'cia -
Oinibs ste Gris ccetie filiis 7 fidclibs - Waldeuns fit Comitis Cofpat'eij

falé - Noflint ta fut’i q” pfentes me ocefliffe 7 hac mea [earta] of'maile cde
ceelic unitifas pofleftiones -

ste Maric de Kelcho - 7 Monachis ipius einfdé

noiate ecctie : i ecctiis - it

ingis - 1

q’s dedit pr + i pafenis - i fe

ppetua clemofind - sic' fir ths illas pceflit - ut heant 7 tencant illas ita libe
7 qete inppetud / fict aliq'm potieftioné tuay - libins 7 q'eci? poflident -
Tett> - Huctredo capo - Waltio de Teyfe « WiHo fe Elgera eancet reg -

Huctredo jipofito + 7 aliis -

Carta sr Capella de ffoghouh ci wolend eid 7 aliis libtatibs -

Sciant des ta ffentes q® futuri - q ego Patici? Corbet dif de foghou + p
i} q q ¢g s) P

salute afe mee - 7 dium aficcfloy 7 succetioy meoy dedi + gcefli - 7 hac pret
carta mea pf'maui Deo 7 ecctie be Warie de Kelchou + 7 @onachis ibidé

Foonov.


--- Kelso1_page366.png ---
246 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Fosuov. Deo Snientibs 7 inppetuii fuitn® Capella de foghou - ci colendino ei?dé
ci tris - pttis + pafenis + redditib; - libtatibs + ayfiaiitis - ac dib3 7 singlis
ptindciis fuis - q® dis Wis pa? meus - 7 Diis Nichof f¥ mis dee capelle i
teneMito de foghou q“liteig, otulerunt + foluta 7 q'eta ab di exacde sélari -
7 demanda - Tenend 7 habend dis Abbi 7 Conuentui de Kelch 7 coy sue-
cefioribs inppetuii ita libe 7 qtete pacifice » plenarie « sic aliq® clemofina i
regno Seoé liberi? , pleni? 7 q'eei? ab aliq'b3 Religiofis tenet? 7 poflidet? -
Ita q nf ego n® hedes mei + aut aliq's succedentiii aliq'd de déa capella + ut

de aliq'b; ad candé speetantib; + vi spttare ualentib; pt miflas 7 ofones
exiZe potim? » Déi u? Religiofi tre! @onachos + ut tres capHos secularef p
yoliitate coydé i déa capella dinina celeb"ntes p aiab3 aicetloy 7 succefloy sot. 118,

t + Ego w° 7 hedes mei dtam capellam ci ib ad

mcoy inppetud inueni

eandé sp*tantib; put sup"dtm eft pdéis Abbi 7 Couentui 7 coy succefloribs
wt omies hoies 7 feminas warantizabim? ; acq'ctabim? ; 7 defendem? in-
ppetuii + In cui? rei tefie pfenti septo sigilla mei appofai + Hiis teftibs «
Duo Nichot de Rothirford «ilite » Johe de Qalcaruiftun clico - Wito de
Karnoto ; Ricardo de favnes ; Ad Tunnock- ; watho de Grenlawe 7

coulé aliis -

Conf'maco 2r Capella de ffoghouh ca molend ei?dé 7 aliis libtatibs -
T s 7 5

BOG Omid; has tras vifu? ut anditu® / Pat'ci? de Dumbar comes Q)archie salt
i dno + Notit vniliitas tra me p falute aie mee + 7 dium afiecefloy 7
succetioy meoy + dedifle - ocefliffe - 7 hae Pfenti carta mea of'mafte deo 7
ccctie ste Marie de Kelchou - 7 conachis ibidé deo Suientibs 7 inppetui
Suitu¥ » ilibam , pura 7 ppetua clemofind capella de foghov - ci molendino
cinfdé - efi tris , p*tis » pafeuis , redditibs , libtatibs 17 ayfiamétis ; ac
dibs 7 singlis ptindeiis suif - que dis Wills filius comitis - 7 diis Nichot
Corbet + i teneiito de foghou pdée capelle q“liteiq otulerat ; soluta 7 q'eta


--- Kelso1_page367.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 247

ab di exacébe félari 7 demanda - Tenend 7 habend déis Abbi 7 Conuétui 7 foci
eoydé succefloribs inppetuii i pura 7 ppetna elemofina - ita libe » hono-

rifice ; pacifice ; 7 q'ete + sict aliq® elemofina i regno Scocie - libius
honorificenci® ; 7 q'eci? ab aliq'bs religiofis tenet? ut poffidet? , Ita q n°

ego né fiedes mei aut aliq's m* succedentia aliq'd de déa capella ut de
aliq’b3 ad eandé sp*tantib pt solaf ofones exife potim? - Dei u? religiofi t’s
capHos diuina celeb*ntes i déa capella inppetui inuenient - In cui? rei teft-

sigilla met pfentibs appofiai - Hiis Teft> - Pno Pat'cio fit meo » Dno Ricard

do de foghou Reétore ecctie de Lyntoun - @agro - Hen de Lemontoun

r‘tore ee de Duns - Pno Ada de Tonirgaith eapHo meo + 7 aliis -

Conf'mato sr Capella 7 Qolend de ffoghouh -

307 Omid; ad q’s Pfentes tre puctit - Pat'eius de Dumbar comes Warehie « fat
ico q' eft dium uora saluf - Notit vniffitas Pat'eia Corbeth diim de foghou

a

nob p tras fuas patentes dudi supplicatie q nos vellem? abbm 7 Conv
de Kelchou + quib3 idé Pat'ci? capella 7 molendina de foghou eit tris 7 dibs
reb3 ad eandé capella spectantib; caritatine pcefferat 7 donatlat i pura. 7
ppetua clemofina i pofleflioné ci’de eapelle indute corporalé - 7 cifdé dtam
capella ei oiibs fuis ptinenciis of'mare ; Hine eft q supplicacdi ei?dé
Pat'cij fanorabitr inclinati ? p falute aie mee - aficefloy meoy 7 succetioy
meoy + fayfina pate capelle 7 ominm rey ad candé eapella sptantid vna et
ofirmacione fira i pfencia fidedignoy put moris eft dedim? ¥ delihanim? «
noie déi Pat'é Corbeth Abbi 7 Conuétui memoratis - sedm forma tray patent
nob ab codé - P - &r hoe fpeciatr direiay que q'dé tre patentef adhue i firo
thefaurario in? alia fira se'pta penef nos dinofewnt? veraci? refidere - Et h®
omibs q°y inteft 7 obs flit significand tenore pient: intimam? » In eni? rei
teftimoft sigilla nfm Pfentibs eft appenS - Dat ap’ Ditbar dic sti Mathie
apli » Anno dni ; @° / cee? ; iiij? -


--- Kelso1_page368.png ---
Foouov.

308

248 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Conftnaco Sr Capella de ffoghouh ci ptineng -

Oimiibs ste «at's Ecetie filiis ad qs Plentes tre pucnint - Wiks firafer
dei puidencia Ecetie sti Andree qinift humit salt i dno , Ci capella fi
Nichot de foghon fita fit inf* limites pochie eectie pochiat de foghou que
qidem Eeetia poehiat ad ins 7 pp'etaté wonltii de Keleh ptinet « 7 Nobilis
uir Pat'eins Corbeth cui? pgenitores ipam capella ex suo pat'monio funda~
tint firo ad hoe aecedente glenfu + ipam capella eit dib3 suif redditibs ,
‘tris ) polieflionibs 7 libtatibs y ayfiamétis ; 7 ptineneiis fuis - Deo 7
wonattio de Kelcho - ppetuo geetlerit donatit p earta sua i hee flba -
Sciant offis ti plentes q” futu® - q ego Pat'ei? Corbeth diis de foghou » p
falute aic mee 7 dium aieetioy 7 suceefloy meoy + dedi edeefli ; 7 live plenti
carta mea ofirmani - Deo 7 Ecetie ste Marie de Keleh 7 @onach ibidé deo
fuientibs 7 inppetuii Suitut capella de foghou - ci molendino ci’dé - ct

‘tris, p*tis 7 paleuis ; redditib; , libtatibs 1 ayfiafitis ac dib3 7 singlis

pting fnis que diis Wits pat iis 7 diis Nichot ff mis dée capelle i

teneffito de foghou q'litetiq otulerit + solutd 7 q'eta ab di exacéde sélari

z demanda - 'Tenend 7 nd déis Abbi 7 Comentui - 7 coy succefforib;
inppetuii + ita libere ; pacifice , plenaf ; 7 q'cte sicut aliq® clemofina i regno
Seoé libius pleni? / 7 q'eci? / ab aliq'b3 religiofis tenet’ 7 poflidet® - Ita q n®

ego né hedes mei aut aliq's m' suecedentid - aliq'd de dea capella ut alig'b;

ad eandé sp‘tantib; pt solaf ofones exi%e potim? - Ego u° 7 hedes mei

déam capella ei dibz ad eandé sp*tantib; put sup“d@m eft , jdéis Abi 7
Connétui 7 coy suecefloribs ; ot® ofis hoies warantizabim? ; acq‘etabim? » 7
defendem? inppetua - In cui? rei teftimof pfenti sc'pto sigilla mea appofui -
Teftib; - Bno Nicholao de Rothirford @ilite - Joh de Qalearuifton chico -
Wilo de Carnoto + Rieardo de favnes ; Ada Tunnock- ; 7 qultis aliis -
Nos g* pfati nobilis Pat'eii » 7 déoy ADbis 7 Connent? de Kelechi piis 7 iuftis

peticdibs gto gcurrétes affenfu / oceflioné 7 donaéom déi nobit auctoritate

fol. 119.


--- Kelso1_page369.png ---
309

LIBER DE CALCHOU. 249

fiva Epali oftmam? ; ratificam? ; 7 approbam? 7 defeétii si q's sit i pmiflis fira
auc'te epali fupplem® « refuata nob 7 succeflorib; firis p'te cdpellendi déos
Abbm 7 Couent de Kelchou p bona {ua i pochia dée cectic de foghou
exiftencia 7 sequeft“cioné coydem ad inueniend tres @onach vt tres capttos
ad honefta s°tentaédm i déa capella diuina celeb‘
aficetloy 7 succefloy ; ac dium fidelid defiidtoy aiabs » 7 ad fuftinend

ntes p ata dei Pat’t 7 suoy
7 %

ornafiita veltitita / libros ; ac edificia ad candé capella ptinécia i bono 7
honefto fiatu inppetuii sic i carta sua fup h° pfecta ¢ pleni? ptinct® . Et si
ptingat q alig's Monach? ut capHts i da capella defuiés i fata decefferit ¢ vt
amot? fflit 7 idem abbas 7 guent? ali loco ipi? decedétis vt amoti # ofenfu
diocefani ad h° accedente inf* q'ndena inftituét - 7 ad he licebit nob 7 suc-
cefloribs déos Religiofos q°ciiq, m° voltiim? opellere - In cui’ rei teftimon
plenti se’pto sigilla nfm apponi fecim? -

Conf'maco sr Eectiam de Grenlaw + et capelt suif +

Vnitiis x fidelibs ad q’s piontes tre pueftint - Wills de Lambirtoa di
sti And# rpé sali i duo sempitna » Cai wonaftia ste Qarie de Kelch fire

dioceS fitti i @archia Anglie ; 7 Scot sit p cimuné gwerra 7 dint na

depdacse 1 bonoy fpolia@%e incendio fi"yeq, dettradia ; 7 Gd dolentef
refim? ; qonachi 7 pti ci?d@ p alia loca religiofa regni Scot vidi mendi-
eantes queriit 7 vettiti i q° loco ecleberrimo diuin? cult? i magna Mltidie
pfonay pululare pfueuit - ca innuinis opib3 caritatis - ac 7 onera 7 in-
comoda pfluentia ut'ufy, Regni subportaut » 7 afi gwerra dibs indigentibs

se exhibuit hofpitale , cui? ftatui edpatim? vehement + Idcirco hito sup h°

diligenti traétatu ci capitlo firo sti And? . de eofentu déi capitli i

caritatis ac pictatis 1 Sbleuamen d@i coonattij de Kelch - Et ut anit
ee ee a 2 a
nim singlis annis i do Qonattio libenci? celebret? 7 memoria aie fire
i vna colleéta di dic ad magni altare ibidé heat? ¢ Dam? peedim’ 7

24

Gwextawe.


--- Kelso1_page370.png ---
250 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Gurvtawe. tenore pfent> ofirmam? pdzo wo'ttio de Kelch - 7 @onachis ibidé deo
Suientibs 7 inppetuad Suituris - Ecctiam sua de Grenlaw i pp'os vius ci
suif capellis de Haliburtun - 7 de Lambeden i liam ; pura /; 7 ppetua
clemofina ; ci tris decimis , frnetib3 77 obuen@ib3 dimodis ; ta maiorib3
g * rminoribs ad dias ecctiam 7 capellas de iure 7 pluctudie ptinentib;
ut ptitle valentib3 pp'ts vfib; déoy onachoy ppetuo contitendis ecdente
ut decedente duo Nichot nie vica¥ ¢idé@ cectie do Grenlawe » Tenend
z habend d@is monach 7 coy suecetloribs inppetud adeo libe ; qete 7
plena® ; sient aliq® ccctia ci suif capellis libins ; qeci? ; ab aliq'b3 viris
Religiofis i ufus pp'os ab aliq? Epo i Regno Scocie tenct® sen poflidet? . ft. 120
Abbas u° 7 Comuent? pdéi monattij de Kalchou q’cits otigit view
Eeetic vacare / pfentabitt nob 7 suceefforib3 firis vieaF ad candé o
q' cura aiay pochic de Grenlaw hebit ac nob 7 suecefforib; firs de
plebis enra refpondebit i Q' qidé viea¥ peipict singlis annis centi solid
stlingoy p porcione sua s* p dos Abbm 7 Conuentit de frudtibs d&e ecelic

a dte

cam

affignados y"m porcioné efiali auc'te d@o vicario limitam? 7 taxam? - cetis
dibs ipi’ ecclic de Grenlaw ; 7 capellay einfdé ; decimis ; fruétibs ; redditibs ;
7 obuenddibs ta minorib3 q* maiorib; tottatr 7 intcgre 1 ufus @onachoy
ouertendis - facientg, dei Abbas 7 Connent? Pdéis capellis more solito de-
fuiri « saluif nob 7 succefforibs firis pe’atoniby firis + 7 aliis inribs Ppalibs 1
ordinariis 7 7 extordinariis 1 ac Fiurib; Archit Landonie q' p tempe fitit
i pdtis ecctia 7 capelt » Et he ynitfitati tre tenore pent fignificam? ; Et
ut ifta donato caritatiua jira robur ppetue fmitatis optineat ¢ pfens carta
fira sigill fri 7 capiili iri padi counimine roborat® - Hiis Tefte ; Dopnis -
Wilt - de Qelro3 » Wit de Driburch ; Helia de sta cruce ; Geruafio de
Neubotil Abbibs , WiHo Archid Laudonic ; 7 ultis aliis -


--- Kelso1_page371.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 251

Prnutazo in? Ecctias de C*neftun 7 Naythantherey ci fuis appendiciis + Navraayrucayy.
310 Ad ppetua rei memoria eft feiendai q veilabilis i x° pa? diis Wis de
Lambirtofi dei gfa sti Andi Eps habens Ecctia pochialé de Naythanthiri -
7 eapella de pua Nenthon ad menfa fud Efialem fp‘tantes - monattio de
Kalch ciufdé dioceS deppe vicinas - Et Wits de Alyncrome eadé gia
Abbas ei’dé onaftij de Kalchou fins Ecectiam pochiat de Cranifton ;
tris , 7 potleffionibs dé dui epi vtilins adiacenté ; hito frp h? ptus diligenti
7 folempni tractatu ex vty pte ; penfata vtilitate vénfq xectie vidett
zi Andi ; 7 ste Qarie de Kelch de vnanimi ofenfu 7 affentu vttufy, capituli
sti And? ; 7 Kalchouien$ - Anno ab incarnaéve diii - @° } cee? 7 xvj’
stdo die men qareij ap’ Cranifton s° déas rectias adinnicem pmutariit -

uidett q dés diis Eps 7 sui suecetiores hebunt ; inppetunn pdgam Eectiam
de Cranefton ei tra de Prefton ad candé reelefiam fp‘tante - ci omib3
7 singlis libtatibs 7 ptinenciis ; 7 ci eifdé diuifis 7 onerib; ; cai qb3 dai
Abbas 7 Couent? platas eectiam 7 tram temuerit » Predti vero Abbas
7 Connent? wonaftij de Kalch tebunt Ecctiam de Naythanthirn pdtam ,

: capella de pua Neuthon s* 7 @onaftio sno in pprios vfus inppetna /

cai tris , decimis , frudibs , 7 obuenddibs dimodis ta maiorih; q* minorib;
ad déas Ecctiam 7 capella qq? iure sp*tantib; liberas a plia

epalia ; 7 Archidiacdlit. - Ita libey q'ete ; 7 pacifice  sicut aliqui viri Religioli

be peuraconii

i Regno Scoé aliq‘m cectiam vel eapella liberi? » seu q'eci? in pprios vius
ab aliq’? Epo tenct 7 poffident « Et si Epe vel Archid pidéas Ecctiam
ut capellam vifitare voluerit ? fiptibs fuis ppriis ipas vifitabat - Salis Epo
7 Archidiacono iurib3 rfialibs 7 Archidiaconalibs i eifdé - Et déi Religiofi
ad dam Kcctiam de Naythanthirn pfentabat Epis q' p tempe fuerint

vicariai ad porcioné centi solidoy tantii - q' plebis cura hebit ? 7 de plebis
cura Epis refpondebit ; Quam q'dé Ecctiam de
de pua Neuthoii , dés dis ept 7 sui succeflores pfatis abbi 7 Connétui

ythanthirn 7 capella


--- Kelso1_page372.png ---
Navrwistneryy,

311

252 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

con® offs hoies eft fuis immunitatibs ; libtatibs 1-7 ptineneiis pnotatis waran-
tizabat ; adq'etabit , 7 defendent inppetnit - Pred@i vero Abbas 7 Conuent?
déo dio Efio 7 {nis fuccefforibs fdéas Eectiam de Cranyfion 7 tra de
Prefton cf dibz fuis libtatiby 7 ptinenciis fimili modo cont® offis hofes
warantizabit ; adq'etabit » 7 defendent inppetnai - Et vt hee pmntacio
ppetue funitatis robur optineat - huie pti s¢pture penes ADbm 7 Conuentii
de Kalchou refidenti ? sigilla déi di Epi 7 sui Capitli sti AndF sit appensa -
Parti v° penes diim Epm 7 suecetlores fuos refidenti ? sigilla déoy ADbis 7
Couent? fit appenfa . Hiis Tefie - Duis dei gia - Helya de sta Cruce ;
WiHo de Welros ; Gernafio de Neubotil Abbatib; , magro Wil de
Egglifhtm Archid Laudonie ; magris » J + flemyng officiat eurie Glat-
guens , Ada de Qorania - Hugone de Chirnefyde - et aliis -

Compoticio int Epm sti And#- 7 Abbm 7 Conuent de Kelch -

Vnififis x fidelibs ad q’s pfentef tre puciiint - Wits pmiftione dia Epe
sti Andi salé i dno + Cai nos de voluntate 7 edimni ofentu capitli fri
pmutatlim? Ecetiam firam de Naythantherii - 7 eapella de pua Neuton + ad
menfa fram speéantef - ea Abbe 7 Comnentu onaftij de Kalchon p fua
Fectia de Cranifion 7 tra de Prefton ad d@am ecctiam sp*tante + Et qx déa
cectia fira de Naythanthern 7 capella pdt de Neuton fit exiles 7 p
cémuné gwerra deftrnde 7 deuattate / ac pata e

ia de Cranifion 7 tra

de Prefion® habiidat i decimis 7 redditibs viq ad valoré vigint qing

mnareay 7 ex's

ci

onibs dée Ecetie de Cranifton inetibentibs 2 ex pnende
speciali int nos 7 déos Abbm 7 Conuentii de Kaleh inita - Obligam? nos
+ succeifores firos tenore pilent® ad soluend cifde abbi 7 Connetui uel coy
actornato p fmio decé annoy + a fefto Pentecoft: - Anni dni, a, ecc ,
xvij' - ap* Cranifton q°libg anno viginé q'ng, oareas stlingoy ad duos anni
‘ininos p equales medietates + vidett ad feltit sti Jacobi apli ; 7 pvificagis

fol. 122.


--- Kelso1_page373.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 253

be V'ginis , p'mo tmino solud¥is incipiente ad feftit sti Jacobi apli eimfe Navrnascueaes,
ia pd@a de Naythanthirn ei capella de Neuton

anni - 7 s° deineeps + n' ec
intim aliq’? anno ad valoré viginti q'ng, wareay deuenit 4 deduéo falario
vui? capellani q' defuict eée aiidée ; 7 tite ad soluGSem sime pdte nolum?
obligari - Et eft seiend q qeq'd dé Religiofi de dedis 7 fruétibs déay ecctie
de Naythanthimn 7 eapelle de Neuton y"libs ano déoy decé annoy vit*
salarii, d@i eapellani peepint nob 7 succefforibs alloeabiit 1 soluéde stime
p*eunie afidée scdm eftimacdmm viroy fidedignoy ex vt"q, pte clectoy ; Et si
eGa de Cranifton 7 tra de Prefton® p cOmuné gwerra durante tmino decé
annoy doy + ofo deftruant? ¢ fimili m? a pftadbe d&e ptcunie erim® im-
munes 7 abfoluti » si v° p pte ¢ fict nob 7 suceetlorib; firif remiflio de pdta
fima viginti q'nq, carcay p q‘ntitate ptis defiructe scdim fidedignoy
eftimagm 7 vil » Tranfacto 4 tmino pdzo decennij # eeflabiit of0 hui’modi
foluéo 7 remiflio « 7 ce pmutate penes ptes scdm forma pmmtaddis
inppetnii remanebit - ci suif emolufitis 7 detmentis - fub q'bsciig, piclis
paeis fine gwerre + In eni? rei teftimof Pleutibs tris sigilli nfm eft appens -
Dat ap' Neubotil dic Jouis px* poft fetti bi GregoF pape - Anno dni

8¢

«7 cee’; sexto decimo -

Compoticio Sr exempe@e 7 puilegiis Abbis 7 Connent? de Kelch -

312 Vnittis pfentes tras infpectu®» Wis pmiflide dia Efis fei Andi « salt i dno «
Nofiit vniiifitas fra q ea nos ex vnanimi pfenfu Capli iri pmutattim?
Fcctiam fram de Naythanthirn 7 capella de pua Neuton ad @enfa fram
rpalem sp‘tantes ci Abbe 7 Conuétu de Kaleh p rcclefia sua de Craniftofi
+ tra de Prefton - dée cectic annexa - Nolétes exempéi feu pluilegiis d@oy yy, 122.
abbis 7 Conucnt? @onattij de Kalehou optentu dée Ecctie de Naythanthirn
7 capelle + fen pmutadis aiidée ii derogari + p nob 7 fuceetlorib3 firis

tenore plent> pfitem? - q fone pmutacionis pdée - seu optent? Ecctie de


--- Kelso1_page374.png ---
Navrnantugryn.

313

314

254 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

Naythanthy¥ afidée con® @onaftia de Kelchou feu Abbm vel qonachos
ciufde vbiora iura nolum? + n° intendim? inpoftum vendicare » Dat ap*
Neubotil Nonodecio die Warcij » Anno dni «° ; ecc® ; sexto decio -

Lia de Sayfina sr déam ecctiam ci f*tibg -

Wits miferad&e dia sti Andt Epé - Dileéto st Wichi cfico senefeallo fno
in ptibs Laudonie falé ci biidicde dia + Q'a pmutauim? ci Religiofo viro
dno Abbe de Kelch Ecctiam firam de Naythanth¥ ci frnétibs ci?dé fedm
oucném in’ nos 7 ipm inita - Vob

dam? firmi? Peipientes ¢ q'tin?
faifind dtc Eectie ci frnéibs , sccm q yiditis 1 dta puenge 7 eidé delifjari
faciatis - Et he fillaten? om‘tatis ; Dat ap* Qonimel dic c°cuF px* afi {™ Be
Margaret Regine - Anno dni a? ; cee? ; xvij? «

ita Sayfina Sr eand Eectiam +

Qichacl clic? senefeall? fray dni Epi sti Andi i ptibs Laudonie Hent
Stulp ballino de Wedale salé 7 amoré + Q'a mandatii a dno firo Epo recepi
ad tradendi faifina Ecctiay de Naythanthirfi 7 de pua Nenton ea suif
ptinéciis Abbi de Kelch vt suo Eto adtornato + Vob @andam? 7 Peipim? ex
pte dai dui fri Epi q‘tin? faifinam detis abbi déo seu ei? Eto actornato de
Pdsis Ecctiis cf dibs {nis ptinenciis sict ouenta eft in? pdtm dim nim Epm
7 dém Abbaté - Et h° fillo m® om'tatis « In cui? rei teftimoniii has tras
meas sigillo meo fignataf vob ficri feci patentes - Dat ap* Petindreyh die
dnica px* aii f” Be Margarete v'gis + Anno dni «° ; cece? ; septio decio -



--- Kelso1_page375.png ---
LIBER DE CALCHOU. 255

4¥ Archid Laudonie fillas capiat pe’addes de Ecctia de Naythantherin + Caasesros.

315 Vnififis Pfentes tras infp*tuk » Wills de Eglitham Archid Laudonie falt i
dno sempitna « Nowiit ynitifitas tra q ca Ecctia de Naythanthirn ; 7 capella
de pua Neuton ad menfa efialem sti Andf {p*tantes sint pmutate ; et abbe
7 Conuentu monaftij de Kelehou p ecctia fua de Cranifion ; 7 fra de
Prefioi dée Ecctie anexa - de q'b3 Ecetia de Naythanthirn ; 7 capella de

Neutofi + nos n‘ pdecefiores firi pe’abes Allo m° recepim? n® recipe

gluenim? + Concedim?® p nob 7 fueceflorib3 firis q pe“acdef de eifdé in
futura nullaten? exigem? - s5 ci ipas vifitare volilim? / saptibs firis ipas
vifitabim’ - put ipa pmutaco in se pportat 7 teftat? - In eui? rei teftimonid
sigilla u?m pfentibs eft appen$ » Dat ap' Neubotil - Nonodecio die @en&

careij » Anno gfe «® 7 cece?  sextodccio +

Confmato sr Ecctiam de Crancfi- -

316 Oimibs x fidelibs ad q’s Pientes litte puehint de Welro¥ 7 de Driburg
Abbes salf i dno - Nottit vnilifitas tra nos infpexifle cartas Hug Ridel -
Rit Ridel , 7 Riz Ridel n6 cancellatas nd rafaf n° i alig® sui pte viciatas i
h Vba - + - Vnilifis ste Gris ee fillis 7 fidelibs - Hugo Ridel falé  Nofint

ds ta p%teri q® pfentes me dedifle 7 geefliffe - 7 hac carta mea of'maiie ecctie
ste Marie de Keleh - 7 Conuétui ibidé deo Suienti - s + ad vfus see*tarij «
Ecctiam de Cranefiofi cf dibs ad ipam iufte ptinétibs - i libam 7 ppetua
elemofina - falua tenura Yfaac i vita fua - Salua F cult’a de tra ipius Eectie -
pt decima seget ipi? pochie q° liba ert 7 qeta de ula - Tencbitt a ifta
Ecetia - ita 7 q ca filli pfone dabat - n° ad firma ponét - s3 i ddinio Ecctie yo. 123.
sue + 7 i manu sua cd tencbit - 7 ad vius secretarij - Hane & Ecctiam dedi



--- Kelso1_page376.png ---
CRANESTON,

a

256 LIBER DE CALCHOU.

eis p aia Regis Dauid - 7 Comitis Hent dni mei - 7 Hug filii mei + 7 p
falute aie mee + 7 sponfe mee - 7 dium aficetioy - 7 dit heredi 7 suecefioy
firoy + Ita lihe , qete ; 7 honorifice tenenda in ppetua elemofina poffidenda -
sie‘ aliq’m alia Eectiam 1 Regno Seot ; libins » q'eei? » 7 honorifieenei? -
tendt 7 poflidet - Hiis Teftib; - Symone Archid de Glalg - Herehto Decano
de Glafe «7 Wilt fil ei? » Hug eapHo 7 clico Reg - al

Conf'mato Sr Ecetiam de Cranett> «

Vniliis ste Gris cectic filiis 7 fidelib; Rid Ridel - salé - Notlint ds ta
potteri q® plentes me peeffite 7 h%e carta mea conf'matle Ecetie ste Q)arie
de Keleh - 7 Conentui ibid deo Suiéti Ecetiam de Cranilion - sic! Hugo
Ridel pat itis dedit illis ef « s + ad vfus seeretarij ci dib; ad ea intie
ptinentibs i libam 7 ppetua clemofina - salua tenura Yfaac i vita sua - 7

coult’a de tra ipi? ecetie « Pt decima seget ipi? poehie « q® liha ert 7 qteta
de mult’a - Tenebiit 4 ifta Ecetiam ita / q ea filli pfone dabiit n° ad firma
pontt s3 1 dnio Eectie sue - 7 i manu sua ef tenebat - 7 ad vi? Sceretarij -
Hane 4 Eeetiam dedit eis pat Mis me peedente 7 pfmante - p aia Regis
BP . 7 Comitis Hen¥ dni sui 7 p aia Hug Ridel fit sui - 7 p falute aio
{ue 7 sponse sue - 7 p falute aie mee - 7 p aiabs dium aieeiloy 7 dium
hedum 7 sueecloy firoy - ita libe s qete ; 7 honorifice tenenda 7 i ppetua
elemofina poffidenda ? sic’ aliq’m alia Ecetiam i Regno Seott - libius , qleei?
7 honorificenei? tenét 7 poflident - Hiis Teft> - Herebto Decano de Glafg -
Hug capo 7 clico Reg + Ofbto eapHo de Keleh « 7 aliis -


--- Kelso1_page377.png ---


--- Kelso1_page378.png ---


--- Kelso1_page379.png ---


--- Kelso1_page380.png ---


--- Kelso1_page381.png ---


--- Kelso1_page382.png ---

